NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT COMPETITION AND
QUALITY IN HEALTH CARE MARKETS?
Martin Gaynor
Working Paper 12301
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12301
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006

This paper was commissioned and supported by the Federal Trade Commission. The views and opinions
expressed here are those of the author alone and do not necessarily represent the views or opinions of the
FTC or any individual commissioner. Thanks are due to Ashish Arora, Nicolas Gravel, Paul Pautler, Mark
Pauly, Carol Propper, Ray Rees, Lise Rochaix, Patrick Romano, Bill Sage, Alain Trannoy, Mike Vita, Bill
Vogt, David Zimmer, Peter Zweifel, and participants at the Agency for Health Care Research and Quality
and Federal Trade Commission conference “Provider Competition and Quality,” held in Washington, D.C.
in May 2003, and at the Third Annual Journ ées Louis-André Gérard-Varet, held in Marseilles in June 2004,
for helpful comments and discussion. An earlier version of this paper was published as “Competition and
Quality in Health Care Markets: What Do We Know? What Don’t We Know?” in Économie Publique
(Gaynor, 2004). I am grateful to Liz Fowler for editorial assistance. The usual caveat applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2006 by Martin Gaynor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Do We Know About Competition and Quality in Health Care Markets?
Martin Gaynor
NBER Working Paper No. 12301
June 2006
JEL No. I1, L1, L3
ABSTRACT
The goal of this paper is to identify key issues concerning the nature of competition in health
care markets and its impacts on quality and social welfare and to identify pertinent findings from the
theoretical and empirical literature on this topic. The theoretical literature in economics on
competition and quality, the theoretical literature in health economics on this topic, and the empirical
findings on competition and quality in health care markets are surveyed and their findings assessed.
Theory is clear that competition increases quality and improves consumer welfare when
prices are regulated (for prices above marginal cost), although the impacts on social welfare are
ambiguous. When firms set both price and quality, both the positive and normative impacts of
competition are ambiguous. The body of empirical work in this area is growing rapidly. At present
it consists entirely of work on hospital markets. The bulk of the empirical evidence for Medicare
patients shows that quality is higher in more competitive markets. The empirical results for privately
insured patients are mixed across studies.
Martin Gaynor
H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and
Management
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
and NBER
mgaynor@cmu.edu

What Do We Know About Competition and Quality in
Health Care Markets?∗
Martin Gaynor
H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and Management
Carnegie Mellon University,
National Bureau of Economic Research,
Leverhulme Centre for Market and Public Organisation
University of Bristol
June 7, 2006
Theory is clear that competition increases quality and improves consumer welfare when prices are
regulated (for prices above marginal cost), although
The goal of this paper is to identify key issues conthe impacts on social welfare are ambiguous. When
cerning the nature of competition in health care marfirms set both price and quality, both the positive
kets and its impacts on quality and social welfare and
and normative impacts of competition are ambiguous.
to identify pertinent findings from the theoretical and
The body of empirical work in this area is growing
empirical literature on this topic. The theoretical
rapidly. At present it consists entirely of work on
literature in economics on competition and quality,
hospital markets. The bulk of the empirical evidence
the theoretical literature in health economics on this
for Medicare patients shows that quality is higher in
topic, and the empirical findings on competition and
more competitive markets. The empirical results for
quality in health care markets are surveyed and their
privately insured patients are mixed across studies.
findings assessed.
Abstract

∗ This paper was commissioned and supported by the Federal Trade Commission. The views and opinions expressed
here are those of the author alone and do not necessarily
represent the views or opinions of the FTC or any individual commissioner. Thanks are due to Ashish Arora, Nicolas
Gravel, Paul Pautler, Mark Pauly, Carol Propper, Ray Rees,
Lise Rochaix, Patrick Romano, Bill Sage, Alain Trannoy, Mike
Vita, Bill Vogt, David Zimmer, Peter Zweifel, and participants at the Agency for Health Care Research and Quality
and Federal Trade Commission conference “Provider Competition and Quality,” held in Washington, D.C. in May 2003,
and at the Third Annual Journées Louis-André Gérard-Varet,
held in Marseilles in June 2004, for helpful comments and discussion. An earlier version of this paper was published as
“Competition and Quality in Health Care Markets: What Do
We Know? What Don’t We Know?” in Économie Publique
(Gaynor, 2004). I am grateful to Liz Fowler for editorial assistance. The usual caveat applies.

1

Introduction

One of the most important industries in the United
States economy is health care, accounting for nearly
two trillion dollars in expenditure annually (Smith
et al., 2006). The United States relies on markets for
health care delivery and financing. As a consequence,
antitrust enforcement is an important component of
health care policy. This industry is also one in which
competition is a real issue, given the extensive consolidation that has occurred in recent years (Gaynor
and Haas-Wilson, 1999).
During the second half of the 1990s, a dramatic
1

wave of hospital consolidation occurred in the United
States. One source puts the total number of hospital mergers from 1994-2000 at over 900 deals (Jaklevic, 2002, and www.levinassociates.com), on a base
of approximately 6,100 hospitals. Further, many local markets, including quite a few large cities such as
Boston, Minneapolis, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, St.
Louis, and San Francisco (and others), have come to
be dominated by 2-3 large hospital systems. Not surprisingly, many health plans have complained about
rising prices as a result of these consolidations (Lesser
and Ginsburg, 2001).

Hospital markets have been an active area of antitrust enforcement. Since 1984, the federal antitrust
authorities have brought 11 suits seeking to block
hospital mergers, and engaged in many other activities combating anticompetitive practices.4 The major emphasis in these cases has been effects on price.
A major concern in health care, however, is effects on
quality.5
Quality is of major concern in health care for a
number of reasons. First, the effect of health care
quality on an individual’s well-being can be very
great, and often will be more important than the
quality of other goods or services. Second, due to the
pervasive presence of insurance against health care
expenditures, health care consumers are not exposed
to the full expense associated with their health care
decisions. Thus, in the presence of a reduced role
for price, quality looms larger in consumer choice,
and serves as an important rationing device. In the
case of beneficiaries of the U.S. Medicare program,6
price is irrelevant for choice. Medicare pays hospitals and doctors fixed prices for their services,7 thus
a Medicare beneficiary pays the same amount regardless of where she obtains service. Thus, for Medicare
in particular, we would expect quality to be salient.8

Table 1 provides statistics on concentration in hospital markets at 5 year intervals over the period
1985-2000.1 The table shows that the HerfindahlHirschmann Index (HHI)2 for U.S. hospitals has been
steadily increasing over time. In particular, the median HHI increased from 3,028 in 1985 to 3,995 in
2000. This is an increase of almost 1,000 points on a
very large base. An HHI of 3,000 indicates a very concentrated market — for example, a market with three
equally sized firms will have an HHI close to this value
(3,333). The FTC and DOJ consider markets with
an HHI above 1,800 as highly concentrated.3 For
highly concentrated markets such as these, the enforcement agencies consider any increase in the HHI
This is not to say that price is not important. Most
of 100 points or more as presumptively anticompetipeople with health insurance in the United States
tive (Federal Trade Commission and Department of
have some form of managed care insurance (Gabel
Justice, 1992). The increase in median concentration
et al., 2000). One of the defining features of managed
from 1985 to 2000 is far greater than that threshold.
care is restriction of consumer choice. Plan enrollees
are allowed to choose from a pre-approved subset of
1 These data are for metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs)
only. This represents the vast majority of the population and
hospitals in the U.S.

4 See http://www.ftc.gov/ and http://www.usdoj.gov/ for
detailed information.

P

2 The HHI is defined as the sum of firms’ squared market
2
shares, HHI = N
i=1 si , where si is firm i’s market share, and
N is the number of firms. The HHI increases as the number
of firms decreases or asymmetry of market shares increases. It
has a maximum of 10,000 for a monopoly and has a minimum
at 10, 000/N , where the market is divided equally between N
firms.

5 Of course health care is not the only industry where effects
on quality are important — it is, however, particularly salient
here.
6 Mostly those over age 65, but also some disabled individuals, notably those with end-stage renal disease (kidney failure).

3 Markets with an HHI below 1,000 are considered unconcentrated, and those with an HHI between 1,000 and 1,800 are
designated as moderately concentrated (Federal Trade Commission and Department of Justice, 1992). In practice, concentration levels higher than the cutoffs in the Guidelines are
often tolerated (see Federal Trade Commission, 2004).

7 Prices are regulated to be the same for a given service in a
given location at a particular point in time. Regulated prices
for a particular service vary by location and over time.
8 This will also be true for in many European health systems.

2

doctors and hospitals in their area – not all doctors
or hospitals. Managed care plans thus bargain with
doctors and hospitals over prices. Hospitals or doctors with prices that are too high will be excluded.
In principle, managed care plans are acting as agents
for consumers. Consumers want to reduce the price
of care, since higher prices result in higher premiums
and lower consumption of other goods.

dards for competition, then review relevant findings
from economic theory, then consider empirical evidence on health care competition and quality. The
final section of the paper contains a summary and
conclusions.

2

However, quality is obviously important as well as
price. Indeed, many health care analysts have identified quality problems as a major failing of the U.S.
health care system (Kohn et al., 1999; Institute of
Medicine, 2001). Antitrust is important for health
care quality, since health care quality is determined
via markets.9 The courts and the antitrust enforcement agencies have not dealt with quality in a uniform manner, however. In some antitrust cases, impacts on quality have been explicitly considered. In
many cases, however, it has been simply presumed
that price competition will lead to beneficial effects
on quality.10

Performance Standards

In economics the performance standard is social welfare – consumer plus producer surplus. In some cases,
however, the impacts on consumer and social welfare
differ considerably. This is particularly relevant to
the topic at hand. For example, it is possible that
free entry of firms into a market can increase consumer welfare, but decrease social welfare. Suppose
that entry leads to increased quality, but also that
every firm pays a fixed cost of entry. Then the value
consumers derive from the higher quality may be less
than the increased costs due to entry. In this case
consumer welfare is increased but social welfare is
In this paper, I review the state of knowledge in not. In what follows, I consider social welfare as the
economics on issues relevant to the assessment of the performance standard, but point out situations where
impact of competition in health care markets on qual- considering only consumer welfare would lead to subity. This is relevant for antitrust policy in the U.S., stantially different conclusions.
where there are well established health care markets,
While it may seem uncontroversial to point out
and for the evaluation of market oriented reform prothat there can be excessive quality in the context of
posals in Europe and elsewhere. I limit myself to
an abstract model, it can be harder to think about
the economics literature, or papers published outthis clearly in the context of health care. Quality in
side of traditional economics journals, but nonethehealth care involves better or worse health, including
less using an economics approach. I do not survey
death. As a consequence, a theoretical finding that
the health services research literature on quality, in
quality is excessive can translate into a health care
particular the literature on outcomes research. That
setting as stating that mortality rates are too low.
literature is primarily concerned with measurement,
Suggesting that social welfare would be improved by
as opposed to assessing the impact of competition.
increasing mortality rates is not a pleasant prospect.
Romano (2003) provides an excellent review of this
However, the same economic concepts apply here
literature.
as to any other resource allocation problem. We want
In what follows I first discuss performance stanto devote resources to reducing patient mortality up
until the point where the marginal benefit of reduced
9 See Sage et al. (2003) for a discussion of the role of commortality is balanced by the marginal cost. This
petition policy in determining health care quality.
means that there will be a socially optimal mortality
rate that will certainly be greater than zero. While
10 See Hammer and Sage (2002) for a comprehensive review
of the treatment of health care quality by the courts in an- this may seem repugnant, it is important to realize
titrust cases.
that there are competing uses for resources and if
3

the value of reduction in patient mortality is not that
great, then it may be better to devote those resources
to finding a cure for cancer, school lunches, or battleships. It is also important to realize that tradeoffs
involving mortality risks are made every day. We devote resources to improving traffic and airline safety,
but not to the point that the risks of death associated
with these activities are zero.

differentiation is represented in a number of different
ways. In particular, economic models distinguish between vertical product differentiation, and horizontal product differentiation. With vertical differentiation, all consumers have the same preferences and
thus agree that some products are better than others. I will refer to this as product quality. With horizontal differentiation, consumers can have differing
preferences and thus some may like one product while
others prefer another. I will call this product variety.
3 What Do We Know From Economic Since the setup of the models differs, I will distinguish between them for clarity in reviewing results.
Theory?
There are also models with both product quality and
product variety, which I discuss separately. Rather
Economists, antitrust scholars, and the courts intuthan going into detail on the differences, I will focus
itively think that competition is a good thing. Inon what the models have to tell us about about the
deed, this is the presumption of antitrust law. Ecoability of markets to deliver products with the charnomic theory when there are differentiated products,
acteristics that people want (regardless of whether it
11
however, is not so clear. In what follows, I review
is the right “quality” or right “variety”).
the state of knowledge on this issue from economic
theory. I divide my review into analyses where price
In what follows I first review the literature on prodis regulated versus those where price is set by firms. uct differentiation where prices are set by firms in
These assumptions lead to very different results.
the market. I begin by covering models with product
quality, then move on to those with product variIn particular, the impact of competition is reasonety. I then cover the literature on product differentiably clear when prices are regulated. If price is above
ation in markets with regulated prices. Last, I review
marginal cost, competition leads to quality and conthe research that allows for both product quality and
sumer welfare being greater, although the impact on
product variety. Table 2 presents a summary of the
social welfare is ambiguous. If firms choose both price
various papers and their findings.
and quality, however, the results are much less clear.
3.1

3.2

Models

Prices Set by Firms

There is a very broad literature on product differentiation. I will review only the findings from a few key
articles. Most research has found ambiguous effects
of competition (or monopoly) on welfare. In what
follows, I review the key findings for product quality
first, then for product variety.

The theory of competition with differentiated products is complicated. My purpose here is not to review
the literature, but to try and draw out key insights.
As a consequence, I will use only simple presentations
of the theory and not dwell on details.12 Product
11 By differentiated products, I mean any products that consumers do not regard as identical, and thus are not perfectly
substitutable. The products may be differentiated either because some are better (e.g., Honda vs. Yugo), or because they
are somewhat different, at least to some consumers (e.g., Coke
vs. Pepsi).

3.2.1

Product Quality

First consider the model of product quality by Spence
(1975). Here the question is whether a monopolist
will produce the socially optimal level of quality (only
one level of quality can be chosen). Let market in-

12 For more complete presentations and reviews, see Tirole
(1988); Eaton and Lipsey (1989); Anderson et al. (1992).

4

verse demand be p = P (q, z), where p is price, q is whereas the monopolist is concerned with the
quantity, and z is quality. Assume that price is de- marginal marginal valuation of quality, the marginal
creasing in q and increasing in z. Let the cost func- consumer’s marginal valuation of quality,
tion be T C = C(q, z), where costs are increasing in
quantity and quality.
∂P (q, z)
.
∂z
First consider the choices made by a social planner,
who maximizes social welfare (the difference between
The social planner considers the effect of an inconsumer surplus and cost),
crease in quality on all consumers, whereas the monopolist considers only the effect of an increase in
quality on the marginal consumer. Therefore, for a
Z q
P (x, z)dx − C(q, z).
(1) fixed quantity, the monopolist will provide too little,
max W (q, z) =
q,z
the right amount, or too much quality as,
0
The first-order conditions to this problem are:

Z
0

q


∂P (q, z)
∂P (x, z)
dx
qT
.
∂z
∂z

The monopolist will supply the socially optimal
quality only when the marginal consumer is the avZ q
erage consumer. When the marginal consumer’s val(3) uation is less than the average the monopolist will
0
supply too little quality, and vice versa. Since it
seems quite likely there is considerable heterogeneNow consider the monopolist’s problem. The mo- ity in consumer preferences for health care quality, it
nopolist maximizes profits,
seems particularly unlikely that the expression above
is an equality.
∂C(·)
=0
∂q
∂C(·)
∂P (x, z)
dx −
= 0.
∂z
∂z
P (q, z) −

max π = P (q, z) · q − C(q, z).

(2)

(4)

The consequence is that there is no general theoretical prediction on whether monopoly reduces welfare
The first-order conditions to the monopolist’s when product differentiation takes the form of vertical quality differences. The exception to this conproblem are:
clusion occurs if the monopolist can perfectly price
discriminate. Under this condition the monopolist
will maximize social welfare. Since the monopolist
∂P (·) ∂C(·)
P (q, z) + q ·
−
=0
(5) captures all of consumer surplus when they perfectly
∂q
∂q
price discriminate their problem is the same as the so∂P (·) ∂C(·)
q·
−
= 0.
(6) cial planner’s problem in (1). Although this will lead
∂z
∂z
to the socially efficient outcome, there is redistribution away from consumers, since the discriminating
A comparison between the first-order conditions monopolist captures all of the surplus.
(3) and (6) is illuminating. Dividing the first terms in
It is possible to construct less general models that
both equations by q, we have the social planner congenerate the conclusion that monopoly undersupplies
cerned with the average marginal valuation of quality,
or oversupplies quality.13 Consider the following exq,z

Z
0

q


∂P (x, z)
dx
q,
∂z

13 See Tirole (1988), Section 2.2.1 and Pepall et al. (2005),
Section 7.5.1, for examples.

5

ample from Pepall et al. (2005).

Mussa and Rosen consider a monopolist that sells the
same good at different levels of quality to discriminate among consumers with different valuations.14
The monopolist cannot perfectly price discriminate
— it does not know individuals’ valuations. The monopolist does know, however, the distribution of valuations in the population. As a consequence, the
monopolist can set quality levels to get consumers to
self-select their most preferred quality, thus allowing
the monopolist to price discriminate. This leads to a
distortion, thus monopoly leads to inefficient quality
choice.

Let consumers have the following inverse demand
function, p = z(θ − q). The term θz is the reservation
price, so consumers’ reservation price is increasing in
quality. Let the costs of production be constant and
zero, but the costs of quality be described by c = αz 2 .
Then the first-order profit maximization conditions
for the monopolist are:
∂π
∂q
∂π
∂z

= z(θ − 2q) = 0

(7)

Consider a simple example with two types of consumers. Let type 1s value quality more than type 2s.
The monopolist can maximize profits by setting two
We can solve for the monopolist’s profit maximiz- levels of quality in such a way that the type 1s select
ing quantity and quality, which are qm = θ2 and the high quality good and the type 2s select the low
θ2
.
zm = 8α
quality good.
=

(θq − q) − 2αz = 0.

(8)

The monopolist clearly does not choose the quantity and quality that maximize social welfare. Since
the marginal cost of quantity is zero, the social welfare maximizing quantity is θ. That is the quantity at
which the demand curve crosses the horizontal axis.
We can find the social welfare maximizing quality
as follows. Social welfare is maximized where the
change in consumer surplus from additional quality
equals the marginal cost of quality,
Z

q

(θ − x)dx =

2αz

0

θq −

q2
2

=

In order to do this, the difference in quality between the high and low quality products has to be
large enough that the type 1s will not choose the low
quality good. The self-selection then allows the monopolist to set the prices of the high and low quality
good to extract the maximum amount of surplus from
consumers.

This, however, leads to a distortion. In order to
get the type 1s to choose the high quality/high price
product, the monopolist sets the quality on the low
quality product low enough that it is not a good sub(9) stitute to the type 1s. Thus quality choice is distorted.

2αz.

As in all models of this type, the inefficiency results
from an information asymmetry. If the monopolist
knew consumers’ valuations, then it could perfectly
price discriminate. This would be socially efficient,
although not desirable from consumers’ perspectives.

Solving, we find that the social welfare maximizing
θ2
quality is 4α
.

This exampleprecisely illustrates
Spence’s point.
R q ∂P (x,z) .
Some further insight into the determinants of qualdx
q = θ − 2q , and
In this case,
∂z
0
R
.
ity
levels can be gained from the model of Dorfman
q ∂P (x,z)
∂P (q,z)
∂P (q,z)
= θ − q. So
dx
q
>
,
and
Steiner (1954). Their model is nominally about
∂z
∂z
∂z
0
which means that the monopolist undersupplies quality.
14 In Spence’s model only one level of quality can be chosen. This drives the difference between Spence and Mussa and
Rosen.

Mussa and Rosen (1978) is an important paper
with a different setup than Spence. In their paper,
6

choice of price and advertising, but can also be inAfter some manipulation we can obtain the followterpreted as about price and quality (although in a ing formula, known as the Dorfman-Steiner condisomewhat restrictive way).15 Consider a firm who tion,
has the following profit function, where per unit (and
marginal) costs are constant in quantity (q) and ind·z
εz
=
(17)
creasing in quality (z), and F represents fixed costs,16
p
ε
p

π = q(p, z) · (p − c − d · z) − F.

or

(10)

z=

The first-order conditions with respect to price and
quality are,

p εz
·
.
d εp

(18)

This says that the amount spent on quality relative to sales should go up if the quality elasticity of
∂q
∂π
= q+p·
−c−d·z =0
(11) demand increases or the price elasticity of demand
∂p
∂p
declines, and vice versa. It also offers some other
∂π
∂q
insights.
= p·
− d · q = 0.
(12)
∂z
∂z
Presume that there exist “optimal” values of the
price
and quality elasticities, that is, there exist
Let the price and quality elasticities of demand be
unique values which induce the monopolist to choose
the socially optimal price and quality. Then if market
power over price increases, i.e., εp goes down, price
∂q p
εp ≡ −
(13) will increase above the optimum. Quality will also in∂p q
crease, but to a supra-optimal level.17 Alternatively,
∂q z
.
(14) if the quality elasticity decreases, quality will fall to a
εz ≡
∂z q
sub-optimal level, even if the price elasticity is at its
optimal value. If an increase in market power reduces
Then the first-order condition for price can be ex- both the price and quality elasticities, the effect on
pressed in the following familiar form (remembering quality is unclear. Price will certainly rise. If the
that marginal cost = c + d · z),
price and quality elasticities fall by the same proportion, so that their ratio is unchanged, price will still
c+d·z
p=
(15) rise and as a consequence quality will also rise above
1 − ε1p
its optimal level. If the ratio of the quality elasticity to the price elasticity falls by more than price
increases, quality will fall below the optimal level.
or as the Lerner Index,
There are some other papers which provide a similar
intuition, although the models are quite different
(16)
from Dorfman and Steiner. Dranove and Satterthwaite (1992) consider the effects of information on
15 Dorfman and Steiner model a monopolist’s behavior. We
price and quality when consumers are imperfectly incan consider this an approximation to the behavior of a mo- formed about both. They find that if consumers have
p − (c + d · z)
1
L=
=
.
p
εp

nopolistically competitive firm if we think of the demand function as a reduced form demand, e.g., an oligopolist’s residual
demand curve (see, e.g., Dranove and Satterthwaite, 2000).

17 The excess profits may attract entry, but that entry is not
necessarily welfare increasing. Each entrant adds F to costs,
but does not necessarily increase surplus accordingly. See the
next section for an explicit discussion of this issue.

16 This is a modification of the cost structure used by Dorfman and Steiner.

7

better information about price than about quality,
then this can lead to an equilibrium with suboptimal
quality. Intuitively this is similar to an increase in
the price elasticity of demand, with no increase in
the quality elasticity.

costs are not too high and there is an excess supply of
physicians. If switching costs are high then effort will
be suboptimal, but competition will result in effort
levels above the minimum.18 Again, there are parallels to the Dorfman and Steiner intuition. In the
Allard et al. model optimal effort occurs when patient switching costs are not too high. This is similar
to the quality elasticity of demand being sufficiently
high in the Dorfman and Steiner model. Sub-optimal
effort occurs when switching costs are high, analogous
to a low quality elasticity of demand.

Kranton (2003) examines the impact of competition on quality when consumers have imperfect information about quality. A number of papers have
considered the question of whether there is an equilibrium at which the socially optimal quality is produced in a market where consumers are imperfectly
informed about quality (but not about price) (Allen,
1984; Klein and Leffler, 1981; Shapiro, 1983). These
papers demonstrate that there is an equilibrium with
optimal quality if consumers can learn about quality
ex post and if firms care enough about (future) repeat business. In this equilibrium there is a “qualityassuring price” that is above marginal cost and supports the optimal quality. Kranton shows that this
result does not necessarily hold if firms compete in
price for market share (a feature that is absent from
the prior models). If a firm can increase (and sustain)
its market share by cutting price, then there isn’t
an equilibrium at the socially optimal quality level.
One may apply the intuition from the Dorfman and
Steiner model to Kranton’s result. The ability to increase market share via price cuts is analogous to the
price elasticity of demand exceeding the quality elasticity, hence both price and quality are lower. If the
reference point is an equilibrium with optimal quality, as in Kranton’s model, then the lower quality is
suboptimal.

While there are still no determinate conclusions
from this framework, it does offer some useful guidance for thinking about issues of competition in
health care markets. For example, the advent of managed care in the 1990s is commonly thought to have
increased the price elasticity of demand facing health
care firms (hospitals in particular). This should have
led to decreased prices, and indeed seems to have
done so.19 If there was no sufficiently countervailing increase in the quality elasticity, then quality
should have fallen. It is important to bear in mind
here that if the starting point was one where hospitals possessed market power, then the model predicts
that quality should have been at supra-optimal levels.
Thus a decrease in quality could be welfare improving
(assuming it did not fall below the optimal level).

Another change in health care markets is the recent emphasis on medical errors and quality improvement. If that leads to the quality elasticity of demand increasing, then quality will increase. If the
price elasticity remains unchanged this will increase
Allard et al. (2005) explicitly consider competition price (since increased quality raises marginal cost),
in the physician services market. They consider a re- but price cost margins will remain unchanged. This
peated game between physicians and patients. The framework will prove helpful in making sense of some
patient’s health is determined by observable medical results from the empirical literature, as we shall see
care and physician effort. Physician effort is any- later in this paper.
thing physicians do that affects patient health. It
can be thought of as quality. The patient observes his
18 In addition, if there is uncertainty in the relationship behealth ex post, so physician effort is observable, but is tween
patient health and physician actions, then physicians
non-contractible. In the static game physicians will face some risk of patients switching even if they have supplied
supply sub-optimal effort. However, in the repeated optimal effort. In this case there physicians will supply supragame there is an equilibrium in which physicians sup- optimal effort.
19 See Dranove and Satterthwaite (2000) and Gaynor and
ply optimal effort. This equilibrium obtains under
certain conditions, in particular, if patient switching Vogt (2000) for reviews of the evidence.
8

3.2.2

Product Variety

We obtain the following expression by adding and
0
subtracting the term G0 f 0 qN
and rearranging,

In the previous section I reviewed the findings of economic theory on quality and competition for models
of vertical product quality. I now turn to product
variety. The classic references on this are Dixit and
Stiglitz (1977) and Spence (1976).

0
W 0 = πN + N [G0 f 0 − c0 ] qN
+ G0 [f − f 0 qN ] . (23)

First, assume that the third term in the expression
To illustrate, consider a simple model based on above is zero. Now consider the second term. G0 f 0 −c0
Spence (1976) and Mankiw and Whinston (1986). is price minus marginal cost. It is non-negative. The
0
Let consumer preferences be represented by:
term qN
is how per firm output changes with the
number
of
firms. Assume it is negative, i.e. there is
!
∞
a business stealing effect of firm entry. Then, for any
X
u=G
f (qi )
(19) markup of price over marginal cost, the second term
i=1
is negative. Thus W 0 < πN . This implies that πN at
the socially optimal N is positive. At a competitive
where firm i produces output qi and both of the func(free entry) equilibrium, profits must equal zero. It
tions G and f are concave. This gives consumers a
is true that profits fall with the number of firms (see
taste for product variety and also implies that the
Mankiw and Whinston). This then implies that the
various firms’ products are substitutes.
number of firms in competitive equilibrium is greater
Costs consist of a fixed cost of entry, F , and vari- than the socially optimal number, i.e. competition
able cost, c(q).
produces too much product diversity. This happens
because firms do not take the business stealing effect
Impose symmetry for simplicity and let the social
into account. The gain in social welfare from entry
planner choose product variety (i.e., the number of
is outweighed by the fixed costs incurred. The confirms, N ),
clusion is different, however, when measured against
a consumer welfare performance standard. Ignoring
the fixed costs incurred by entering firms, since they
max W (N ) = G (N · f (qN ))−N ·c(qN )−N ·F . (20) don’t affect consumer welfare, implies that consumers
N
are made (weakly) better off by entry.20
With N firms the symmetric firm output is qN .
Now assume that the second term in (23) is zero
and consider only the third term. G0 [f − f 0 qN ] represents the effect of product diversity (due to more
firms). This term is positive, since f is concave. Consumers value product diversity, but an entering firm
cannot capture all of the increase in surplus they generate. G0 f is the contribution to surplus of another
firm, and G0 f 0 qN is the firm’s revenue. Using the arπN = G0 (N · f (qN )) f 0 (qN ) · qN − c(qN ) − F. (21) gument from the preceding paragraph, the fact that
this term is positive implies that a free entry equilibrium will produce too little product diversity, due to
Now consider the first-order condition for the social
the non-appropriability of social surplus.
planner,
Now consider profit maximizing behavior by firms.
First note that with N firms, utility maximization
by consumers implies that the equilibrium price is
G0 (N · f (qN )) f 0 (qN ). Each firm’s equilibrium profits are therefore,

20 If there is 100% business stealing then consumer welfare is
unaffected. If there is less than 100% business stealing, then
consumers are made better off.

0
0
W 0 = G0 [N f 0 qN
] − c(qN ) − N c0 (qN )qN
− F. (22)

9

It isn’t possible in general to tell whether one
of these terms is larger than the other.
The
business stealing effect could dominate the nonappropriability effect, or vice versa, or they could be
exactly balanced. Therefore a free entry monopolistically competitive equilibrium can result in too much
product diversity, too little, or precisely the optimal
amount.

3.3

Regulated Prices

In contrast to the mostly ambiguous theoretical results on competition and quality with variable prices,
the theoretical literature on competition and quality
when prices are regulated is clear. When price is
above marginal cost, competition leads to more quality. This improves consumer welfare, but can have
any impact on social welfare. In particular, there
is a distinct possibility that competition will lead
to excessive quality provision from the perspective
of social welfare. In this section the focus is solely
on product quality, since it is well known that firms
will pursue minimal product variety in the absence of
price competition (e.g., Hotelling, 1929; White, 1972;
Tirole, 1988, section 7.1.3). In what follows, I review
the general economics literature on this topic and also
that from health economics.

and 1980s, e.g., airlines and taxis.22 There are also
some models specific to health care.23 The intuition of these models is as follows. Price is regulated,
so firms compete for consumers on non-price dimensions, i.e. “quality.” If the regulated price is set
above marginal cost at some baseline level of quality,
then firms will increase quality to try to gain market
share. This will continue until profits are zero. Since
firms don’t take account of stealing market share, in
equilibrium quality levels can be excessive.
Consider the following sketch of a simple model.
Let quality have only a vertical dimension, i.e., “more
is better.” For simplicity in exposition, assume that
the demand that any firm i faces is separable in its
market share, si , and the level of market demand, D.
Firm i thus faces a demand of:
qi = si (zi , z−i )D(p, zi , z−i )

(24)

where si is firm i’s market share, zi is firm i’s quality,
z−i is a vector of all other firms’ qualities, D is market demand, and p is the regulated price.24 Assume
that i’s market share is increasing in own quality,
decreasing in the number of firms, and that the responsiveness of market share to own quality is also
increasing in the number of firms.

Assume that firms all use the same technology and
face
the same input prices. Then they each have costs
Government regulation commonly leads to fixed
described
by:
prices. The most prominent example of this in U.S.
health care is the Medicare program. Price regulation in health care is the norm in most other counci = c(qi , zi ) − F
(25)
tries. Medicare sets fixed prices for hospitals based
on a patient’s diagnosis.21 Doctors are paid fixed where c(·) is variable cost, and F is a fixed cost of
prices for services provided. Further, Medicare bene- entry.
fits are such that Medicare beneficiaries pay the same
22 See, for example, Douglas and Miller (1974); Schmalensee
amount regardless of the provider they use to obtain
care. As a consequence, economic models of compe- (1977); Vander Weide and Zalkind (1981); White (1972) on
airlines and Frankena and Pautler (1984) on taxicabs.
tition with regulated prices are relevant here.
23 Allen and Gertler (1991); Held and Pauly (1983); Pope
(1989).

These models largely derive from analyses of industries subject to price regulation up until the 1970s
21 Prices are fixed for a given location and point in time.
Thus Medicare regulated prices vary geographically and intertemporally. This applies to both doctors and hospitals.

24 Note that for consumers insulated from the cost of consumption, as in health care, the price they face will be less
than the price received by the firm. I ignore this in order to
keep this sketch of a model simple. It would not affect the
conclusions in any event.

10

Further assume that there is free entry and exit, so
that all firms earn zero profits in equilibrium. Then,
assuming Nash behavior, equilibrium is described by
the solutions to the following across all firms i:

∂πi
∂zi

and

market, i.e., competition leads to more quality. Further, quality is increasing in the regulated price. One
may write down a firm’s equilibrium quality function
as the (implicit) solution to equations (26) and (27),

z e = z(p, cq , cz , si , D)
(28)


∂ci ∂si
∂D(·)
= [p −
]
D(·) + si
∂qi ∂zi
∂zi
where cq and cz denote first derivatives. The firm’s
∂ci
level
of quality depends on the level of the regulated
−
= 0.
(26)
∂zi
price, the marginal cost of quantity, the marginal cost
of quality, the level of demand, market share, and the
quality elasticities of market share and market demand. This can be seen informally by manipulating
(26) to obtain the following expression,
(27)
πi = p · qi − ci = 0

Inspection of (26) yields some immediate insights.
First compare equilibrium quality under monopoly
to that with multiple firms. Notice that, since a monopolist faces market demand, the first term in curly
∂si
brackets in (26) vanishes and si = 1. Since ∂z
is
i
positive (by assumption), the term in curly brackets
is larger with multiple firms than with a monopolist, so equilibrium quality is higher with competition. Whether welfare is higher depends on the rel∂si
∂D
ative magnitudes of ∂z
and ∂z
. In particular, if
i
i
∂D
∂zi equals zero, then increases in quality do not shift
market demand, and quality competition is simply
over market share, and hence wasteful.

z=

(p − cq )[ηzs + ηzD ](si · D)
cz

(29)

where ηzs and ηzD are the quality elasticities of market share and market demand, respectively. Quality
is increasing in price, the elasticity of demand with
respect to quality, and the firm’s total demand. Quality is decreasing in the marginal costs of quantity or
quality.

This has implications for econometric specifications for empirical analysis. The equation to be estimated is (28). However, measures of marginal cost,
market share, and demand are likely to be endoge∂si
increases with the number of firms (i.e., nous in an econometric equation. One would employ
Since ∂z
i
the firm’s demand becomes more elastic with respect exogenous determinants of these factors, such as cost
to own quality the more alternatives there are for shifters (W ), demand shifters (X ), and the number
D
consumers), quality competition will be more intense of firms (N ). A reduced form econometric specificawith entry and equilibrium quality will increase with tion would thus look something like the following,
the number of firms in the market. This benefits
consumers, but may not increase social welfare. In
z e = Z(p, W, XD , N, ε)
(30)
particular, the increase in consumer surplus from increased quality may be outweighed by the increased
costs, particularly if there is diminishing marginal where ε is a random error term.
utility from quality and diminishing returns in quality
As we shall see, most of the empirical studies to
production. As indicated previously, this may result
date include a measure of market structure and a
in excessive quality levels.
number of control variables. They are not generally
The positive predictions of this model are clear. clear about whether the control variables represent
Quality is increasing in the number of firms in the cost shifters or demand shifters. Further, the reg11

ulated price, p, is generally omitted from empirical conditions for an industry of profit maximizing firms
∂v
studies, although theory indicates its inclusion.
. Since this term
is the presence of the last term, ∂z
i
is positive, the value that not-for-profit firms put on
The normative implications of the model are less
quality acts like a reduction in the marginal cost of
clear than the positive ones. Depending on the naproducing quality, i.e., not-for-profit firms will act
ture of demand (specifically how responsive market
like for-profit firms with a lower marginal cost of
demand is to quality), competition may lead to exquality.25 This implies that quality will be higher
cessive quality provision. Similarly, a higher reguin equilibrium. The comparative statics, however,
lated price may reduce welfare by leading to excesare identical with an industry of profit maximizing
sive quality. These conclusions, however, are altered
firms. Quality is increasing in the number of firms
if we consider only consumer welfare. Consumers are
and the regulated price, as before.
never made worse off by competition. If competition
leads only to demand stealing they are no better off
as a result, but if it leads to any increase in market 3.4 Models with both Product Quality and
demand then consumers are unequivocally better off.
Variety
The model outlined above is not specific to health
care. In particular, the majority of firms in the hospital industry are not-for-profit. Let us now write
down a simple model that captures this aspect of the
health care industry. There have been many models of not-for-profit hospitals (Pauly and Redisch,
1973; Newhouse, 1970; Lee, 1971; Lakdawalla and
Philipson, 1998). While there is no agreement on a
general model, most models posit an objective function which includes profits and some other argument,
such as quantity or quality. Therefore, let us assume
that not-for-profit hospitals have an objective function which includes quality and profits (as a shorthand for everything else they care about). Further,
for simplicity, let this function be additively separable in quality and profits and linear in profits:

There are some models with both product quality
and variety. Product variety in these models is usually chosen first, and is typically location along a
line. Product quality then consists of choice of a level
of a common characteristic. These are sequential
games, with strategic variables determined in order.
The sequential nature of these games is necessary for
tractability, but also leads to different outcomes than
if the strategic variables are chosen simultaneously.
Both price setting and regulated price situations are
considered.

Kamien and Vincent (1991) and Ma and Burgess
(1993) are two similar papers. The models are of
duopolies with fixed locations where firms go on to
sequentially choose quality and price. Variety is determined first (exogenously), then firms either choose
Ui = u(zi , πi ) = v(zi ) + πi .
(31) quality and price simultaneously or then quality and
last price. These papers both give the result that
We can now revisit the first-order conditions for unregulated competition leads to suboptimal quality
quality choice (26), modified to take account of this when price is chosen after quality. Fierce competition
in the anticipated subgame in prices that follows the
objective function:
quality choice subgame leads firms to choose lower
quality, since the tough price competition lowers the


return to quality. This turns out to be suboptimal,
∂ci ∂si
∂D(·)
∂Ui
= [p −
]
D(·) + si
thus price regulation can thus improve on competi∂zi
∂qi ∂zi
∂zi
tion.
∂ci
∂v
−
+
= 0.
(32)
∂zi
∂zi
25
Notice that the only difference with the first-order

This is the same specification and result as for not-forprofit firms that care about quantity, as opposed to quality.
See Lakdawalla and Philipson (1998); Gaynor and Vogt (2003).

12

Kamien and Vincent (1991) show that with unregulated competition there is a symmetric equilibrium
in which quality is too low, due to the fierce price
competition that ensues. They also show that price
regulation can lead to the optimal quality level if the
price is set just right. If not, quality can be too high
or too low.
Ma and Burgess (1993) also consider a model where
firms have fixed locations. Firms then choose quality
and price sequentially. If there is a fixed cost of quality then firms react to quality disadvantages by price
reductions. This price response reduces the return
to higher quality. As a consequence, firms have an
incentive to provide less quality and thus provide a
suboptimal level of quality to avoid generating tough
price competition. They find that price regulation
can improve welfare by eliminating the quality distortion induced by price competition.

will increase prices to the point where the last consumer is just indifferent about purchasing insurance.
Since all consumers are insured, only a fraction of any
one hospital’s price increase is passed on to consumers
through the insurance premium. This softens price
competition, and thus hospitals compete on quality.
Since the competition is only over market share, in
equilibrium quality levels are excessive and prices are
supra-optimal.

The results for managed care are quite different.
Under managed care, there are exclusive contracts
between hospitals and insurers, thus the choice of an
insurer is the same as choice of a hospital. In this
case, a price increase by a hospital is fully passed on
through the insurance premium. This makes price
competition tougher than in the traditional insurance
case, and thus prices are lower. Quality is therefore
lower than in the traditional insurance case. Quality can be is lower or higher than the social optiThese results derive from a number of specific asmum, depending on whether it is sufficiently costly.
sumptions of the model. Ma and Burgess show that
Nonetheless, consumers are always better off with
if firms compete simultaneously in quality and prices,
managed care than with traditional insurance. Maninstead of sequentially, equilibrium qualities are opaged care provides lower quality, but also lower prices,
timal. If there are only marginal costs of quality and
and lower prices are low enough to more than comno fixed costs, then the equilibrium quality is optipensate for the lower quality.
mal. The assumption of linear demand eliminates the
Spence effect (difference between average and marNuscheler (2003) studies competition with reguginal valuation). Nevertheless, Ma and Burgess show lated prices. He models competition as a three stage
that there are conditions under which competition game. In the first stage, firms enter, in the second
leads to suboptimal quality.
stage they choose location (on a circle), and in the
third stage they choose quality. Quality is increasA paper by Lyon (1999) adapts this kind of model
ing in the regulated price. Entry is decreasing in
to the institutional specifics of health care markets.
the regulated price, since potential entrants anticiSpecifically, Lyon examines a model of health care
pate fiercer quality competition at a higher price.
competition which includes insurers and hospitals.
The insurance market is presumed competitive. HosNot too surprisingly, (first-best) optimality cannot
pitals are differentiated both with regard to product be achieved when price is the only instrument availvariety and quality. Product variety is captured as able to the regulator. The regulator would like to
location and product quality is the quality of care. achieve optimal entry and quality (location is symProduct variety is fixed (the hospitals are at the ends metric in equilibrium, so that is determined by enof a unit line). Lyon assumes the entire market is cov- try), but that will not generally be feasible with only
ered, so competition is only over market share. He one policy instrument. If the regulator sets the price
considers two kinds of insurance: “traditional” insur- at the level that induces optimal quality, there is exance in which consumers have free choice of hospitals, cessive entry. If the regulator sets the price at the
and managed care, in which choice is restricted.
level that leads to optimal entry, then there is excessive quality. This could be solved either by a nonlinLyon shows for traditional insurance that hospitals
13

ture, focusing mainly on the economics literature.26 I
will first review the results from econometric studies
Barring those possibilities, if the regulator can
of markets with regulated prices, and then variable
commit to a fixed price at the very beginning of the
prices, reversing the ordering of the preceding theory
game (with no re-optimization in subsequent stages),
section. I do this because the theoretical predictions
then there is a second-best regulated price. Equifor markets with regulated prices are clearer, thus
librium entry and quality at this price will both exthey offer a clearer target for econometric hypothesis
ceed the optimal (first-best) levels. Nuscheler shows,
testing.
however, that this second-best price is not credible.
The regulator’s optimal price changes after the secThe studies reviewed here employ a variety of
ond stage of the game (location, following entry in econometric approaches. The modal approach is
stage 1). This is therefore the only credible price by what I will call a “Structure-Conduct-Performance”
the regulator. This price leads to the first-best qual- (SCP) specification. These econometric models are
ity, but induces excessive entry.
derived from a conceptual model that hypothesizes
a causal link from market structure to firm conduct
The results from these papers reinforce the findand then to industry performance.27 Most SCP modings reviewed in the preceding sections that compeels applied to health care focus on the link between
tition need not lead to optimal quality. The papers
market structure and firm conduct, and omit indusby Kamien and Vincent and Ma and Burgess pretry performance. The typical conduct measure in the
dict that when prices are set by firms, competition
general industrial organization literature is price or
will lead to decreased, and suboptimal, quality. Lyon
price-cost margin. The typical measure of market
also models competition with prices set by firms, but
structure is the Herfindahl-Hirschmann Index (HHI),
obtains different results from Kamien and Vincent
which is the sum of the squares of all firms’ market
and Ma and Burgess, due to the presence of health
shares.28 The equation usually estimated has roughly
insurance in his model. Lyon’s results depend on the
the following appearance,
nature of the health insurance regime. If consumers
have insurance contracts that allow them choices over
hospitals, then competition leads to increased, and
p = β0 + β1 q + β2 XD + β3 W + β4 HHI + ε (33)
excessive quality. If consumers have contracts that
restrict their choice of hospital, then competition can
lead to too little or too much quality. Nuscheler where XD represents demand shifters and W capshows that quality is increasing in the regulated price. tures cost shifters. The SCP studies of quality simply
The regulator may set the price to achieve optimal employ a measure of quality as the dependent variquality, but cannot also achieve the optimal market able in this equation, rather than price. Only one of
the studies I review estimated equations for price and
structure.
quality together.
ear price, or by regulating entry as well as price.

The SCP approach has a number of well recognized problems when price is the dependent variable

4

What Do We Know From Econometric Studies?

There is a rapidly growing empirical literature on
competition and quality in health care. At present
the evidence from this literature is entirely on hospital markets. In what follows I will review this litera-

26 Not too surprisingly, this captures the vast majority of
such studies, given the nature of the topic. While I believe I
have captured most of the prominent work on this topic, I do
not claim to have covered every study, however, in particular
any that may have appeared in the medical literature.
27 See

P

Carlton and Perloff (2005).

2
HHI = N
i=1 si , where si is firm i’s market share, and
there are N firms in the market.

14

28 I.e,

(see Bresnahan, 1989; Schmalensee, 1989, on these issues). These problems also apply when quality is the
dependent variable, and there are some additional issues. First, the use of the HHI in a pricing equation
can be explicitly derived only from a homogeneous
goods Cournot model of conduct.29 Obviously an
SCP regression with quality as the dependent variable does not derive from this framework. In the case
of regulated price, theory does point to an econometric model with a measure of market structure on the
right hand side (see equation (30)). Even in this case,
or even if one thinks of a quality SCP regression as deriving from a broad conceptual framework as opposed
to a specific theoretical model, a number of issues remain. The HHI (or any market structure measure) is
usually regarded as endogenous. Unmeasured variation in demand and cost factors affect both quality
and market structure. For example, a firm with low
costs is likely to have both a high market share (leading to a high HHI) and choose high quality (refer to
equation (18) for optimal quality in the Dorfman and
Steiner type framework or equation (29) for optimal
quality for a regulated price regime).
Two additional specification issues arises in regard to SCP studies of markets with regulated prices.
When firms set prices it is clear that price and quality are determined simultaneously, so an SCP model
might either include price and treat it as endogenous, or simply include exogenous determinants of
price. Typically price is not included in the studies reviewed here, although it is not clear whether
the authors were explicitly trying to include exogenous determinants of price. When price is regulated,
however, price (or the price cost margin) should appear as an exogenous determinant of quality (again,
see equation (30)). In some studies price is omitted
based on the argument that, since price is regulated,
price does not affect demand (e.g., for Medicare beneficiaries). The regulated price should be included,
however, because it is a determinant of supply, not
demand.

29 In that case, the coefficient on the HHI in an SCP regression captures the elasticity of demand, not firm conduct (which
is already assumed to be Cournot).

There is another complication due to the nature of
hospitals. The major purchasers of hospital services
are Medicare and private health insurers. Medicare
sets regulated prices. Prices from private health insurers are determined in the market. Since hospitals
generally sell in both markets, one must either account for this or presume that there are no complementarities between the two (e.g., demand and cost
are completely separable in Medicare and private output). Many of the studies that focus on Medicare
seemingly make the implicit assumption of separability.
While the majority of the studies I review here employ an SCP framework, some employ different approaches. Some studies evaluate the impact of mergers, some evaluate the impact of regulatory changes
(e.g, price deregulation), two studies estimate demand, one study examines the determinants of the
number of firms, and a number estimate the relationship between hospital volume of a surgical procedure and patient health outcomes. Each of these
approaches have their advantages and disadvantages.
I will discuss these in the context of evaluating the
various studies.
Before proceeding, however, I want to note that
the results of the majority of these studies provide
evidence only on positive questions, e.g., “Does competition increase quality?”. Few of these studies allow for normative analysis. This first wave of studies
consists for the most part of policy evaluation and
reduced form studies.30 It is not possible to evaluate
effects on welfare with these kinds of studies. This
should not be taken as a criticism of these studies,
but simply a recognition of what sorts of inferences
can be drawn from them.

30 By policy evaluation studies, I mean econometric specifications that evaluate the impact of some policy or (economic)
environmental factor, but are not derived from an explicit economic model. By reduced form, I mean an econometric specification that is the reduced form of a specific economic model.

15

4.1

Studies with Regulated Prices

shifters.

There are a number of studies of hospital quality provided to Medicare patients. The amount a Medicare
beneficiary pays is the same, regardless of where she
obtains care (again, in a given area at a given point
in time). As a consequence, price is not a strategic
variable for hospitals serving Medicare patients. Table 3 presents a summary of these studies and their
findings. The entry in the column labelled “Effect
of Competition on Quality” indicates the direction
of the relationship between the competition measure
and the quality measure. For example, in the first
row, the entry “Increase” in that column indicates
that the quality is higher in more competitive markets. For the study cited in the first row (Kessler
and McClellan, 2000), quality is measured by mortality and competition is measured by the HHI. Quality
is inversely related to mortality – lower mortality is
higher quality. Competition is inversely related to the
HHI – the HHI is lower in more competitive markets.
So, the finding that competition increases quality is
based on a positive empirical relationship between
mortality and the HHI – mortality is higher in less
competitive markets.
Kessler and McClellan (2000) is a study of the
impact of hospital market concentration on riskadjusted one year mortality from acute myocardial
infarction (AMI, i.e., a heart attack) for Medicare
patients. Expenditures on these patients are also
studied. The study included data on all non-rural
Medicare beneficiaries with AMI during selected
years from 1985 to 1994. Kessler and McClellan use
the SCP framework discussed above, with some modifications. They instrument for the HHI with hospital market shares predicted from a model of patient
choice of hospital, where patient choice is largely determined by distance from the hospital. They also
employ zip code fixed effects. As a consequence, the
effects of hospital market concentration are identified
by changes in the predicted HHI. The specification
they employ, however, omits the regulated Medicare
price. A number of hospital and area characteristics
are included, HMO enrollment among them. It is
unclear whether they are considered demand or cost

The results from this study are striking. Kessler
and McClellan find that risk-adjusted one year mortality for Medicare AMI patients is significantly
higher in more concentrated markets. In particular,
patients in the most concentrated markets had mortality probabilities 1.46 points higher than those in
the least concentrated markets (this constitutes a 4.4
percent difference) as of 1991. This is an extremely
large difference – it amounts to over 2,000 fewer (statistical) deaths in the least concentrated vs. most
concentrated markets. The results with regard to expenditures have a somewhat different pattern. Prior
to 1991, expenditures were higher in less concentrated
markets, while the reverse is true as of 1991.
Kessler and McClellan also find that HMO enrollment reduced expenditures on average, but had no
statistically detectable impact on mortality. They
also find an interaction effect between HMO enrollment and market concentration. In low HMO enrollment states, patients in less concentrated markets
had higher expenditures and better (although statistically insignificant) outcomes. In states with high
HMO enrollment, patients in less concentrated markets had lower expenditures and lower mortality.
The positive inferences from this study are clear.
Mortality from heart attacks for Medicare patients
is lower in less concentrated markets. The effects
of concentration are stronger beginning in 1991 and
are reinforced by HMO enrollment. The omission of
the regulated price is unfortunate, although for this
omission to lead to biased estimates the changes in
the omitted price would have to be correlated with
the within zip code changes in the predicted HHI. It
is unclear whether the inclusion of market and hospital characteristics is intended to control for possible hospital complementarities between Medicare and
private output. So long as it is unlikely there are important omitted factors there should be no problem
with bias. While it is clear that concentration affects
hospital quality, the mechanism by which this works
is not.
It seems unlikely that hospitals deliberately choose
lower quality in the form of an increased probability

16

of death. What may be happening is that hospitals in more concentrated markets take some of their
excess profits in slack. General slack in the hospital may have the unintended consequence of higher
mortality. Another issue with regard to this application is whether hospitals compete for heart attack
patients. Tay (2003) states that one-half of heart attack patients arrive at the hospital via ambulance.
It seems unlikely that these patients have any choice
of hospital, hence hospitals cannot compete for these
patients. I think the most likely story is that heart
attack patients are the “canary in the mine shaft.”
Hospitals in more competitive environments are pressured to be better across the board, and that manifests itself clearly in a very sensitive area – heart
attack patient mortality.

tient mortality up until the point where the marginal
benefit of reduced mortality is balanced by the marginal cost. This means that there will be a socially
optimal mortality rate that will certainly be greater
than zero, and it is possible to devote too many resources to reducing mortality. While reduced mortality is a good thing, it is not without cost, therefore
we cannot conclude that social welfare is improved
simply based on evidence that competition leads to
reduced mortality.

Gowrisankaran and Town (2003) estimate the
effects of hospital market concentration on riskadjusted mortality rates for AMI and pneumonia, for
both Medicare and HMO patients. I will discuss their
findings with regard to Medicare patients here, since
the price is regulated for them, and discuss the findWhile the basic positive results from this study are ings with respect to HMO patients in the next secclear, I do not believe that there are clear norma- tion. Gowrisankaran and Town use data from Los
tive inferences. The results show that both expen- Angeles county from 1991-1993 for AMI and 1989ditures and mortality are lower in less concentrated 1992 for pneumonia. Their approach is similar to that
markets. Kessler and McClellan claim that this im- of Kessler and McClellan. They use an SCP frameplies there is a welfare gain from competition. I do work, instrumenting for the HHI with hospital marnot believe this is so. First, the measure of Medicare ket shares predicted from a patient choice equation,
expenditures they use is not a measure of economic where distance is the main determinant of hospital
cost. Second, and more fundamentally, economic the- choice. An innovation is that they construct separate,
ory does not predict that quality competition in price hospital-specific, HHIs based on (predicted) hospital
regulated markets will lead to socially optimal quality market shares for Medicare, HMO, Medicaid, indilevels. If price is above marginal cost at the optimal gent and self-pay patients, and indemnity patients.
quality then competition can lead to excessive qualGowrisankaran and Town find, in contrast to
ity. Consumer welfare may be enhanced, but can be
Kessler and McClellan, that mortality is worse
outweighed by reduced producer welfare. In essence,
for Medicare patients treated in hospitals with
the benefits that accrue to consumers from increased
lower Medicare HHIs.
The implication is that
quality can be smaller than the costs incurred. Therecompetition reduces quality for Medicare patients.
fore, the finding that quality is higher in less concenGowrisankaran and Town hypothesize that Medicare
trated markets tells us that consumers are likely betmargins are small or negative, or that hospitals may
ter off, but does not tell us if social welfare has been
deviate from profit-maximizing behavior. If Medicare
improved. This is a question which an SCP analysis
margins are indeed negative (i.e., p < M C), then the
is not designed to answer. Quality in unconcentrated
results are consistent with theory. It seems unlikely,
markets could be too high, too low, or just right. The
however, that this is true for AMI. Heart treatments
model that Kessler and McClellan employ ably idenfor Medicare patients are widely thought to be proftifies the relation between concentration and quality,
itable. Indeed, there is substantial entry of hospitals
but does not allow for the evaluation of welfare efspecializing only in the treatment of heart disease.
fects.
Since Medicare patients are a substantial portion of
As I stated when discussing performance stan- heart patients, it seems as if Medicare margins must
dards, we want to devote resources to reducing pa- be significant in order to generate the observed entry.
17

Small or negative Medicare margins for pneumonia,
however, do seem plausible. We do not observe the
entry of hospitals specializing in pneumonia, or pulmonary disorders generally.

price is set via regulation. Clearly any incentive to
engage in product differentation is not related to a desire to relax price competition for Medicare patients.
It is possible that hospitals may be attempting to
relax price competition for private patients, and are
unable to quality discriminate between Medicare and
private patients, perhaps for legal or ethical reasons.
It seems like it should be a straightforward result
from models where firms choose both product variety and product quality that oligopolists operating in
a market with a regulated price have an incentive to
differentiate themselves with regard to product variety in order to avoid the kind of quality competition
described previously in Section 3.3.31

This study also omits Medicare price. Since
Gowrisankaran and Town only examine Los Angeles
county there may be little or no variation in Medicare
price across hospitals for a given year. Although there
should be temporal variation, they have only a short
time period. As a consequence, there may not be
enough variation in their sample to estimate a parameter for Medicare price. It includes some hospital
characteristics, although it is unclear if these characteristics are considered demand or cost shifters.
It is hard to know why the results of this study contrast so markedly with the previous one. It may be
that the Medicare price is below marginal cost (on average) for the hospitals in Gowrisankaran and Town’s
study, while the opposite is true for the hospitals in
Kessler and McClellan’s study. Since neither study
included Medicare price it is impossible to evaluate
this hypothesis. It is also possible that the estimated
relationship between the HHI and mortality is sensitive to the choice of instruments. Gowrisankaran and
Town and Kessler and McClellan use similar, but not
identical, instrumenting strategies. Obviously identification is driven by the instruments, so it is possible
that the differences in instruments are driving the
differences between the studies. This is only speculation, however. The opposite results from the two
studies suggest caution in drawing strong conclusions
about the impact of market structure on hospital
mortality at this point.
Kessler and Geppert (2005) extend the framework
employed by Kessler and McClellan to consider the
impact of concentration on differences in quality between patients. Their work is inspired by the theoretical result that oligopolists will find it optimal to engage in product differentiation in order to relax price
competition (see Tirole, 1988, section 7.5.1). These
theory papers are not directly relevant for Kessler and
Geppert’s empirical exercise, since the theory examines quality dispersion when firms set prices. Kessler
and Geppert examine Medicare patients, for whom

Kessler and Geppert examine outcomes (readmissions, mortality) and expense (expenditures, various
measures of utilization) for Medicare heart attack patients, as in Kessler and McClellan. They contrast
outcomes and expenditures for high-risk and low-risk
patients in highly concentrated vs. unconcentrated
markets. High-risk patients are those who were hospitalized with a heart attack in the previous year,
whereas low-risk patients had no such hospitalization. They find that low-risk patients receive more
intensive treatment in highly concentrated markets,
but have no statistically significant difference in outcomes. High-risk patients, on the other hand, receive
less intensive treatment in highly concentrated markets, and have significantly worse outcomes. They
conclude that competition leads to increased variation in patient expenditures, and that it is welfare
enhancing, since on net outcomes are better and expenditures are lower. Medicare price is omitted, as
in previous studies.
31 If one takes the kind of model used in Lyon (1999) or
Kamien and Vincent (1991), where firms locate on a line, it
seems evident that firms will have an incentive to locate as
far apart from each other as possible (at the ends of the line),
rather than nearby (in the middle). If they locate in the middle, the firms are identical, so the one that produces the highest
product quality will take the entire market. Thus firms will engage in fierce product quality competition, up until the point
that profits are dissipated. If firms are located at the ends of
the line, then each firm will be considerably more attractive to
consumers located very close to it. This will dampen quality
competition.

18

This paper adds to the evidence that concentration is significantly correlated with readily observable measures of quality for hospitals. As I stated
previously in discussing Kessler and McClellan, I do
not believe that there are clear welfare implications.
The statistical relationship between quality dispersion and concentration is surprising and interesting.
So far as I know, this is the only paper to examine
quality dispersion. What economic behavior generated these patterns in the data is an intriguing puzzle.

ronment.32 She examines data from 1985-1990 and
1990-1994 for most nonrural hospitals in the U.S.
Shen’s measure of market structure is an indicator for
whether there are five or more other hospitals within
a 15 mile radius of a hospital. This is interacted with
a measure of the change in the Medicare price and
the change in HMO penetration. There are direct
effects of Medicare price and HMO penetration, but
not market structure.

Shen finds a negative and significant relationship
between the change in Medicare price and mortalMukamel et al. (2001) examine risk-adjusted hospi- ity. The interaction between the market structure
tal mortality for Medicare patients in 134 Metropol- and Medicare price variable is negative and signifiitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) in 1990. They focus cant for 1990-1994, but has no significant impact on
on the impact of HMOs, but also examine hospital mortality for 1985-1990. These results are consistent
market concentration. Mukamel et al. (2001) find with standard theory. Hospitals respond to an inthat HMO penetration (the percent of the MSA pop- crease in the regulated price by increasing quality.
ulation enrolled in an HMO) has a negative impact This response is amplified when hospitals face more
on excess hospital mortality (the difference between competitors.
observed mortality and predicted risk-adjusted morThe effects of HMO penetration also appear to be
tality), i.e., HMO penetration is associated with betroughly consistent with theory. Shen finds that HMO
ter quality. Hospital market concentration (measured
penetration leads to higher mortality, and that hosby the HHI) has no statistically significant impact
pitals in markets with more competitors appeared to
on mortality. HMO market concentration is also inrespond to HMO penetration with quality reductions
cluded as an explanatory variable, although it is not
in 1985-1990, although not thereafter. HMOs are hysignificant. Medicare price is omitted. It is unclear
pothesized to increase the price elasticity of demand
what to make of these results. First, Mukamel et al.’s
facing hospitals. If so, then the increased price elasspecification includes inpatient expenditures, which
ticity will likely lead to a quality reduction. This
are certainly endogenous, as well as hospital HHI,
should be amplified in markets with more competiHMO HHI, and HMO penetration, which may very
tors, since that should also increase the price elaswell be endogenous, so it is unclear that the resulting
ticity. Shen also does a simple normative analysis of
estimates are consistent. It is possible that hospital
the effects of financial pressure, but not the effects of
concentration does truly have an impact on mortalcompetition.
ity, but that it is not consistently estimated in this
study. Second, it is not clear how enrollment in priA paper by Tay (2003) takes a more structural
vate HMO plans affects the mortality of Medicare approach. Tay specifies and estimates a structural
patients. Presumably there has to be some spillover econometric model of hospital choice by Medicare eneffect, but the nature of the mechanism is unclear, as rollees with AMI.33 Tay uses data on urban enrollees
Mukamel et al. acknowledge.
A recent study that does take account of Medicare
price effects is Shen (2003). Shen examines the
impact of financial pressure from reduced Medicare
payments and HMO penetration on mortality from
AMI, controlling for the hospital’s competitive envi-

32 There have been a number of studies assessing the impact
of the change in Medicare hospital payment from cost-plus to
fixed price (the Medicare Prospective Payment system). See,
for example, Kahn et al. (1990); Cutler (1995).
33 A number of papers have previously examined whether
choice of hospital is affected by quality (Luft et al., 1990; Burns
and Wholey, 1992; Chernew et al., 1998). These studies find

19

in conventional Medicare, located in California, Oregon, and Washington in 1994. She examines the effect of a number of aspects of quality and distance on
the probability a patient is admitted to a particular
hospital. The quality measures include two clinical
outcomes: the mortality rate and the complication
rate; a measure of input intensity: nurses per bed;
and whether the hospital can perform two high-tech
cardiac services: catheterization or revascularization.
All measures of quality are treated as exogenous.
Tay finds that hospital demand is negatively affected by patient distance and positively affected by
quality. She then simulates the effects of changes in
the various aspects of a hospital’s quality, holding the
total number of heart attack patients fixed, the locations of patients and hospitals fixed, and the qualities
of all other hospitals fixed. Adopting a catheterization lab is predicted to increase demand by 65 percent, while adding revascularization in addition to
catheterization increases demand by 76 percent. If
the number of nurses per bed is increased by one
percent, then demand is predicted to increase by 24
percent.
Tay shows that hospital demand is significantly affected by quality and distance, thus there are potentially high payoffs to hospitals increasing quality.
While this represents an advance over the previous
literature by using more detailed modelling, there are
nonetheless some limitations to the inferences that
can be drawn from this study.

is not modelled. As a consequence, competition itself
is not modelled and can not be examined explicitly.
There is no structure in place for dealing with the
potential endogeneity of the quality variables. There
is the usual reason to be concerned about endogeneity, since quality is chosen by the firm. In addition,
it has been observed for a number of hospital procedures that hospital volume causes patient outcomes
(see section 4.2.3 below for a review of some studies). This suggests endogeneity of the mortality and
complication rates.
Further, the simulation is an out of equilibrium
prediction.
Tay’s predicted effects of adding a
catheterization lab or other services on demand are
likely too large, since they hold rivals’ responses fixed.
If rivals respond by also adopting catherization labs
or other services, then the equilibrium effects should
be smaller, potentially even zero. It is also unclear
whether firms would actually make the predicted
choices. If rivals respond strongly to a firm’s adoption of services, the responses may make adoption unprofitable. As a consequence it is hard to assess the
magnitude of quality effects. Last, as Tay acknowledges, without a supply side no welfare analysis can
be performed.

Most of these studies are quite recent. There are,
however, two early studies that should be mentioned.
Shortell and Hughes (1988) examine the association
between in-hospital mortality among Medicare patients in 1983 and concentration. They find no statistically significant association, and the point estiAs with the previous studies, the Medicare price is
mate of the impact of concentration on mortality is
omitted. It is possible that this omission is inconsesmall. Shortell and Hughes also examine the impact
quential, but I see no way to tell. Tay assumes that
of stringency of state hospital price regulation prohospitals set the same level of quality for Medicare
grams and state regulation of hospital entry. They
and non-Medicare patients. This is also an untested
find that mortality was significantly worse in states
assumption, although it is at least explicit.
with stringent price regulation and strict entry reMore fundamentally, the supply side of the market strictions. This is exactly as the theory predicts – if
the regulated price is lower, quality will be lower as
that clinical quality, as measured by deviation between ex- well. Entry restriction will lead to lower quality.
pected and actual mortality rates, has a significant impact on
hospital choice – hospitals with lower mortality are more likely
to be chosen. The responsiveness found in these studies indicates the potential for quality competition among hospitals,
although how much is not clear, since the studies were not
designed to assess this.

Held and Pauly (1983) examines the competition
and quality in the dialysis market. All people with
end stage renal disease (ESRD, i.e., kidney failure) in
the U.S. are covered by Medicare. Medicare pays a

20

fixed price to dialysis facilities for treating patients.
They use data on dialysis facilities in large urban areas of the U.S. in 1977 and 1978. The measure of
quality is dialysis machines per patient. The notion
is that greater capacity translates into greater convenience for patients in scheduling appointments. They
regress the HHI for dialysis facilities on the number of
dialysis machines per patient, including a number of
control variables. The Medicare price is omitted, because there is no variation in the price in the sample.
Held and Pauly find that there are more dialysis machines per patient in less concentrated areas. Hence,
competition increases quality. Held and Pauly recognize that they are unable to draw normative conclusions from their analysis.

4.2.1

Older Studies — “Medical Arms Race”

There are a number of studies of what has been
dubbed “The Medical Arms Race.” These studies examine the impact of competition on a number of measures of quality, usually facilities rather than clinical
quality. They cover the period in the 1970s and 1980s
when it was generally agreed that price competition
among hospitals was weak or nonexistent. The notion was that, since price competition was weak, then
competition must occur over non-price attributes.34
If we accept that price competition during this period
is essentially nonexistent, then these studies should
be regarded as similar to studies of competition with
regulated prices, in contrast to the more recent studies I discuss below, which occur during a period in
which there is clearly vigorous price competition.

This literature typically regresses a measure of
market concentration (often the HHI) on some measure of input use or costs. The medical arms race
4.2 Studies with Prices Set by Firms
is to be detected via a negative correlation between
concentration and the input measure. Evidence of
I now turn my attention to econometric studies of a negative relationship is generally presumed to be
competition and quality where prices are set by firms. evidence of welfare reducing non-price competition.
I will subdivide these studies into three categories.
Examples of this literature are Joskow (1980);
The first consists of older studies of the “Medical Robinson and Luft (1985); Dranove et al. (1992).
Arms Race.” The second are newer studies that ex- Joskow examines the relationship between hospital
amine the impact of competition on hospital qual- reserve capacity (i.e., unoccupied beds) and the HHI
ity either via the SCP model or examining the im- for all U.S. hospitals in 1976. Joskow takes reserve capacts of mergers or price deregulation. The results pacity as quality. He finds that hospitals in less conare summarized in Table 4. The last category are centrated markets had more excess capacity. Based
papers studying the relationship of hospital volume on the model of quality competition with regulated
of specific procedures to patients’ clinical outcomes. prices presented in Section 3.3, Joskow deduces that
The results of these studies are summarized in Ta- competition may lead to supra-optimal excess capacble 5. In both tables the entry in the column labelled ity in hospital markets. This may be correct, but
“Effect of Competition on Quality” indicates the di- unlike the model, prices are not fixed. Without a
rection of the relationship between the competition fuller examination of price determination in hospimeasure and the quality measure. The measure of tal markets at that time, or of the costs associated
quality used in the study is listed under the column with excess capacity, it isn’t possible to make a deheading “Quality Measure,” and the measure of com- termination about the welfare impacts of non-price
petition is listed in the column labeled “Competition competition.
Measure.” For example, in the first row, the study
by Joskow finds that his quality measure, excess bed
34 See Lyon (1999) for a model that generates this in equicapacity, is lower in more competitive markets, as
librium.
indicated by the HHI.
21

Robinson and Luft (1985) study the impact of market structure on inpatient admissions, outpatient visits, length of stay and average costs for California
hospitals in 1972. They use indicators of the number
of other hospitals within a 15 mile radius of a hospital as measures of market structure, and regress those
on their outcome variables. Robinson and Luft find
that hospitals with more neighbors within 15 miles
have more inpatient admissions and higher costs per
case and per day, although there is no impact on
outpatient visits or length of stay. Quality is unobserved. Presumably hospitals with more neighbors
face tougher competition and are supplying higher
quality, leading to the estimated positive relations between number of neighbors and admissions and costs.
They infer that hospital competition is welfare reducing. Although the correlations this study turned up
are interesting, it is not clear how to interpret them,
either positively or normatively. The relationships
they estimate are not derived from any obvious economic model, which makes interpretation difficult.

4.2.2

Recent Studies

There have been a number of more recent studies of competition and quality in hospital markets.
These all cover time periods from the 1990s or later,
when it is generally agreed that price competition
had emerged in hospital markets. I will first discuss
SCP studies, then cover merger studies, then finally
move to studies of price deregulation. In considering these studies we need to refer back to the theory
for guidance. Unlike the case of regulated prices, economic theory on competition and quality is less clear.
Nonetheless, theory does provide a guide to what to
look for, and what economic factors might be underlying an estimated relationship.

The study by Gowrisankaran and Town (2003) examined the relationship between market structure
and AMI and pneumonia mortality in Los Angeles
county in the early 1990s for both Medicare and HMO
patients. I discussed the findings for Medicare patients in the previous section. I now turn to HMO
Dranove et al. (1992) examine hospital adoption of
patients. Gowrisankaran and Town find that risksophisticated medical technologies. They utilize 1983
adjusted mortality is significantly lower in less conhospital data from California, and examine the imcentrated parts of Los Angeles county. This implies
pact of the HHI and market size on the number of
that competition is quality increasing for HMO pahospitals in the market adopting particular technolotients. Using equation (18) for guidance, we see that
gies. Dranove et al. find that the HHI has a negative
this could occur if the quality elasticity of demand
impact on the number of hospitals adopting these
is higher in less concentrated markets, or if the price
technologies, i.e., there is more adoption in less conelasticity is lower. Since we generally think that elascentrated markets. They also find, however, a very
ticities are higher with more competitors, the former
strong effect of market size on adoption. They interseems plausible (and the latter does not).
pret their results as providing evidence that market
size is more important than market concentration, alSohn and Rathouz (2003) study the impact of comthough the results do provide at least weak support petition on risk-adjusted mortality for patients refor the medical arms race hypothesis.
ceiving percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) in 116 hospitals in California in
Noether (1988) uses a slightly different method1995. They construct a “competition coefficient”
ology. She uses data on prices and expenses for 11
that varies between zero and one depending on the
frequent diagnoses in all U.S. hospitals located in SMdegree of overlap in the patient pools of a pair of
SAs from 1977 and 1978. She finds that less concenhospitals. Sohn and Rathouz find that mortality is
trated markets have lower prices and higher expenses,
lower for patients in hospitals facing more competialthough the effect is weak and small. Thus this pation. This effect is stronger in lower volume hospitals.
per provides some moderate support for the existence
Again, this result seems to imply that the quality
of both price and non-price competition among hoselasticity is higher in more competitive markets.
pitals in the 1970s.
Mukamel et al. (2002) examine the impact of com22

petition on risk-adjusted mortality for California patients in 1982 and 1989. The two years cover the period before and after the introduction of insurer selective contracting in California. They hypothesize that
the introduction of selective contracting increased
price competition and that hospitals responded by
shifting resources from clinical activities, which are
hard to observe, to hotel activities, which are more
easily observed. Mukamel et al. estimate the effects
of the level of hospital concentration (measured as
the HHI) in the base year and the change in hospital concentration on the change in inpatient clinical expenditures, and then the impact of the change
in expenditures and the level of the hospital HHI in
1989 on the level of risk-adjusted mortality in 1989.
They find that the change in the HHI had a negative and significant impact on both clinical and hotel
expenditures for not-for-profit hospitals, but no significant impact on for-profit hospitals. The estimated
relationship between clinical expenditures and mortality is negative. Mukamel et al. find that together
these two results imply that increased competition
from 1982-1989 led to increased mortality, operating via competition reducing clinical expenditures on
patients. The introduction of selective contracting
is likely to have increased the price elasticity of demand facing hospitals, without increasing the quality elasticity by a similar proportion. In this case,
the Dorfman and Steiner model predicts that quality
will fall.

hospital changes in lagged operating profit margins36
on the probabilities of adverse patient safety events.
They find that patients at hospitals in the lowest quartile of operating profit margins have significantly higher probabilities of adverse safety events
than those in any of the higher quartiles. There
are no significant differences in the probability of adverse events between patients in the highest, secondhighest, or third-highest quartiles.37 Thus patients
at hospitals that are doing poorly financially are at
greater risk of suffering from a patient safety problem
than those who are at hospitals that are doing better financially. There seems to be no impact of doing
better financially above a threshold (bottom quartile
of operating margin).
This finding is roughly consistent with theory. We
expect that quality will be positively related to marginal profits, so the empirical finding that quality is
lower at hospitals with low profits seems likely. Standard theory would predict a continuous effect of profits on quality, however, not a threshold. It is possible
that this could be due to data limitations. Encinosa
and Bernard have to rely on accounting data, so they
are unable to measure economic profits or construct
a measure of marginal profits.

There are also some issues with the econometrics.
Encinosa and Bernard use hospital dummies to control for hospital-specific unobserved factors. The estimating equations are logits for the probabilities of
adverse patient safety events. This is a nonlinear esEncinosa and Bernard (2005) use data on all intimator, so unlike least squares, hospital-specific efpatient discharges from Florida hospitals from 1996
fects are not differenced away. As a consequence, it
to 2000 to examine the impacts of financial pressure
isn’t clear to what extent their estimates of the efon patient safety. Encinosa and Bernard employ a
fects of profits on safety are truly purged of potennewly available set of quality indicators developed
tially confounding hospital-specific effects. Another
by the Agency for Health Care Research and Qualissue is that slope estimates from nonlinear models
ity (AHRQ). These indicators measure a variety of
with group fixed effects are only consistent when the
factors reflecting clinical quality, including mortality,
number of observations per group goes to infinity. In
obstetric complications, adverse or iatrogenic comthis context, that means that the number of years
plications, wound infections, surgery complications,
35
caesarean section, and inappropriate surgery. En36 The ratio of net operating profit to net operating revenue.
cinosa and Bernard estimate the impact of within
35 Go to http://http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov
for more information.

37 The first quartile covers patients at hospitals with margins
below -0.5%. The second quartile covers margins between 0.5% and 4.4%, the third between 4.4% and 9.3%, and the
fourth covers margins greater than 9.3%.

23

each hospital is observed has to be large. Since the
sample in this paper covers 5 years, it seems unlikely
this condition is met, hence the estimates may not be
consistent.

– he estimates that a 10 percent increase in hospital market share leads to a 0.18 percent decrease in
quality. He also finds evidence that managed care
penetration increases quality for some of the quality
indicators, although there is no statistically significant relationship for others.

While this study does not directly examine competition, it may have implications for the impact of
competition on quality. To the extent that competiHo and Hamilton (2000) and Capps (2005) are two
tion reduces hospital operating margins to low levels papers that examine the impact of hospital mergers
as in Encinosa and Bernard it may put patients at on quality of care. Ho and Hamilton (2000) study
higher risk of adverse safety events.
130 hospital mergers of various types over the period 1992 to 1995. The quality measures they emPropper et al. (2004) use an SCP approach to exploy are inpatient mortality, readmission rates, and
amine the effect of the effect of hospital competition
early discharge of newborns. They employ hospital
in the United Kingdom following reforms to the Naspecific fixed effects to control for time invariant hostional Health Service in the 1990s. These reforms enpital characteristics that may be related to merger.
couraged payer-driven competition among hospitals.
Ho and Hamilton find no detectable impact of merger
Propper et al. examine the impact of this payeron mortality for either heart attack or stroke patients.
driven competition on mortality for AMI patients.
They do find that some mergers increase readmission
They examine the impact of a measure of market
rates for heart attack patients and the early discharge
structure (roughly, the number of competitors) on
of newborns. It is unclear whether Ho and Hamilton
mortality over the period 1995-1998 and find that
find no effect because there truly is no effect or bemortality increases with the number of competitors.
cause they are unable to identify the effect in the
This finding certainly contrasts with that of U.S. SCP
data. The effects of mergers are notoriously diffistudies, but (for better or for worse) it is consistent
cult to identify. First, there are not a large number
with theory. The presence of more competitors can
of mergers, so there is not a lot of statistical power
increase quality elasticity, price elasticity, or both. If
with which to detect an effect. Second, the identifythe price elasticity increases more than the quality
ing variation in this study comes from within-hospital
elasticity, then quality will fall. Whether this is the
variation over time. If that is not the primary source
mechanism driving the result in this paper can not be
of variation in outcomes then the estimates of the padetermined, although it provides some direction for
rameters will be imprecise. Third, mergers are cerfuture research. As previously, the welfare impacts
tainly endogenous. Mergers occur for reasons that
of this finding are unclear. If increasing the number
are often related to the outcome variables of interof competitors is associated with a decrease in marest. If mergers occur for reasons related to hospitals’
ket power, then a quality decrease may be welfare
changing circumstances over time, then the hospital
improving. Alternatively, it could be harmful.
fixed effects will not control for endogeneity, so it will
An interesting study is by Sari (2002). Sari uses be difficult to obtain consistent estimates of a merger
the same quality indicators as Encinosa and Bernard. effect.
Sari is one of the first studies to employ these indiCapps (2005) uses the AHRQ quality indicators
cators rather than following the common practice of
to examine the effect of hospital mergers on qualusing risk-adjusted mortality as a quality measure.
ity. He compares merging to non-merging hospitals
He employs data on hospitals in 16 states covering
in New York state during 1995-2000. There are 25
the period 1992-1997 and estimates the SCP model
merging hospitals, and 246 total. Control groups are
using fixed effects, random effects, and instrumental
constructed in 2 ways. The first method is to sevariables with fixed effects. Sari finds that quality
lect non-merging hospitals that are similar to merging
is significantly lower in more concentrated markets
hospitals in observable characteristics (e.g., teaching
24

status, size, ownership, etc.). The second method is
to use propensity scores to identify a control group.
The control group for a merging hospital then consists of the ten non-merging hospitals that have predicted probabilities of merging that are closest to the
predicted probability of the merging hospital.
Using the first method Capps finds no statistically
significant effect of mergers on most of the quality
indicators. There is no effect on 4 of 6 inpatient indicators for quality procedures, no effect for indicators
for 3 other surgical procedures, and no effect for 6 patient safety indicators. Merger is found to have a negative effect on the inpatient quality indicators for 2
cardiac procedures: AMI and congestive heart failure
(CHF). Merger is estimated to lead to an additional
12 deaths per 1,000 AMI or CHF admissions in the
year following the merger, although there is no significant effect in the second year after the merger. There
are no statistically significant effects of merger on any
of the quality indicators when propensity scores are
used to generate a control group. As with the Ho and
Hamilton paper it is hard to know how to interpret
the overall lack of statistical significance. Mergers
may truly have had no impact on hospital quality in
New York state over this period, or it may just be
very difficult to precisely test the hypothesis.
Two very interesting recent papers use changes in
regulation as a way to learn about the effect of hospital competition on quality. Volpp et al. (2003) study
the effect of the deregulation of hospital prices in New
Jersey to try and learn about the impact of the introduction of price competition on hospital quality.
In 1992 New Jersey deregulated hospital prices. The
neighboring state of New York had no change in its
hospital regulatory regime. Volpp et al. use data
on AMI hospital admissions in New Jersey and New
York from 1990 to 1996 to learn about the effect of
the deregulation. They look at the difference in riskadjusted inpatient AMI mortality between New Jersey and New York before and after regulatory repeal.
They find that mortality in New Jersey relative to
New York increased after price deregulation. At first
glance this result contrasts markedly with the SCP
type studies previously discussed. However, consider
the impact of price deregulation. The biggest impact

should be to increase the price elasticity of demand,
and decrease price.38 The quality elasticity seems unlikely to be significantly affected. The prediction of
the Dorfman and Steiner type model is that quality
will fall when the price elasticity of demand increases.
It is impossible to say what the impact on welfare
might be. If the regulated prices were set too high,
then this quality decrease is welfare increasing, and
vice versa.
A paper by Propper et al. (2003) employs a similar
approach to Volpp et al. In this paper Propper et al.
(2003) examine the impacts of competitive reforms
in the NHS on mortality for AMI patients. Propper
et al. (2003) use a different strategy in this paper than
in Propper et al. (2004). Here they use the change
in regulation in the U.K. over the period 1991-1999,
combined with geographic variation in the number of
competitors.39 Competition was introduced in 1991
and actively promoted up until 1995. It was downplayed after 1995 and actively discouraged from 1997
onwards. The impact of competition is identified by
differences between hospitals facing competitors and
those who are not between the time periods when
competition was encouraged versus when it was discouraged.
Propper et al. (2003) find that competition reduces
quality. The differences in mortality for hospitals in
areas with competitors versus those with no competitors was higher during the period when competition
was promoted (1991-1995), than during the period
when competition was discouraged (1996-1998). The
estimated cumulative effect of competition over the
entire period is to raise mortality rates by roughly the
same amount as the cumulative effect of the secular
downward trend in heart attack mortality (presumably due to technological change). This is a large impact. As with Volpp et al. (2003), these results can
be interpreted as consistent with the Dorfman and
Steiner model, although that is not testable within

38 Unfortunately Volpp et al. do not have any evidence on
the effect of deregulation on prices.
39 Only variation in the number of competitors is used in
Propper et al. (2004).

25

the framework employed in the paper. Also as before, the welfare inferences are unclear.

them. Endogeneity of quality may also be an issue,
for the same reasons as the Tay paper.

Howard (2005) is a recent paper that focuses on
demand, as in the paper by Tay. Howard models the
demand for kidney transplantation facilities, focusing
on the effect of quality on consumer choice of facility.
Howard examines the choices of all patients receiving transplants, including Medicare patients, Medicaid patients, and those with private insurance.

Abraham et al. (2005) is one of the few studies
with clear welfare implications. Abraham et al. examine the determinants of the number of hospitals
in isolated markets in the U.S. for 1990. They do
not examine price or quality explicitly. Instead, they
infer whether competition is increasing by the population required to support another firm in the market.
If the population required to support another firm is
increasing, then average profits available post-entry
must be decreasing, thus increasing the volume necessary to make entry profitable. They find that market size is the primary determinant of the number
of hospitals, and that the quantity bought and sold
in the market rises, and variable profits fall, as the
number of hospitals in a local market increases. This
implies that the market is getting more competitive
as the number of hospitals increase. Further, it shows
that entry isn’t simply demand-stealing — more hospitals increase demand. The reason is that quantity
demanded can increase only if price is lower or quality is higher. Since that does happen, people are
consuming more and must be better off. As a consequence, they conclude that competition increases
with the number of hospitals, and that competition
is welfare improving.

Quality is measured as the difference between expected and actual one year post-transplant graft failure rates at a center. Howard assumes that there are
no price differences that affect choice between transplant centers, thus price is omitted. The explanatory
variables are the quality measure, patients’ distances
from transplant centers, and patient characteristics.
The average estimated choice elasticity with respect
to quality is -0.12. The quality elasticity for privately
insured patients is larger: -0.22.
These elasticity estimates are not particularly
large. The low value of the average estimated quality
elasticity implies that this does not give transplant
centers a large incentive to compete on quality, as
indicated by equation (29). Since Howard does not
model the supply side, his model doesn’t directly predict the impacts of competition (it is not intended to
do so).
As with the Tay paper there are also some concerns about price and endogeneity. Howard assumes
that price has no impact on where patients obtain
their transplants. This may be true for Medicare,
but it seems unlikely for patients who are privately
insured. Privately insured patients face very large
differences in out of pocket costs between providers
that are in and out of their coverage networks. In
addition, health insurance plans make decisions on
which providers to include in their networks based
on price. Thus it seems as if price should be included
for those with private insurance. Further, if price is
positively correlated with quality, then its omission
could lead to a downward bias in the estimated effect
of quality on demand. Patients may appear less responsive to quality differences than they really are if
high quality transplant centers are also high cost to

4.2.3

Studies of the Volume-Outcome Relationship

There have been a very large number of studies of
the “volume-outcome” relationship, the majority in
the medical literature. These studies commonly find
a significant correlation with the volume a hospital
does of a procedure and the medical outcomes of patients receiving the procedure at that hospital. The
obvious concern with studies of this kind is endogeneity. It may be that hospitals that do more of a procedure are better at it, whether from learning by doing
or by making quality improving investments. It may
also be true, however, that patients are attracted to
hospitals with the best outcomes. The studies in the
medical literature are unable to distinguish between

26

these two alternatives.
This is important for assessing competition in the
hospital sector and for antitrust enforcement. If volume causes quality, then there may be some efficiencies from improved patient outcomes in more concentrated markets. This could also affect hospital merger
evaluation. I review three relatively recent studies below that present the strongest evidence to date on the
volume-outcome effect: Ho (2002), Gowrisankaran
et al. (2004), and Gaynor et al. (2005). The results
of these studies are summarized in Table 5.
Ho (2002) examines the volume outcome relationship for PTCA using data from California hospitals
from 1984 to 1996. The outcomes she examines are
mortality and emergency CABG. She estimates the
effects of hospital cumulative and annual volume on
outcomes, employing hospital and time fixed effects.
Ho finds substantial improvements in outcomes over
time, but a small effect of annual hospital volume on
outcome. The effect of cumulative volume on outcomes is imprecisely estimated.
Gowrisankaran et al. (2004) attempt to recover the
causal relationship between volume and outcome using instrumental variables. They study the volumeoutcome relationship for three surgical procedures:
the Whipple procedure (removing tumors from the
pancreas); CABG; and repair of abdominal aortic
aneurysm (AAA - this repairs weak spots in the abdominal artery). They use data on hospitals from
Florida from 1988 to 1999 and California from 1993
to 1997. The instrumental variables approach is to
use patient distance from the hospital to estimate
patient choice of hospital and then construct predicted volume. Gowrisankaran et al. find that increasing volume causes better outcomes for all three
procedures and find significant and large effects of
hospital volume on patient mortality. This implies
that volume-outcome effects can be important to consider when evaluating the impact of hospital competition. If competition leads to reduced volume then
outcomes will decline. If competition leads to specialization then outcomes will improve.
Gaynor et al. (2005), in a similar paper, use instrumental variables techniques to estimate the vol-

ume outcome relationship for CABG. They use data
from California for 1983-1999. Gaynor et al. find a
causal, and substantial, effect of volume on outcome.
For example, if CABGs could only be performed in
hospitals with a volume of 200 or greater, the average mortality rate from CABG would fall from 2.5
percent to 2.05 percent, saving 118 (statistical) lives.
In a related working paper by the same authors, Seider et al. (2000), simulate the effects of two mergers:
a hypothetical ”standard merger”, in which two out
of five firms with equal market shares merge; and the
actual merger of Alta Bates Medical Center and Summit Medical Center in Oakland, California. They find
that, for larger hospital mergers (hospital volumes
> 140), the value of saved lives from the standard
merger outweighs the loss of consumer surplus from
increased prices. For the Summit-Alta Bates merger,
which does not, however, have a large effect on volume, the effect is a net loss of $2.8 to $4.4 million.
The reason is that the increase in volume due to the
merger is too small to have much effect on outcomes,
while the price increase reduces welfare.

5

Summary and Conclusions

In this paper I have reviewed the literature relevant
to competition and quality in health care markets.
Economic theory does not provide an unambiguous
answer to the question of whether competition is
welfare enhancing in markets with product differentiation, although it provides guidance for thinking
about the issues. The empirical literature on competition and quality in health care markets is for the
most part fairly recent, and growing rapidly. The results from empirical research are not uniform. Most
of the studies of Medicare patients show a positive
impact of competition on quality. This is not surprising, since economic theory for markets with regulated prices predicts such a result. However, the
results from studies of markets where prices are set
by firms (e.g, privately insured patients) are much
more variable. Some studies show increased competition leading to increased quality, and some show the
opposite. While this may appear surprising, it is not.

27

Economic theory predicts that quality may either inThere are three other directions for future studies
crease or decrease with increased competition when to pursue. First, measures of health care quality are
firms are setting both quality and price.
becoming more common and more sophisticated. Future studies can begin to employ these new measures.
This first generation of studies has provided a very
Second, most of the studies to date have focused on
valuable base of knowledge for further research. The
a single measure of health care quality, and often for
base that has been constructed, while extremely usea single condition. A task for future work is to try to
ful, does not allow for normative analysis, for the
develop broader evidence on the impact of competimost part. The results of these studies don’t allow
tion on various aspects of health care quality. Third,
us to make inferences about whether their estimated
the study of the impact of competition on quality
results imply that competition increased or decreased
should be extended to other parts of the health care
social welfare.
sector — most notably physician services and health
A major next step for research in this area is sort- insurance.
ing out the factors that determine whether competiMarket oriented health care system reforms are betion will lead to increased or decreased quality. Ecoing considered by quite a few countries. U.S. courts
nomic theory can be a helpful guide for these next
have to make decisions about antitrust issues involvgeneration studies. While theoretical models of price
ing health care firms. Evidence on the impacts of
and quality determination are complex and usually
competition on quality in health care is vital to the
yield indefinite predictions, there is also some simple
policy decisions these individuals must make. There
intuition that can be gleaned from theory. Whether
is considerable scope for future research to contribute
competition leads to increased or decreased quality
to policy on this issue.
will depend on its relative impacts on firms’ price and
quality elasticities of demand. Future research can
focus on trying to recover estimates of these key elements. Additionally, studies of price regulated markets can refer back to theory to specify econometric
models that include the regulated price and marginal
cost (or its determinants). These sorts of studies will
allow for more precise positive analysis of the impact
of competition on quality in health care.
We need more detailed models, however, in order
to perform normative analysis. Thus, an important,
although formidable task, for future work is to pursue
the estimation of more complete econometric models
of quality determination in health care markets. This
means trying to recover preferences and costs (i.e.,
demand and supply). The benefit of this approach is
the ability to make clearer inferences about welfare,
since estimates of preference and cost parameters are
in hand. The drawback is that such estimates are
not easily obtained. In particular, they usually can
only be obtained at the cost of making untestable
assumptions. The quantity, and detail, of health care
data may make some of the assumptions employed in
settings with sparser data unnecessary, however.

28

References

Dixit, A. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1977). Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity. American
Economic Review, 67:297–308.

Abraham, J. M., Gaynor, M., and Vogt, W. B.
(2005). Entry and competition in local hospital
markets. unpublished manuscript, Carnegie Mellon University.

Dorfman, R. and Steiner, P. (1954). Optimal advertising and optimal quality. American Economic
Review, 44(5):826–836.

Allard, M., Léger, P. T., and Rochaix, L. (2005).
Provider competition in a dynamic setting. unpublished manuscript, HEC Montréal.

Douglas, G. W. and Miller, J. C. (1974). Quality
competition, industry equilibrium, and efficiency
in the price-constrained airline market. American
Economic Review, 64(4):657–669.

Allen, F. (1984). Reputation and product quality.
RAND Journal of Economics, 15(3):311–327.
Allen, R. and Gertler, P. J. (1991). Regulation
and the provision of quality to heterogeneous consumers. Journal of Regulatory Economics, 3:60–75.

Dranove, D. D. and Satterthwaite, M. A. (1992).
Monopolistic competition when pirce and quality
are imperfectly observable. Rand Journal of Economics, 23(4):518–534.

Anderson, S., dePalma, A., and Thisse, J. (1992).
Dranove, D. D. and Satterthwaite, M. A. (2000). The
Discrete choice theory of product differentiation.
industrial organization of health care markets. In
MIT Press.
Culyer, A. and Newhouse, J., editors, Handbook of
Health Economics, chapter 20, pages 1094–1139.
Bresnahan, T. F. (1989). Empirical studies of indusElsevier Science, North-Holland, New York and
tries with market power. In Schmalensee, R. and
Oxford.
Willig, R., editors, Handbook of Industrial Organization, volume 2, chapter 17, pages 1011–1057.
Elsevier Science, North-Holland, Amsterdam and Dranove, D. D., Shanley, M., and Simon, C. (1992).
Is hospital competition wasteful? Rand Journal of
New York.
Economics, 23:247–262.
Burns, L. R. and Wholey, D. R. (1992). The impcat of
physician characteristics in conditional choice mod- Eaton, B. C. and Lipsey, R. G. (1989). Product difels for hospital care. Journal of Health Economics,
ferentiation. In Schmalensee, R. and Willig, R.,
11(1):43–62.
editors, Handbook of Industrial Organization, volume 1, chapter 12, pages 723–768. Elsevier Science,
Capps, C. (2005). The quality effects of hospital
North-Holland, Amsterdam and New York.
mergers. unpublished manuscript.
Encinosa, W. E. and Bernard, D. M. (2005). HospiCarlton, D. W. and Perloff, J. M. (2005). Modern
tal finances and patient safety outcomes. Inquiry,
Industrial Organization. Addison-Wesley, Boston,
42(1):60–72.
MA.
Chernew, M., Scanlon, D., and Hayward, R. (1998). Federal Trade Commission (2004). Horizontal merger
investigation data, fiscal years 1996-2003. Report,
Insurance type and choice of hospital for coronary
Federal Trade Commission, Washington, D.C.,
artery bypass graft surgery. Health Services ReFebruary 2, Revised August 31.
search, 33(3):447–466.
Cutler, D. M. (1995). The incidence of adverse med- Federal Trade Commission and Department of Jusical outcomes under prospective payment. Econotice (1992). Horizontal merger guidelines. Issued
metrica, 63(1):29–50.
April 2, 1992, Revised April 8, 1997.
29

Frankena, M. W. and Pautler, P. A. (1984). An eco- Held, P. J. and Pauly, M. V. (1983). Competition and
nomic analysis of taxicab regulation. Bureau of
efficiency in the end stage renal disease program.
economics staff report, Federal Trade Commission,
Journal of Health Economics, 2(2):95–118.
Washington, D.C.
Ho, V. (2002). Learning and the evolution of medical technologies: The diffusion of coronary angioGabel, J., Levitt, L., Pickreign, J., Whitmore, H.,
plasty. Journal of Health Economics, 21(5):873–
Holve, E., Hawkins, S., and Miller, N. (2000).
885.
Job-based health insurance in 2000: Premiums
rise sharply while coverage grows. Health Affairs,
Ho, V. and Hamilton, B. H. (2000). Hospital mergers
19(5):144–151.
and acquisitions: does market consolidation harm
patients? Journal of Health Economics, 19(5):767–
Gaynor, M. (2004). Quality and competition in
91.
health care markets: What do we know? what
don’t we know? Économie Publique, 15(2):87–124. Hotelling, H. (1929). Stability in competition. Economic Journal, 39(153):41–57.
Gaynor, M. and Haas-Wilson, D. (1999). Change,
consolidation, and competition in health care mar- Howard, D. H. (2005). Quality and consumer choice
kets. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(1):141–
in healthcare: Evidence from kidney transplanta64.
tion. Topics in Economic Analysis and Policy,
5(1):Article 24, 1–20. http://www.bepress.com/
Gaynor, M., Seider, H., and Vogt, W. B. (2005). Is
bejeap/topics/vol5/iss1/art24.
there a volume-outcome effect and does it matter?
Yes, and yes. American Economic Review, Papers Institute of Medicine (2001). Crossing the Quality
Chasm: A New Health System for the Twenty-First
and Proceedings, 95(2):243–247.
Century. National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C.
Gaynor, M. and Vogt, W. B. (2000). Antitrust and
competition in health care markets. In Culyer,
Jaklevic, M. (2002). “Tired Trend”. Modern HealthA. and Newhouse, J., editors, Handbook of Health
care, 32(26):10.
Economics, chapter 27, pages 1405–1487. Elsevier
Science, North-Holland, New York and Oxford.
Joskow, P. L. (1980). The effects of competition and
regulation on hospital bed supply and the reservaGaynor, M. and Vogt, W. B. (2003). Competition
tion quality of the hospital. Bell Journal of Ecoamong hospitals. Rand Journal of Economics,
nomics, 11:421–447.
34(4):764–785.
Kahn, K. L., Keeler, E. B., Sherwood, M. J., Rogers,
Gowrisankaran, G., Ho, V., and Town, R. (2004).
W. H., Draper, D., Bentow, S. S., Reinisch, E. J.,
Causality and the volume-outcome relationship in
Rubenstein, L. V., Kosecoff, J., and Brook, R. H.
surgery. unpublished manuscript, University of
(1990). Comparing outcomes of care before and afMinnesota.
ter implementation of the DRG-based prospective
payment system. Journal of the American Medical
Gowrisankaran, G. and Town, R. (2003). CompetiAssociation, 264(15):1984–1988.
tion, payers, and hospital quality. Health Services
Kamien, M. I. and Vincent, D. R. (1991). Price regResearch, 38:1403–1422.
ulation and the quality of service. Discussion PaHammer, P. J. and Sage, W. M. (2002). Antitrust,
per No. 920, Center for Mathematical Studies in
health care quality, and the courts. Columbia Law
Economics and Management Science, NorthwestReview, 102(3):545–649.
ern University.
30

Kessler, D. and McClellan, M. (2000). Is hospital Mankiw, N. G. and Whinston, M. (1986). Free entry
competition socially wasteful? Quarterly Journal
and social inefficiency. Rand Journal of Economics,
of Economics, 115(2):577–615.
17(1):48–58.
Kessler, D. P. and Geppert, J. J. (2005). The effects Mukamel, D., Zwanziger, J., and Bamezai, A. (2002).
of competition on variation in the quality and cost
Hospital competition, resource allocation and qualof medical care. Journal of Economics and Manity of care.
BMC Health Services Research,
agement Strategy, 14(3):575–589.
2(1):10–18.
Klein, B. and Leffler, K. (1981). The role of market Mukamel, D., Zwanziger, J., and Tomaszewski, K. J.
forces in assuring contractual performance. Journal
(2001). HMO penetration, competition and riskof Political Economy, 89(4):615–641.
adjusted hospital mortality. Health Services Research, 36(6):1019–1035.
Kohn, L., Corrigan, J., and Donaldson, M., editors
(1999). To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health Mussa, M. and Rosen, S. (1978). Monopoly and prodSystem. National Academy Press, Washington,
uct quality. Journal of Economic Theory, 18:301–
DC.
317.
Kranton, R. E. (2003). Competition and the incentive
to produce high quality. Economica, 70(279):385–
404.

Newhouse, J. (1970). Toward a theory of nonprofit institutions: an economic model of a hospital. American Economic Review, 60(1):64–74.

Lakdawalla, D. and Philipson, T. (1998). Non- Noether, M. (1988). Competition among hospitals.
profit production and competition. Working Paper
Journal of Health Economics, 7(3):259–284.
#6377, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Nuscheler, R. (2003). Physician reimbursement, time
Lee, M. (1971). A conspicuous production theory of
consistency, and the quality of care. Journal of Inhospital production. Southern Economic Journal,
stitutional and Theoretical Economics, 159(2):302–
38(1):48–58.
322.
Lesser, C. and Ginsburg, P. (2001). Back to the
future? New cost and access challenges emerge:
Initial findings from HSC’s recent site visits. Issue Brief #35, Center for Studying Health Systems
Change, Washington, D.C.
Luft, H. S., Garnick, D. W., Mark, D. H., Peltzman,
D. J., Phibbs, C. S., Lichtenberg, E., and McPhee,
S. J. (1990). Does quality influence choice of hospital? JAMA, 263(21):2899–2906.

Pauly, M. and Redisch, M. (1973). The not-for-profit
hospital as a physicians’ cooperative. American
Economic Review, 63(1):87–99.
Pepall, L., Richards, D. J., and Norman, G. (2005).
Industrial Organization: Contemporary Theory
and Practice. South-Western, Mason, OH.
Pope, G. C. (1989). Hospital nonprice competition
and medicare reimbursement policy. Journal of
Health Economics, 8(2):147–172.

Lyon, T. P. (1999). Quality competition, insurance, and consumer choice in health care markets. Propper, C., Burgess, S., and Gossage, D. (2003).
Competition and quality: Evidence from the NHS
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy,
internal market 1991-1999. Unpublished paper,
8(4):545–580.
University of Bristol.
Ma, C.-t. A. and Burgess, Jr., J. F. (1993). Quality
competition, welfare, and regulation. Journal of Propper, C., Burgess, S., and Green, K. (2004). Does
Economics, 58(2):153–173.
competition between hospitals improve the quality
31

of care? hospital death rates and the nhs internal market. Journal of Public Economics, 88(78):1247–1272.

Smith, C., Cowan, C., Heffler, S., Catlin, A., and
the National Health Accounts Team (2006). National health spending in 2004: Recent slowdown
led by prescription drug spending. Health Affairs,
25(1):186–196.

Robinson, J. C. and Luft, H. S. (1985). The impact
of hospital market structure on patient volume, average length of stay, and the cost of care. Journal Sohn, M.-W. and Rathouz, P. J. (2003). Competition among hospitals and quality of care: hospitalof Health Economics, 4:333–356.
level analysis. unpublished paper, University of
Romano, P. (2003). Evolving science of quality meaChicago.
surement for hospitals and physicians: Promise
and cautions. presented at AHRQ/FTC conference Spence, A. M. (1975). Monopoly, quality and regulation. Bell Journal of Economics, 6(2):417–429.
on provider quality and competition, May 28.
Sage, W. M., Hyman, D. A., and Greenberg, W.
(2003). Why competition matters to health care
quality. Health Affairs, 22(2):31–44.

Spence, A. M. (1976). Product selection, fixed costs,
and monopolistic competition. Review of Economic
Studies, 43(2):217–235.

Sari, N. (2002). Do competition and managed care
improve quality? Health Economics, 11:571–584.

Tay, A. (2003). Assessing competition in hospital care
markets: The importance of accounting for quality differentiation. Rand Journal of Economics,
34(4):786–814.

Schmalensee, R. (1977). Comparative static properties of regulated airline oligopolies. Bell Journal of
Tirole, J. (1988). The Theory of Industrial OrganiEconomics, 8(2):565–576.
zation. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Schmalensee, R. (1989). Inter-industry studies of
structure and performance. In Schmalensee, R. Vander Weide, J. H. and Zalkind, J. H. (1981).
Deregulation and oligopolistic price-quality rivalry.
and Willig, R., editors, Handbook of Industrial OrAmerican Economic Review, 71(1):144–154.
ganization, volume 2, chapter 16, pages 951–1009.
Elsevier Science, North-Holland, Amsterdam and
Volpp, K. G., Williams, S. V., Waldfogel, J., Silber,
New York.
J. H., Schwartz, J. S., and Pauly, M. V. (2003).
Market reform in New Jersey and the effect on
Seider, H., Gaynor, M., and Vogt, W. B. (2000).
mortality from acute myocardial infarction. Health
Volume-outcome and antitrust in us health care
Services Research, 38(2):515–533.
markets. unpublished manuscript, Universitaet
Augsburg.
White, L. J. (1972). Quality variation when prices are
regulated. Bell Journal of Economics and ManageShapiro, C. (1983). Premiums for high quality prodment Science, 3(2):425–436.
ucts as returns on reputation. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 98(4):659–680.
Shen, Y.-S. (2003). The effect of financial pressure on
the quality of care in hospitals. Journal of Health
Economics, 22(2):243–269.
Shortell, S. M. and Hughes, E. F. (1988). The effects
of regulation, competition, and ownership on mortality rates among hospital inpatients. New England Journal of Medicine, 318:1100–1107.
32

Table 1: Hospital Market Concentration, 1985-2000a
Year
1985
1990
1995
2000

Median HHIb Changec Mean HHI
3,028
3,112
3,353
3,995

—
84
241
642

a

3,483
3,665
3,991
4,391

Change
—
182
326
400

Source: American Hospital Association. Data are for
all U.S. Metropolitan Statistical Areas.
b
Herfindahl-Hirschmann Index.
c
Total change over the previous 5 years.

33

Table 2: Theoretical Results: Competition and Quality
Study

Price Regulated
or Set by Firm

Type of Product
Differentiation

Effect of
Competition on
Quality

Competitive Quality
Relative to Social
Optimum

Spence (1975)

Set by Firm

Product Quality

+, −, 0

Larger/Smaller/Same

Mussa and Rosen
(1978)

Set by Firm

Product Quality

+

Same

Dranove and
Satterthwaite
(1992)

Set by Firm

Product Quality

+, −, 0

Larger/Smaller/Same

Kranton (2003)

Set by Firm

Product Quality

−

Smaller

Allard et al. (2005)

Set by Firm

Product Quality

+

Same/Smaller

Spence (1976)

Set by Firm

Product Variety

+, −, 0

Larger/Smaller/Same

Dixit and Stiglitz
(1977)

Set by Firm

Product Variety

+, −, 0

Larger/Smaller/Same

Mankiw and
Whinston (1986)

Set by Firm

Product Variety

+, −, 0

Larger/Smaller/Same

Douglas and Miller
(1974)

Regulated

Product Quality

+

Larger/Smaller/Same

Vander Weide and
Zalkind (1981)

Regulated

Product Quality

+

Larger/Smaller/Same

White (1972)

Regulated

Product Quality

+

Larger/Smaller/Same

Held and Pauly
(1983)

Regulated

Product Quality

+

Larger/Smaller/Same

Pope (1989)

Regulated

Product Quality

+

Larger/Smaller/Same

Allen and Gertler
(1991)

Regulated

Product Quality

+

Larger/Smaller/Same

34

Table 2, continued
Study

Price Regulated
or Set by Firm

Type of Product
Differentiation

Effect of
Competition on
Quality

Competitive Quality
Relative to Social
Optimum

Kamien and
Vincent (1991)

Set by Firm
Regulated

Product Quality
and Variety

Set by Firm: −
Regulated: +

Set by Firm: Smaller
Regulated:
Larger/Smaller/Same

Ma and Burgess
(1993)

Set by Firm
Regulated

Product Quality
and Variety

Set by Firm: −
Regulated: +

Set by Firm: Smaller
Regulated: Same

Lyon (1999)

Set by Firm

Product Quality
and Variety

Traditional Health
Insurance: +
Managed Care: −, +

Traditional Health
Insurance: Larger
Managed Care:
Smaller/Larger

Nuscheler (2003)

Regulated

Product Quality
and Variety

+

Larger

35

36
1985-1990,
1990-1994

1994

Shen (2003)

Tay (2003)

1990

Mukamel
et al. (2001)

California,
Oregon,
Washington

U.S.
(nonrural)

U.S. (134
MSAs)

U.S.
(nonrural)

1985-1996

Kessler and
Geppert
(2005)

U.S.

Los Angeles

1985, 1988,
1991, 1994

Kessler and
McClellan
(2000)

Geographic
Area

Gowrisankaran 1991-1993
and Town
(Heart
(2003)
Attack),
1989-1992
(Pneumonia)

Time Period

Study

Heart Attack

AMI

All

Heart Attack

Heart Attack,
Pnemonia

Heart Attack

Medical
Condition

Medicare

Medicare

Medicare

Medicare

Medicare

Medicare

Payers

Mortality

Mortality

Mortality

Readmission,
Mortality

Mortality

Mortality

Quality
Measure

Demand Elasticity

# of hospitals
interacted with
Medicare Payment,
HMO Penetration

HHI

HHI

HHI

HHI

Competition
Measure

Table 3: Health Care Quality and Competition Empirical Studies: Regulated Prices

Increase (mortality ↓)

Interacted with
Medicare Payment:
1985-90 - No Effect,
1990-94 - Increase
(mortality ↓);
Interacted with HMO
Penetration: 1985-90 Decrease (mortality ↑),
1990-94 - No Effect

No Effect

Increase (mortality ↓,
readmissions ↓)

Decrease (mortality ↑)

Increase (mortality ↓)

Effect of Competition
on Quality

37

Time Period

1983-1984

1977-1978

Study

Shortell and
Hughes
(1988)

Held and
Pauly (1983)

U.S.

45 States

Geographic
Area

Renal Failure

16 Conditions

Medical
Condition

Medicare

Medicare

Payers

Table 3, continued

Dialysis
machines per
patient

Mortality

Quality
Measure

HHI

Concentration,
Price & Entry
Regulation

Competition
Measure

Increase (machines ↑)

Concentration: No
Effect;
Regulation: Decrease
(mortality ↑)

Effect of Competition
on Quality

38
1982, 1989

1996-2000

1995-1998

Mukamel et al.
(2002)

Encinosa and
Bernard (2005)

Propper et al.
(2004)

1977-1978

Noether (1988)

1995

1983

Dranove et al.
(1992)

Sohn and
Rathouz (2003)

1972

Robinson and
Luft (1985)

Heart Attack:
1991-1993,
Pneumonia:
1989-1992

1976

Joskow (1980)

Gowrisankaran
and Town (2003)

Time Period

Study

U.K.

Florida

California

California

Los
Angeles

U.S.

California

U.S.

U.S.

Heart Attack

All, Nursing,
Surgery

All, AMI,
CHF,
Pneumonia,
Stroke

PTCA

Heart Attack,
Pnemonia

11 conditions

NA

All

All

Geographic Medical
Area
Condition

NHS

All

All

All

HMO

All

All

All

All

Payers

Mortality

Patient Safety
Event

Mortality

Mortality

Mortality

Expenses (Price)

High-tech
Services

Admissions,
Outpatient
Visits, Length of
Stay, Average
Costs

Excess Bed
Capacity

Quality Measure

Number of
Competitors

Low Hospital
Operating
Margin

HHI

Competition
Coefficient

HHI

HHI

HHI

HHI

HHI

Competition
Measure

Table 4: Health Care Quality and Competition Empirical Studies: Prices Set by Firms

Decrease (mortality ↑)

Decrease (patient safety
events ↑)

Decrease (mortality ↑)

Increase (mortality ↓)

Increase (mortality ↓)

Increase: Expense (↑)
Decrease: Price (↓)

Increase (weak) (High-tech
services↑)

Increase (length of stay,
costs, etc. ↑)

Increase (excess capacity ↑)

Effect of Competition on
Quality

39
1990

Abraham et al.
(2005)

1990-1995

Volpp et al.
(2003)

2000-2002

1995-2000

Capps (2005)

Howard (2005)

1992-1995

Ho and Hamilton
(2000)

1991-1999

1991-1997

Sari (2002)

Propper et al.
(2003)

Time Period

Study

U.S.

U.S.

U.K.

New
Jersey

New York

California

16 States

All

Kidney
Transplant

Heart Attack

Heart Attack

All

Heart Attack,
Stroke

All

Geographic Medical
Area
Condition

All

All

NHS

All

All

All

All

Payers

Quantity
consumed

Graft Failure

Mortality

Mortality

Quality
Indicators

Mortality,
Readmission

Quality
Indicators

Quality Measure

Table 4, continued

# of hospitals

Demand
Elasticity

Deregulation,
Number of
Competitors

Price
Deregulation

Merger

Merger

HHI

Competition
Measure

Increase (quantity ↑)

Increase (small) (elasticity ↑)

Decrease (mortality ↑)

Decrease (mortality ↑)

No Effect: 13 inpatient &
patient safety indicators
Decrease: 1 year post-merger
in-hospital mortality for
AMI, Heart Failure
(mortality ↑)

No Effect: Mortality
Increase: Readmission (↓)

Increase (quality indicators ↑)

Effect of Competition on
Quality

40

Time Period

1984-1986

1993-1997 (CA),
1988-1999 (FL)

1983-1999

Study

Ho (2002)

Gowrisankaran
et al. (2004)

Gaynor et al.
(2005)

California

California,
Florida

California

CABG

Whipple Procedure,
CABG, Abdominal
Aortic Aneurysm

PTCA

Geographic Medical Condition
Area

All

All

All

Payers

Mortality

Mortality

Mortality,
CABG

Quality
Measure

Surgical
Volume

Surgical
Volume

Surgical
Volume

Factor
Affecting
Quality

Table 5: Health Care Quality and Competition Empirical Studies: Volume-Outcome

Increase (volume ↑ → mortality ↓)

Increase (volume ↑ → mortality ↓)

Increase (small)
(volume ↑ → mortality ↓)

Effect on Quality

