NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SEARCHING FOR THE EU SOCIAL DIALOGUE MODEL
Richard B. Freeman
Working Paper 12306
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12306
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006

Forthcoming in Social Impacts, Employment and Growth: A Reappraisal of Enzio Tarantelli’s Thought, (eds)
Nicola Acocella and Riccardo Leoni (Physica-Verlag, Heidelberg, 2006). The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Searching for the EU Social Dialogue Model
Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 12306
June 2006
JEL No.
ABSTRACT
The European Union and the United States operate different variants of market capitalism. The EU
model uses social dialogue institutions to help determine economic outcomes, particularly in the
labor market, whereas the US relies more on market forces. The theory of competitive markets
provides a powerful framework for analyzing market driven economies and for assessing the
conditions under which unfettered markets yield desirable outcomes. But there is no comparable
framework for analyzing institution driven economies. This paper argues that models of efficient
bargaining/the Coase Theorem offer the best framework for analyzing social dialogue economies and
for identifying policies and institutional reforms to improve their functioning.
Richard B. Freeman
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
freeman@nber.org

“Collective bargaining and social dialogue were designed into the European
project from the very beginning.” John Monks, European Trade Unions Congress
Secretary, May 2004

3

The European Union and the United States operate different variants of market
capitalism. Both systems base economic transactions on private property and rule of law.
Both have open economies with sound monetary and macro-economic policies. Where
the EU and US differ is in the role of institutions in affecting outcomes, particularly in
the labor market.
The EU relies on collective bargaining between employer associations and trade
unions to determine wages and employment and on social dialogue between the “social
partners” of labor and capital, often working in concert with government, to choose
social and economic policies. The US relies on firms and individual workers to determine
employment and wages in competitive markets. The EU has high taxes that provide a
strong social safety net for workers. The US has lower taxes and a weak safety net for
workers. The differences are sufficiently large to have generated a “war of the models”
about how best to organize a market economy (Freeman, 1998).
From the 1960s through the 1970s oil shock and productivity slowdown, the rapid
growth and low unemployment of Western European economies led some analysts to
generalize that neo-corporatist centralized bargaining wage systems work better than
more market based systems (Bruno and Sachs, 1984). In the 1980s Japan’s rapid
economic growth and export success directed attention at the virtues of Japanese
institutions. During his visit to Harvard in 1986/7 Enzio Tarantelli and I debated whether
the Japanese economy was more aligned to the EU institution-affected system than to

more market-driven US.1 But Japan went into a bad economic decade while US

4

performance improved. From the 1990s through the mid 2000s, the rapid growth and low
unemployment in the US shifted sentiment in favor of more market driven variants of
capitalist economies.2
Regardless of whether more market-driven or institution influenced economies do
better in a given period of time, there is generally a wide range of economic outcomes
within each group. In the 1990s the US performed well in productivity and employment
but Canada, with much the same economic system, had an horrific economic record.
From the 1990s through the mid 2000s several smaller EU economies --Ireland,
Denmark, Austria, and to some extent the Netherlands -- performed better than Germany
and France, among others. Supporters of the EU system often cite the smaller successes
as evidence that social dialogue economies can deliver economic efficiency as well as
economic security and desirable distributions of income.
When market economies run into trouble, the natural response of economists has
traditionally been to seek out imperfections in the market and to suggest ways to
eliminate those imperfections. This response builds on the powerful framework that
economic theory provides for analyzing real market economies. The model of a perfectly
functioning competitive system gives economists and policy-makers a benchmark for
measuring real world divergences from the ideal and directs attention at reforms designed
to bring the real world closer to the competitive ideal.
1

The modest unionization rates, company level unions, use of bonuses related to profits, and
limited political role of unions suggested that Japan was closer to the US than to the EU system.
But the Shunto offensive, coordination of wage settlements, lifetime employment, lead bank
system, industrial concentration, and protection of small firms in the service sector suggested
that Japan was closer to the EU than to the US.
2
For instance, in 2004, 4.9% of the German labor force had been unemployed for over a year,

When EU economies have gotten into trouble, the economists’ response is often
the same: to identify market imperfections and seek ways to eliminate them. But this
seems less appropriate in a social dialogue economy than in a market-dominated
economy. Why not seek out imperfections in the social dialogue institutions and search
for ways to improve institutional interventions? One reason why economists do not
pursue this approach is that we lack a well-specified model of the ideal institution driven
economy to benchmark real world divergences from the ideal.
In the world of ideas and in policy discourse the absence of a social dialogue
model creates an uneven playing field for assessing the two capitalist models and
improving their performances.
EU social dialogue model, where art thou?
This paper begins the search for such a model. Section I documents the
differences between the EU’s social dialogue and collective bargaining system and the
US’s market driven economy. Section II presents my principal theme: that efficient
bargaining models and the Coase theorem offer the best framework for developing the
missing social dialogue model. Section III assesses evidence on efficient bargaining
from laboratory experiments. Section IV considers the implications from game theory
analyses of bargaining for developing an efficient social dialogue system. There is a
short conclusion.
I The Two Economic Systems
Exhibit 1 gives a capsule summary of the differences between the EU and US
economic systems. The exhibit shows that the EU relies on collective bargaining to set

compared to 0.7% of the US labor force. OECD, Employment Outlook, 2005, table A and G

5

wages and working conditions to a far greater extent than does the US. In the EU 77

6

percent of workers3 were covered by agreements in 2000, many through mandatory
extension of contracts to firms outside the bargaining group. In the US bargaining covers
only 13 percent of workers, and most collective bargaining contracts are at the firm level.
Although EU centralized bargaining allows for “wages drift” (by which firms deviate
from the agreement due to their particular circumstances), and although most EU
countries have devolved some bargaining to firms or plants, the difference in reliance on
institutions in wage-setting with the US remains stark. The 2003 Global Competitiveness
Report gave the US the 3rd highest rank in terms of having wages set by the company vs
by institutions and while the median ranking for EU countries was 68 out of 80 countries
in the listing (World Economic Forum, 2003, table 10.19).
The US and EU also differ greatly in the rules that govern “ownership” of jobs.
The US has employment at will, which allows firms to lay off or fire workers at their
discretion with no legally mandated severance pay. During a strike, the employer can
replace strikers and need not re-employ them after the dispute. By contrast, EU
employment protection legislation gives some ownership of jobs to workers. The
OECD’s index of employment protection legislation, which gives higher scores to
countries with greater protection, gave the US a score of 0.7 compared to a score of 2.3
for EU countries in 2003.4 Strikers in the EU have a right to return to their job after a
labor dispute.

3

OECD, Employment Outlook 2004, table 3.3, where I have averaged collective bargaining
coverage figures for 2000 for 13 EU countries and Norway, excluding the new East European
members.
4
OECD, Employment Outlook 2004, table 2.A2.3, where I averaged the EPL scores for the EU countries
and Norway, exclusive of the new entrants.

In the product market the US has fewer regulations governing business activity

7

and makes it easier to form and end businesses than the EU. It takes 64 days to form a
business in the EU compared to 7 days in the US. The OECD index of regulations,
which codes countries from 0 to 2 in three different areas of regulations, gave the US in
2003 a 1 in product market regulations, 1.1 in administrative regulations, and 1.3 in
economic regulations compared to 1.4, 1.5, and 2.0 in these three areas for the EU.5
Finally, the US has a more limited welfare state than EU countries. In the US the
primary source of economic security is working; unemployment benefits are modest and
of limited duration; and income support for single parent families is limited. The US
offers health care insurance through employers or private purchase; government
provision is limited to the elderly and poor. While state and local governments funds
primary and secondary education, a large proportion of higher education is paid by
students and their families and by private donations.
By contrast, the welfare state is the EU’s primary source of economic security.
All EU countries offer high replacement rates for unemployed persons for long periods.
All have some form of national health insurance. Many provide housing assistance for
workers who lose their job and offer other benefits so that loss of a job does not devastate
their living standards. In addition to providing free primary and secondary education, the
EU provides low tuition higher education through state support of universities.
To fund the wider role of government in 2004 governments in the EU received
48% of GDP compared to the US government receipts of 32% of GDP6.
Social dialogue vs market lobbying
5

Djankov, et al, 2000; Conway, et al, table 24

The EU uses social dialogue institutions to bring the voices of business and

8

labor into social and economic policy-making. Most EU countries encourage dialogue at
workplaces through mandated works councils. Depending on the country, from 25% to
50% of workers are represented by elected works councils, and almost all workers in
middle to large establishments have the option to establish a council at their workplace.
The EU social charter requires EU-level councils for larger firms.
By contrast, US labor law discourages firms from setting up systems of dialogue
with workers outside of collective bargaining. Section 8a of the US’s LaborManagement Relations Act forbids firms from establishing non-union systems of
collective representation for fear that companies will create company-dominated
organizations to avoid genuine worker organizations. Many firms have employee
involvement committees but these committees are legally allowed to deal only with
issues that concern the firm such as productivity rather than with worker concerns such as
pay, benefits or working conditions.
At the national level, the EU relies on social dialogue committees to ascertain the
views of labor and management on diverse issues. The US relies on a very different
mechanism for interest groups to contribute to national policy-making – lobbying in
which the groups that fund political campaigns meet with legislators to argue for their
views.
Exhibit 2 contrasts the EU social dialogue system with the US lobbying system.
The upper panel gives the EU’s own description of its system, as reported at the 2005 EU
social dialogue summit. While the description focuses on dialogue at the EU level, it
6

US Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract 2006, table 1335.

notes that “ the European social dialogue complements the national practices of social

9

dialogue, which exist in most Member States”. Indeed, it is at the national level where
social partnership arrangements are particularly important and where collective
bargaining occurs. When an EU government deviates from the consultative model, as the
De Villepin government did in France in 2006 when it enacted a new youth labor law
without consultation, it risks enraging the groups that were not consulted – in this case,
students and unions, whose protests forced the government to withdraw the law.
The lower panel describes the US lobbying system. It is a market-based system
built on the US mode of funding political campaigns through private contributions.
Lobbyists buy access to candidates through their contributions and use that access to
present their case for/against legislation in private closed-door meetings. The opinion
polls summarized in the exhibit show that in the 1990s-2000s the most Americans
believed that political lobbyists had too much power and bribed members of Congress
regularly, and that as a result most citizens were concerned about the corruption this
engendered in Washington.
There is an extensive social science literature on lobbying activities and on the
impact of campaign contributions on legislator’s decision, but no comparable analysis of
the operation of social dialogue committees.
EU social dialogue model, where art thou?
II. The Social Dialogue Model and Efficient Bargaining
The main theme of this paper is that the theory of efficient bargaining and Coase
Theorem provide the best framework for answering the “where art thou?” question.
The notion of efficient bargaining has a distinguished pedigree in economics. In

chapter 7 of the Theory of Wages (first edition, 1932), John Hicks argued that

10

collective bargaining should produce agreement rather than impasse in most situations.
After all, most strikes lower the joint output of capital and labor and thus make no
rational sense. He asserted that “the majority of actual strikes are doubtless the result of
faulty negotiation” (Hicks, 146). Efficient bargaining between employers and unions
ought to yield the same patterns of outcomes that the efficient market hypothesis predicts
for financial markets: randomness. Labor specialists should be no more able to predict
strikes from public information than financial specialists can predict financial returns
from such information.
In 1946 Wassily Leontief applied the efficient bargaining model to the
“guaranteed annual wage” that the US United Automobile Workers negotiated with
General Motors. In this contract the Automobile Workers insisted that GM pay for at
least a minimal number of hours of work from the existing work force. Leontief
interpreted this as bargaining over employment as well as wages and pointed out that
through such a strategy the union could shift distribution to labor while maintaining the
presumably efficient pre-union wage employment and output.
In 1986 Mancur Olson argued that “all-encompassing” unions – those that
represent all workers – should internalize the externalities associated with inefficient
bargains and produce more efficient outcomes than unions that represent only some
workers in a country. In 1988 Lars Calmfors and John Driffill further developed the
notion that centralized or coordinated bargaining yields outcomes comparable to
competitive markets while industry level bargaining yields less efficient outcomes.
But the most influential analysis of efficient bargaining lies outside of labor

economics. This is the Coase theorem on property rights and externalities, which has

11

generated a huge literature in law and economics (Coase, 1960). The theorem holds that,
absent transactions costs, the clear allocation property rights/decision-making power
suffices to assure efficient outcomes. The reason is that, regardless of who owns what,
economic agents should bargain to the most efficient point of production and then divide
the maximum output. They ought to leave no money on the table. The prediction that
efficiency depends solely on clear property rights suggests that economies with
egalitarian rules governing distribution can be as efficient with more unequal income
distributions.7
But real world bargaining is not efficient
“Using the Coase theorem as the starting point for the analysis of EU economies
is more Chicago than Chicago. Bargainers often do not reach efficient solutions.” (Ed
Lazear, commenting on the theme of this essay)
The criticism is right. There are many cases of real world bargaining that falls
short of efficient agreements. In labor economics, the most widely studied failure of
efficient bargaining is in strike behavior. In contrast to Hicks’ prediction that strikes
should have no predictable pattern across time or space, strikes are pro-cyclical, occur
frequently in some sectors and firms and not in others, are more common in some
countries than in others, and occur in narrow time periods. Striking is less common in
sectors where the costs to labor and capital are largest but occurs sometimes even when
both sides end up as big losers. Game theory, models of asymmetric information,
detailed models of negotiations – whatever economists have thrown at the problem –
7

Medema and Zerbe (1999, p 838) note that some versions of the Coase theorem add a stronger claim: that
the final allocation of resources will itself be invariant to the assignment of property rights. Since the
redistributions associated with social dialogue economies are highly likely to affect the allocation of

have failed to put a rational efficient market interpretation onto the strike data.

12

Labor economists have also examined the prediction that efficient unionmanagement negotiations should alter pay but maintain employment and output. Given
that most collective contracts have some form of “management rights” clause that
reserves control over hiring to the firm, the claim that the union determines employment
seems on the face of it unrealistic. In the few cases where unions have negotiated
employment as well as pay, the outcome has often been featherbedding rather than
efficient work arrangements (for example, musicians sitting in a studio with recorded
music in the early days of radio). Since US unions raise compensation and unionized
firms/sectors/workplaces tend to have lower employment growth than their non-union
counterparts, most economists reject the notion that collective bargaining produces
employment off the demand curve in an efficient way.
In a similar vein, studies of productivity among sectors and firms find that
competitive pressures can induce producers to raise productivity so greatly that they
almost certainly had previously unexploited opportunities to increase efficiency – what
Leibenstein (1966) called X-efficiency. Galdon-Sanchez and Schmitz (2002) have
documented a particularly striking example of this in the recovery of US and Canadian
iron ore producers from the collapse of steel production in their home markets in the
1980s. The iron ore producers raised their productivity massively compared to otherwise
comparable iron ore producers operating in markets that had little or no increase in
competitive pressures. The intensified competitive pressure led the firms to reform work
and staffing rules that they could readily have done before they faced great competitive

resources as well as the distribution, I deal solely with the efficiency proposition.

pressures.

13

Empirical studies of the Coase Theorem
Law and economics analyses of the Coase theorem in diverse other settings also
give a mixed picture of its real world applicability. Steven Medema and Richard Zerbe
(1999) reviewed studies of the effect on agricultural production of the property right to
control animal trespassing on farmlands. Two studies found efficient outcomes but both
attributed the outcomes to social pressures/norms to keep animals off farm lands rather
than to efficient bargaining between farmers and ranchers. The third study rejected the
efficiency outcome. In 1989 John Donohue examined the 1980s Illinois employment
experiment, which paid bonuses to workers or to firms to encourage the unemployed to
find employment quickly from the perspective of the theorem. One variant of the
experiment paid the bonuses to unemployed workers who found a new job quickly.
Another variant paid the bonuses to the firms for hiring unemployed workers quickly.
The Coase Theorem predicts that the property right to the bonus ought not affect the
employment outcome. But the payments to workers led to greater employment and
bonus receipt than did the payments to firms. Whether the Coase theorem failed because
transactions costs were higher than the experiment envisaged as some critics of
Donohue’s work argued (see Medema and Zerba, 869-871), or because of some other
form of non-optimizing behavior, the important conclusion is that in this real world
example, the allocation of property rights affected efficiency.
Studies of divorce laws, where the state changes the law from requiring both sides
to agree to a divorce (so that the side most eager for the divorce would pay more to the
other side to accept it) to allowing one side to insist upon the divorce, have also found the

Coase Theorem wanting. Peters (1992) reported that changes in divorce laws from

14

mutual to unilateral divorce had effects consistent with the theorem: a change in the
division of family assets but no change in the frequency of divorce. But ensuing work,
summarized in Allen (2006), has found that rates of divorce rise when the law moves
from mutual divorce to unilateral divorce, contrary to efficient bargaining. Wolfers’
(2006) analysis offers further evidence and analysis of the problems with the Coase
Theorem in this setting.
The most widely studied Coase theorem prediction relevant to EU labor problems
relates to employment protection laws (EPL). The Coase theorem predicts that EPL will
not affect aggregate outcomes but will alter the distribution of income. Many policy
analysts dismiss the prediction and argue that weaker EPL laws would reduce
unemployment, but empirical analyses find no such consistent effect. The OECD (2004)
review of studies of EPL concluded that “the numerous empirical studies of this issue
lead to conflicting results, and (notes further that) moreover their robustness has been
questioned.” Baker et al’s (2005) analysis showing that empirical results vary greatly
with modest variation in the models, countries, time period, and measures used to assess
the impact of EPL is more consistent with EPL having no effect on the volume of
employment or unemployment than with the belief that it has effects.
This does not mean the EPL does not impact labor market outcomes. Stronger
EPL regulations are associated with lower flows of labor from employment into
unemployment, which benefits older workers, and with lower flows from unemployment
to employment, which generally harms younger workers and other new entrants to the job
market (OECD, 2004). What is important is that the effects are on the distribution of

employment rather or more than on the volume of employment or unemployment,

15

consistent with the Coase theorem.
Still, the EPL studies aside, the bulk of empirical work in labor and in law and
economics indicates that the efficient bargaining model does not fit reality well. Does this
make Coase theorem style thinking irrelevant for assessing social dialogue economic
systems?
I think not. Empirical analyses of market driven economies show that real
markets often fall short of 100% efficiency, but the competitive model still provides a
valuable framework for analysing market performance. In finance the efficient market
hypothesis is a useful first approximation and benchmark, even though researchers have
uncovered numerous empirical regularities that reject the model. By analogy, the efficient
bargaining/Coase theorem model can still be a valuable ideal for illuminating social
dialogue systems even though the world does not evince efficient bargaining as a general
rule.
III. Laboratory experiments and behavioral economics
Another way to judge the relevance of efficient bargaining models to real
situations is through laboratory experiments. The bulk of experiments in which efficient
production requires cooperation among people – the prisoner’s dilemma8; public goods
games9– shows that people attain efficient or near efficient solutions in many cases even
without formal side agreements. For example, tit for tat behavior tends to dominate

8

The prisoner’s dilemma is the most widely studied cooperation game. Efficient production requires that
the two participants choose to cooperate even though there is an incentive to defect. See Wikipedia
9
In public goods games subjects invest money in a public pot whose value increases, often with higher
returns the greater the amount invested, and keep the money they did not invest in the pot plus an even
share of the money in the pot. See Wikipedia

prisoner’s dilemma games, producing efficient outcomes. And while participants in

16

public goods games rarely contribute 100% to the pot, they almost never contribute the
0% that theory predicts. If people approach efficient solutions without side agreements,
perhaps a modicum of bargaining would bring them even closer.
The experiments on the Coase theorem by Elizabeth Hoffman and Matthew
Spitzer highlight the strength and weakness of the theorem. Their experiments assigned a
number to each of two participants, one of which could be cashed in for real money. A
coin toss gave the property right/power to determine which number gets cashed in to one
of participants. Without bargaining the person who won the toss would presumably select
their number for that is the most that they can get. They should do this even if the second
party has a larger number, producing a socially inefficient outcome from the perspective
of the pair. But bargaining ought to yield the efficient outcomes. The person with the
power to determine which number cashes in ought to pick the highest number subject to a
side arrangement in which they obtain more money than they could earn from cashing in
their own number (arguably, the entire reward less some minimal payment to the second
party, who would otherwise get nothing).
Hoffman and Spitzer found that over 90% of the sets of bargainers brought the
higher number to the experimenter for an efficient allocation. But the bargainers
distributed the rewards in a manner inconsistent with rational bargaining. They tended to
divide the money equally even though that meant that the party with the property right
accepted less than he/she would have gained by selecting their own number! When
Hoffman and Spitzer altered the allocation of the property right from a coin flip to the
winner of a contest and educated the winner about choosing in their own interests, the

majority of pairs chose the joint maximum but only 60% bargained for more than they

17

would have gotten by selecting their own number.
In sum, these experiments yielded efficient outcomes, but they also found that
participants got to the efficient outcome through decision processes far from the selfinterested economic rationality that underlie the Coase Theorem.
Stewart Schwab’s (1988) experiment used a more complicated bargaining design
that failed to produce efficient solutions. In Schwab’s experiment students were divided
into union and management teams that bargained over 3 items: wages, vacation days -which benefited workers more than they cost management up to15 days but which after
15 days cost management more than their worth to workers, and a contract clause that
allowed the firm to move work from the union plant to a non-union plant. In half of the
experiments, the work clause produced more value to the management team than to the
union team. In the other half, keeping the clause out of the contract meant more to the
union. A fully efficient bargain required that the parties agree to 15 days of vacation and
adopt the transfer clause in the first variant and reject the clause in the second variant.
The wage ($1 benefit to workers = $1 cost of the firm) gave the parties an easily
transferable way to redistribute output from the optimal solution. But Schwab found that
“neither item was bargained to a fully efficient result”(p 251). The contracts produced an
average of 11 days of vacation pay and the optimal solution for the transfer clause in
2/3rds of the cases. The bargaining left money on the table.
Surprisingly, even though bargainers did not reach optimal efficiency, the
experiment validated the prediction of the Coase theorem that changes in property rights
do not affect allocation. In one variant of the experiment the firm had the initial property

right to transfer the work. In another variant the union had the initial right to forbid the

18

transfer. The two property rights regimes produced contracts with similar outcomes
(approximately 2/3rds efficient) while giving a greater share of the joint output to the
party with the property right.
Thus, like the “real world” assessments, laboratory experiments give a mixed
picture of Coase theorem/efficient bargaining. Bargaining pairs sometimes reach
efficiency and sometimes not. Distributive outcomes are sometimes consistent with the
model and sometimes not. These findings raise what is arguably the critical stumbling
block for the theme of this essay: whether actual behavior diverges so much from rational
optimizing as to invalidate the use of efficient bargaining/Coase Theorem models as
benchmarks for analyzing EU social dialogue economies.
behavioral economics and efficient bargaining
A large growing body of evidence from psychology and behavioral economics
shows that people make decisions in ways that deviate substantially from the rational
optimization that economists have historically assumed. Some of these forms of nonrational optimizing behavior make attainment of efficient outcomes more likely – notably
the tendencies for cooperation and for fair distribution of outcomes – but others call into
question the entire notion of efficient bargaining to a social optimum.
As an example of the latter, consider the evidence that possession of a good
raises a person’s valuation of it – “the endowment effect” on preferences. The
endowment effects experiments show that random assignment of items to people (such as
coffee mugs of a given color) raises their valuation of the item and thus leads them to ask
for more money to give up the item than they would be willing to pay for it had it not

been in their possession (Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1990). When willingness to

19

accept payment diverges from willingness to pay for the same item the volume of trade
will be below what the Coase theorem would predict for reasons beyond transactions
costs. Two economies with different initial distributions of property rights would have
different social optimum.
A second example of behavioral findings that challenge any efficient bargaining
analysis is the evidence that individuals choose “default” options in savings behavior for
long periods even when other options dominate the default (Beshears et al, 2006). Since
the transaction cost of shifting to a higher return option are nominally modest, the
implication is that there are large internal transactions costs that deter rational choice. If
a person does not efficiently bargain with themself to make the sensible decision, it
seems unrealistic that they can bargain efficiently with others, per any efficient
bargaining model.
Without gainsaying the importance of these and related findings from behavioral
economics on how people really make decisions, I reject the strong claim that this
evidence by itself invalidates the use of efficient bargaining/Coase Theorem models as
ideals for social dialogue systems.
One reason why the findings do not invalidate the efficient bargaining ideal is that
markets can be efficient even when bargainers make decisions in ways that diverge
greatly from economic rationality. Markets based on “zero intelligence agents” –
computer code that chooses randomly among options – give efficient or near efficient
outcomes when the agents face budget constraints and/or operate under exit and entry
conditions (Gode and Sunder). The agents that make bad decisions lose their position in

the market over time while those who randomly drew good decisions increase their

20

share of the market. In a bargaining situation, the pair of bargainers that reach efficient
outcomes, even by chance, will expand their market presence, leading to an evolution
toward efficient outcomes.
Another reason is that people may make more rational decisions when they
represent others in collective bargaining or social dialogue settings than when they act on
their own behalf. For instance, I would expect that pension fund managers who may
follow some low return default in their own savings behavior would search carefully for
the best returns for the fund as part of their job. Similarly, someone who might take a
high risk in a personal investment would choose lower risk options when representing
widows and pensioners. Indeed, while society does not care how someone invests their
own funds, it places “fiduciary responsibility” on those investing on behalf of others,
which means that they ought to be able to give rational explanations for their decisions.
If my expectations are correct, some behavioral anomalies in private decision-making
will not generalize to settings where decisions are part of someone’s social role.
Finally, collective bargaining and social dialogue usually involve group decisionmaking, which can also produce decisions that differ from what people make on their
own. Studies of group judgment show that under some circumstances groups make better
use of information than individuals. This is the “wisdom of crowds” that improves
estimates of parameters and that reduces variation in those estimates (Surowiecki, 2004).
But other studies show that group decision-making can lead to erroneous decisions,
which members of the group hold with high confidence (Sunstein).
Sunstein gives a telling example of erroneous group decision-making in an

experimental setting. Participants are asked to estimate whether the experimenter is

21

using a Red urn, which has 60% red balls, or a Black urn, which has 60% black balls. The
experimenter selects balls from the chosen urn and gives one ball to each person. If each
person independently guesses the urn from which the experimenter selected the balls,
they would guess the urn whose color they had drawn; and the group would choose the
urn with the color of the majority of the balls. Thus, if 3 of 5 persons draw black balls,
the group would choose the black urn. But if individuals vote seriatim on the urn (and do
not give the color of the ball they drew), the group can go astray. If the first two people
drew red and guessed red, and the others drew black, the group might unanimously
choose the red urn. The third person might be swayed by the two preceding guesses and
guess red as well even though she drew black. The fourth, who also drew black, might
also guess red, on the grounds that 3 of 4 draws were red. The fifth would presumably
make the same choice. This “information cascade” leads the group to choose red without
dissent.
Reviewing the literature on group judgments, Sunstein concludes that “group
polarization can be heightened, diminished, and possibly even eliminated with seemingly
small alterations in institutional arrangements” (p 45). This suggests that whether groups
behave in a more economically rational way than individuals may depend critically on
the arrangement and framing of group interactions.
IV Game Theory and Institutional Design
The argument that analyses of efficient bargaining/Coase theorem offer the most
promising road toward the missing EU social dialogue model directs attention not only at
empirical analyses of actual bargaining situations but also at theoretical investigations of

bargaining situations by rational (or other) decision-makers and of institutional designs

22

that can produce efficient outcomes. Game theory provides a rich set of models on
conditions for efficient bargaining and the Coase theorem. The associated
implementation theory (Jackson, 2001) examines ways to design institutions so that the
parties reach or approximate efficient equilibrium. Although researchers in these areas
have not directed their investigations toward EU social dialogue systems, the work offers
potentially useful insight toward the “holy grail” social dialogue model.
What does the game theory/implementation theory say about bargaining and
social dialogue activities?
First, the analyses show that the institutional structure of a bargaining game
matters critically as to whether it yields a socially efficient outcome. Using different
modelling structures Anderlini and Felli (2001) and Dixit and Olson (2000) find that even
modest transactions costs for participating in a bargaining or dialogue system can readily
lead to inefficient equilibrium.10 Since there are always some transactions costs in any
negotiation, the implication is that the Coase theorem is non-robust to these costs. In a
similar vein Jackson (2001) stresses that particular mechanisms for implementing
decision-making can have huge effects on strategic behavior and social outcomes. These
analyses also highlight a tension between bargaining systems that allow participants to
reach undesirable equilibrium (giving them an incentive to avoid those decisions) and
systems in which renegotiation allow participants to escape disaster but which reduce the

10

Anderlini and Felli use an alternating offer model of negotiation where the bargainers pay a transactions
fee at each stage and show that strategic “hold up” conditions can produce situations where the parties
never come to a profitable agreement. Dixit and Olson model a public goods game in which free rider
considerations induce many people to opt out of the bargaining process, which leads to failure to produce
the good.

disincentive to make poor decisions in the first place.

23

From one perspective, the dependence of results on institutional detail is
disappointing, since it suggests that small differences in design can have large effects on
the success or failure of social dialogue systems. But this is not a surprising result given
the dependence of outcomes on the specifics of game structures broadly (Kreps, 1990).
Optimistically, it suggests that experimentation or tinkering with a system has the
potential for improving outcomes. It also suggests that EU policies that require
bargaining or dialogue may help achieve efficient outcomes.
Second, studies that examine the characteristics of bargainers and bargaining
situations show that homogeneous groups, with similar endowments and abilities,
operating under stable power relations, are more likely to reach efficient bargains than
others (Rajan and Zingales (2000)). Inequality reduces the chance for attaining
efficiency because it increases the incentive for the poor or less productive to use their
resources for rent-seeking rather than to contribute to social output. Stable relations
increase the chance of reaching efficient bargains because parties can be secure that gains
from an efficient contract accruing to the other side will not change their relative power
in the future. For example, if 80% of an expected gain from an efficiency enhancing
economic reform goes to business and business can use this gain to campaign for laws
that may restrict union power in the future, unions may refuse to go along with the
reform, even though it raises the income of business and workers 11
These considerations suggest that EU countries, particularly the smaller ones, are
11

Taking a different approach, Hirshleifer (1995) stresses the importance of the technology of conflict in
leading parties to allocate different fractions of their resources to fighting over distribution as opposed to
producing more output, and shows that under some technologies some resources will always be spent on

reasonably well-suited to reaching socially efficient outcomes through bargaining.

24

Income inequality is modest compared to the US. Populations are relatively
homogenous. And society, including the business community, accepts the legitimacy of
labor organizations. The development of EU wide institutions has, moreover, given an
additional layer of security to the social partners.
Third, analyses show that the ability of participants to make side payments can
affect outcomes substantially. Commitment to make compensating transfers raises the
chances of attaining the efficient outcome. In situations where one of the parties loses
from an agreement, the ability of the winner to commit to the transfer is necessary for the
agreement. But transfers themselves can be inefficient, reducing the value of the bargain,
for instance by reducing the incentive of workers and firms in declining industries to shift
to more productive activities (Dixit and Londregan, 1995). This appears to be
agricultural policy in both the US and EU.
Surprisingly, however, the side contracting or transfers that lie at the heart of
efficient bargaining do not always improve efficiency, even in a world of complete
information and zero transactions cost. Jackson and Wilkie (2005) show that parties can
use side contracts to manipulate the payoff from bargaining so as to redistribute incomes
to themselves at the cost of efficiency. They suggest that side payments work better
when only one player makes them (for instance where someone pays another party to
reduce pollution) than in situations where many participants make side payments (say in
encouraging public goods production). They also show that side payments are more
likely to support efficient strategies when three or more players are involved in decision-

rent-seeking.

making. The implication is that tripartite bargaining – capital, labor, and government,

25

may be particularly fruitful, at least in some circumstances. The 1987 Irish social pact in
which unions accepted small wage increases, so that firms had incentives to expand
production, while the government compensated workers with tax reductions may be a
case in point. The Pact and succeeding Irish agreements contributed to Ireland’s recovery
from economic basket-case in the 1980s to Celtic wonder-economy in the 1990s-2000s.
Fourth, information is an important determinant of the likelihood of attaining
efficient outcomes. Complete information with each party knowing the other’ situation is
no guarantee of efficiency, but its absence – private information in which parties know
only their own benefits/costs – increases the chance of inefficient results. Bargaining
over an indivisible item – say greater authority for the firm to set working hours that will
raise output -- can result in inefficiencies when each agent privately knows their
valuation but is uncertain about the valuation the other party places on it (Myerson and
Satterthwaite). In this case there is an incentive to use private information strategically to
gain a larger share of income, which can lead to an agreement that fails to maximize
joint surplus or to no agreement at all. Mckelvey and Page (2002) show that the outcome
in such circumstances will be tilted toward the party who initially has the property rights
rather than being independent of the initial property rights, per the Coase Theorem.
The bottom line of the game theory/implementation theory analyses of bargaining
is that the way society – government or social partners – design a social dialogue or
bargaining system is likely to affect economic outcomes.
V. Conclusion
This paper has argued that efficient bargaining/Coase Theorem models offer the

best starting point for analyzing EU social dialogue economies. Since the evidence

26

shows that these models fit the economic world at best loosely, they are most sensibly
viewed as benchmarks comparable to the perfectly functioning competitive model used to
benchmark market-driven economies. If the representative agent hypothesis is correct,
participants in social dialogue systems may be less prone to anomalous decision-making
than laboratory experiments find for individuals acting on their own behalf. On the other
hand, if deviations from rational self-interest favor cooperative behavior, as experimental
studies indicate, social dialogue systems where decision-makers diverge from economic
rationality may reach efficiency more readily than game theoretic models suggest.
Overall, this review of laboratory and theoretic analyses relevant to understanding
social dialogue economies suggests the virtue of a research programme that examines
design factors that lead parties to efficient solutions, not only on the assumption of
rational strategic behavior but also on potentially more realistic assumptions about how
people make decisions. In any case, whatever the true social dialogue theory turns out to
be, it should help level the playing field in the “war of the models” between the EU and
US economies and it should direct attention at ways to improve the efficacy of social
dialogue institutions Given Enzio Tarantelli’s comittment to social dialogue as a way for
Italy to resolve its economic problems in the 1980s, I would guess that were he with us
today, he would look favorably upon these areas of research and be contributing to them.
EU social dialogue model, where art thou?

27

Exhibit 1: The EU and US Economic Systems

US : Invisible Hand

EU : Social Partners

Labor Market:
Wages

Market/employer driven

Collective bargaining with extension

employment

employment at will –
employers own job

employment protection legislation –
workers own job

ECONOMY

company level formal Illegal under Section 8a of
dialogue
the Labor Management
Relations Act unless union
involved; employee
involvement committees

European Works Councils (EC
94/45/EC); different country council
legislation

Product Market

less regulated, with ease of
entry and exit, bankruptcy
laws favorable to debtors

greater regulation of business, harder
entry and exit

safety nets

limited, short duration of
unemployment benefits

high replacement for unemployment
with long duration, so long spells

health

health care through
employer/private purchase

national health care

higher education

universities dependent on
private support, tuition,
business linked

publically funded, free universities

GOVERNMENT

Source: Author’s analysis

28

Exhibit 2: EU Social Dialogue from workplace to national policy
European Social Dialogue (Social Dialogue Summit, Brussels, Sept 2005)
European social dialogue is the discussions between employee and employer representative
organisations (the social partners). These can take the form of consultations, negotiations and
joint actions undertaken by the social partner organisations.
At European level, social dialogue takes two main forms - bipartite dialogue between the
European employers and trade union organisations, and tripartite dialogue involving
interaction between the social partners and the public authorities.
These are the essential means by which the social partners help define European social
standards, and play a vital role in the governance of the Union. European-level social
dialogue has received strong institutional recognition in the EC Treaty and in the conclusions
to a number of key European Council meetings, notably those of Laeken and Barcelona.
Combining the values of responsibility, solidarity and participation, the European social
dialogue complements the national practices of social dialogue, which exist in most Member
States.
US Lobbying
As of mid 2005, the US had nearly 35,000 registered lobbyists for Congress alone.
Lobbyists in the US target the Senate, the House of Representatives, and state legislatures.
They may also represent their clients'or organizations'interests in dealings with federal,
state, or local executive branch agencies or the courts. Lobbyists sometimes also write
legislation. Since 1998, 43 percent of the 198 members of Congress who left government to
join private life have registered to lobby. Former lawmakers are hired as lobbyists because
of their relationships with their former colleagues as well as other contacts. In 2006, 273
former members of Congress or heads of federal agency were lobbyists.
Attitudes of Americans toward lobbying:
75% believe political lobbyists have too much power, 1994-2001 (Harris)
81% believe it is common for lobbyists to bribe members of Congress, 2006 (Pew)
91% concerned about corruption in Washington, 2006 (Fox)
Source: EU dialogue, Europa, European Commission,
http://europa.eu.int/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/05/344&format=HTML
&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en;Knowlton, Brian “Lobbyists’s scandal has a K
street home” International Herald Tribune, January 11, 2006, www.iht.com
US http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lobbyist; under lobbying. Harris Poll #23, May 16, 2001,
table 2, www.harrisinteractive.com/harris_poll/printerfriend/index.asp?PID=233,
www.citizen.org/print article.fm?ID=14945 for Pew and Fox polls.

29

References
Allen, Douglas Do No-Fault Divorce Laws Matter? A Survey, 1995–2006
February, 2006 http://www.sfu.ca/~allen/divrate95_06.pdf
Anderline, Luca and Leondardo Felli “Costly Bargaining and Renegotiation” Econometrica
vol 69, no 2 (March 2001), 377-411
Baker, D., A. Glyn, D. Howell and J. Schmitt (2004), “Labour Market Institutions and
Unemployment: a critical assessment of cross-country evidence”, in D. Howell (ed.), Fighting
Unemployment:the limits of free market orthodoxy, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Beshears, John, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian”The Importance of Default
Options for Retirement Savings Outcomes: Evidence from the United States”
February 2006 NBER Working Paper No. W12009
Bruno, Michael and Jeff Sachs, 1984 Stagflation in the World Economy Harvard University
Press.
Calmfors Lars and John Driffill, 1988, Bargaining structure, corporatism, and. macroeconomic
performance, Economic Policy, vol. 6, April, 14-61 ...
Coase, Ronald H. (1960), ‘The Problem of Social Cost’, 3 Journal of Law and Economics, 1-44.
Conway, Paul, Véronique Janod, Giuseppe Nicoletti Producet Market Regulations in OECD
countries: 1998 TO 2003 OECD Economics Department WP NO.419 (Feb 2005)
Dixit Avinash and Mancur Olson “Does Voluntary Participation Undermine the Coase
Theorem?” Journal of Public Economics, 76 (2000) pp 309-335
Dixit, A., Londregan, J., 1995. “Re-distributive politics and economic efficiency”. American
Political Science Review 89, 856–866.
Donahue, John J. III (1989), ‘Diverting the Coasian River: Incentive Schemes to Reduce
Unemployment Spells’,99 Yale Law Journal, 549-609.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio LopezdeSilanes, and Andrei Shleifer The
Regulation of Entry NBER Working Paper No. 7892 2000
Farrell, Joseph 1987 “Information and the Coase Theorem” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol 1, no 2 Autumn 1987, pp 113-129
Freeman, Richard 1998 War of the models: Which labour market. institutions for the 21st
century? “Labour Economics 5 1998 1––24.
Galdon-Sanchez, Jose and Schmitz, James 2002 “Competitive Pressure and Labor Productivity:
World Iron Ore Markets in the 1980s” American Economic Review 92 (September) 1222-1235
Gode, D. K., & Sunder, S. (1993). Allocative efficiency of markets with zero-intelligence
traders:
Market as a partial substitute for individual rationality. Journal of Political Economy,

101(1), 119–137.

30

Hirshleifer, Jack “Anarchy and its Breakdown” Journal of Political Economy, vol 103, no 1 (Feb
1995(, 26-52
Jacob K. Goeree and Charles A. Holt “ Ten Little Treasures of Game Theory and Ten Intuitive
Contradictions” http://www.people.virginia.edu/~cah2k/treasure.pdf
Jackson, Matthew “A Crash Course in Implementation Theory” Social Choice and Welfare 2001,
Vol. 18, No. 4, 2001, pp 655-708.
Jackson, Matthew and Simon Wilkie, ``Endogenous Games and Mechanisms: Side Payments
among Players,'
'Review of Economic Studies. Volume 72, Issue 2, April 2005, pages 543-566.
Hicks, John Theory of Wage (2nd edition, 1963) St Martin’s Press N.Y.
Hoffman, Elizabeth and Spitzer, Matthew L. (1982), ‘The Coase Theorem: Some Experimental
Tests’,25 Journal of Law and Economics, 73-98.
Hoffman, Elizabeth and Spitzer, Matthew L. (1985), ‘Entitlements, Rights and Fairness: An
Experimental Examination of Subjects’ Concepts of Distributive Justice’, 14 Journal of Legal
Studies, 259-297.
Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1990).”Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect and the
Coase Theorem” Journal of Political Economy, vol 98, no 6 (Dec) 1325-1348
Kreps, David Game Theory and Economic Modelling, Oxford 1990
Leibenstein, Harvey Allocative efficiency v. "x-efficiency" American Economic Review vol LVI,
June 1966, pp 392-415
Leontief, Wassily, “The Pure Theory of the Guaranteed Annual Wage Contract” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 54, No. 1 (Feb., 1946) , pp. 76-79
Maskin, Eric “The Invisible Hand and Externalities” American Economic Review, vol 84, no 2,
May 1994, pp 333-337.
McKelvey, Richard and Talbot Page “Status Quo Bias in Bargaining”
Journal of Economic Theory 107, 336–355 (2002)
Monks, John “Is Europe still the workers’ best friend?” May Day Celebration, 2004, St
Anthony’s College, Oxford, 4 June 2004 http://www.sant.ox.ac.uk/esc/esc_lectures/Monks.pdf
Medema, Steven and Richard Zerbe, 1999 The Coase Theorem
http://encyclo.findlaw.com/0730book.pdf
Myerson, Roer and Satterthwaite, Mark “Efficient Mechanisms for Bilateral Trading”, Journal of

Economic Theory, April 1983, 29(2), pp 265-281.
OECD, Employment Outlook, 2004, (OECD, Paris) chapter 2, pp 61-125
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/8/4/34846856.pdf
OECD, Employment Outlook, 2005, (OECD, Paris) table A and G
Olson, Mancur 1990How Bright are the Northern Lights? Some Questions about Sweden
Institute of Economic Research, Lund University, Sweden
Peters, H. Elizabeth (1986) “Marriage and Divorce: Informational Constraints and Private
Contracting”American Economic Review 76(3).
Rajan,Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales “The tyranny of inequality”
Journal of Public Economics, 2000, vol. 76, issue 3, pages 521-558
Schwab, Stewart J. (1988), ‘A Coasean Experiment on Contract Presumptions’, 17 Journal of
LegalStudies, 237-268.
Sunstein, Cass “Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information Markets,"
New York University Law Review ( 2005).
Surowieki, James The Wisdom of Crowds Random House 2004
Wolfers, Justin, Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A reconciliation and new
results, Univ Pennsylvania, jan 11, 2006
http://bpp.wharton.upenn.edu/jwolfers/Papers/Divorce(AER).pdf
Wikopedia
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prisoner'
s_dilemma
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_goods_game
World Economic Forum, 2003 The Global Competitiveness Report 200-2003, Oxford Univ
Press, NY

31

