NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CHOICE BETWEEN INCOME AND
CONSUMPTION TAXES: A PRIMER
Alan J. Auerbach
Working Paper 12307
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12307
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006

This paper was presented at a conference on Key Issues in Public Finance, held at NYU, May 2006. I am
grateful to Dan Shaviro, my discussants Glenn Hubbard and Al Warren, and other conference participants
for comments on earlier drafts. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Alan J. Auerbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Choice Between Income and Consumption Taxes: A Primer
Alan J. Auerbach
NBER Working Paper No. 12307
June 2006
JEL No. H20
ABSTRACT
It has now been nearly three decades since the publication of two important volumes that laid out
many of the details of how one might implement a progressive consumption tax (Institute for Fiscal
Studies, 1978; U.S. Treasury, 1977). Over the years since, many contributions have analyzed the
mechanics of the different variants of consumption taxation, the potential efficiency and
distributional effects of their adoption, the issues of administration and transition from the current
tax system, and the problems relating to certain types of transactions. But much of what we “know”
is not part of the general policy discussion and there are important issues that the literature has
recognized but still not resolved. The aim of this paper is to lay out the key economic issues involved
in deciding whether and how to adopt a consumption tax and to discuss what theory and evidence
have told us and could tell us about these issues.
Alan J. Auerbach
University of California
549 Evans Halls
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu

I. Introduction
It has now been nearly three decades since the publication of two important volumes that
laid out many of the details of how one might implement a progressive consumption tax. The
Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation (Institute for Fiscal Studies, 1978; hereafter referred to
as the Meade Committee Report) was produced in the United Kingdom by a group of economists
and other academics. Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform (U.S. Treasury, 1977, reprinted as
Bradford et al. 1984; hereafter Blueprints) came from the staff of the U.S. Treasury, working
under David Bradford, who was Deputy Assistant Secretary for Tax Analysis while the report
was being prepared. Both reports focused on the direct individual consumption tax envisaged by
such earlier authors as Fisher (1939), Kaldor (1955) and Andrews (1974), rather than on the
indirect consumption taxes already in place, notably value added taxes. Since the publication of
these two volumes, though, there have been new ideas about how to combine the simplicity of
indirect taxation and the progressivity and flexibility of direct taxation, notably the Flat Tax
(Hall and Rabushka 1985) and the X Tax (Bradford 1986).
Over the years, there have been many, many contributions analyzing the mechanics of the
different variants of consumption taxation, the potential efficiency and distributional effects of
their adoption, the issues of administration and transition from the current tax system, and the
problems relating to certain types of transactions. We now have a better idea of how to
implement a consumption tax, and of what adopting a consumption tax would mean for the
economy. But much of what we “know,” from the recent literature and indeed from the Meade
Committee and Blueprints, is not part of the general policy discussion, and there are important
issues that the literature has recognized but still not resolved. The aim of this paper is not to
survey the vast literature on consumption taxes, but to lay out some of the key economic issues

involved in deciding whether and how to adopt a consumption tax, and to discuss what theory
and evidence have told us and could tell us about these issues.
II. What is a Consumption Tax?
It may seem tautological that a consumption tax is a tax on consumption, but no tax
currently in effect or realistically proposed is a consumption tax by that simple definition. To
see this, we start with the product and income sides of the national income identity for Gross
National Product (GNP)1,
(1)

GNP = C + I + G + X − M + R f = W + R + R f

where C is consumption, I is gross domestic investment, G is government spending, X is
exports, M is imports, W is wage income, R is domestic gross capital income, and Rf is net
foreign income, i.e., foreign income of domestic residents less domestic income of foreign
residents.2 The standard method for imposing consumption taxes, as under the VAT, is to start
on the income side, taxing all factor returns but then forgiving taxes on sales that do not
represent consumption, in particular:
(2)

C =W + R − I −G − X + M

so that sales for investment and export are free of tax while tax is imposed on imports.
In principle, government purchases should also be excluded from the tax base, although
this will not matter if the government budget adjusts to the treatment of government purchases.
That is, if government purchases are added to the tax base, and the government budget is then
1

The right-hand side of expression (1) is referred to as Gross National Income, differing from GNP only by the
statistical discrepancy that arises in measuring the same aggregate on the product and income sides.
2

The notation used for net foreign income reflects that fact that most such income is capital income.

2

expanded to cover the additional cost of government purchases, there will be no real impact –
there need be no change in the quantities of goods and services the government purchases. Of
course, if the government budget does not adjust, or if the federal government taxes the
purchases of state and local governments and makes no compensating transfers to these lowerlevel governments, then taxing government purchases will reduce real government budgets.
While this issue may be quite important in evaluating specific tax proposals, it is straightforward
conceptually. For the remainder of the discussion, then, I will ignore this issue, assume that the
consumption tax has no impact on government purchases, and simply leave government
spending out when using the national income identity, starting instead from expression (2’):
(2’)

C =W + R − I − X + M

It is useful to introduce another identity, the international accounts identity which
requires that the current and capital accounts must balance3:
(3)

(X − M + R ) + (− I ) = 0
f

f

where If is net foreign investment. Combining (2’) and (3) yields:
(4)

C = W + (R − I ) + (R f − I f )

which emphasizes that a consumption tax can also be conceived as a tax on wages plus taxes on
the net cash flows (gross income less gross investment) from domestic and foreign activities.
The simplest manner in which “consumption” taxes do not tax consumption is by
omitting certain elements of consumption from the tax base. It is common for VATs to “zero
3

For simplicity, expression (3) omits international transfer payments from the current account balance. Such
transfer payments include government and private foreign aid as well as tax payments to foreign governments.

3

rate” certain commodities, for example, with the objective of achieving more progressive
taxation, notwithstanding the weak theoretical arguments for relying on variations in indirect tax
rates for this purpose in the context of a broader system that includes progressive direct taxes.
But the more complex deviations from consumption taxation occur through the exclusion of
certain elements of the cash flows ( R − I ) + ( R f − I f ) .
A. Consumption Taxes and Wage Taxes
For a zero-present-value investment made today, the future additions to R or Rf are equal
in present value to the cost of today’s investment added to I or If. Thus, with tax rates constant
over time, the decision of whether to include or exclude these cash flows would have no impact
on the present value of government revenues, nor would it have any impact on the incentive to
undertake these marginal investments – the effective tax rate on such investments would be zero
under both approaches.
Both Blueprints and the Meade Committee recognized this equivalence and envisioned
giving taxpayers a choice under a personal expenditure tax of whether assets held at arms length
would be subject to cash flow taxation or simply tax exempt, with both investments and returns
ignored by the tax system.4 Indeed, both volumes saw an advantage in giving taxpayers a choice
when tax rates do vary over time and hence the present value of cash flow taxation is not zero for
marginal investments. Under a progressive expenditure tax for which marginal tax rates could
vary over time, the ability of taxpayers to choose between the two forms of tax treatment would
provide an averaging device, allowing taxpayers to shift their tax bases from high-rate to lowrate years while holding the present value of the tax base constant.

4

Blueprints referred to assets included under the cash flow tax as “qualified” assets, while the Meade Committee
distinguished between registered assets (those subject to the cash flow tax) and unregistered assets.

4

As the subsequent literature has clarified and elucidated (e.g., Gordon 1985, Kaplow
1994, Warren 1996, Weisbach 2004), the same equivalence holds for risky assets, assuming that
taxation of gains and losses is symmetric and that investors can scale up holdings to offset the
government’s implicit equity position. The investor would simply increase holdings of risky
assets in order to undo the reduction in risk and out-of-pocket cost that the cash flow tax would
produce, with the result that after-tax cash flows would be identical under the two alternative
approaches to taxation. This equivalence at the investor level, though, leaves open what happens
to risk taking in the economy as a whole. The answer depends on whether capital markets
efficiently pool risks, a question to which I return below. If asset markets are efficient, though,
the increased riskiness of the government’s share of risky assets under the cash flow tax could
not be reduced by pooling; once the government transmitted this risk back to the economy, the
added “background” risk would offset the propensity for increased individual purchases of risky
assets, leaving the equilibrium unaffected by the decision of whether to include the cash flows
from risky assets in the tax base.
Another conclusion of this literature, to which I also return below, is that the income tax
differs from the consumption tax only in its taxation of the safe rate of return on assets. To the
extent that an asset’s return is simply an excess return that compensates for risk-taking, the
investor can undo the income tax by scaling up the position in the risky asset. Only the tax on
the safe rate of return cannot be undone by this portfolio shift, and thus only the tax on the safe
rate of return is relevant in assessing the distortion of an individual’s intertemporal decisions.
Thus, whether investments are safe or risky, excluding from a consumption tax the cash
flows on new, marginal investments would, to a first approximation, have no impact on the
economy. But there are remaining components of the cash flows ( R − I ) + ( R f − I f ) which

5

may be grouped into two categories: the normal returns (including recovery of principal) from
earlier investments and supernormal economic rents. It is useful to distinguish these two sources
because opinions vary as to how these elements of the cash flow tax base should be treated in a
transition from the income tax to the consumption tax. In particular, some view the tax on
returns to existing capital as an unfair byproduct of the transition from one tax base to another, as
only the net returns, rather than the recovery of capital, would be taxed under the income tax.
Imposing a consumption tax therefore introduces a levy on the sale of existing assets. The
taxation of economic rent, on the other hand, is typically not viewed with such concern, because
rent would be taxed equally under an income tax or a consumption tax. There may also be
different incentive effects if these taxes are anticipated prior to their enactment, because an
anticipated levy on the recovery of capital is effectively capital income tax.
For some assets, notably owner-occupied housing and other consumer durables, it would
be difficult to impose a cash-flow tax because this would require the taxation of imputed rental
income. That is, we observe the investment flows as components of I but we do not observe all
the components of R, just subsequent asset sales, not the flow of imputed rental income during
the period of ownership. Thus, both Blueprints and the Meade Committee viewed the
unregistered/nonqualified treatment as necessary for these assets. For other assets, such as
closely-held businesses, the ease of shifting factor payments between wages and returns to
capital suggested that such assets be subject to cash flow taxation, with no option for owners to
leave such assets outside the system.
B. Origin versus Destination Basis
One particular element of cash flows about which there has been considerable debate is
those from net foreign assets, ( R f − I f ) . Under a standard destination-based value added tax,

6

these would be included indirectly, through the border tax adjustments on imports and exports,
since the current and capital accounts balance. But some taxes, notably the Hall-Rabushka flat
tax, would be imposed on an origin basis and hence would provide no special treatment for the
cash flows associated with cross-border investments. From the analogy with other types of asset
cash flows, it should be evident that the distinction between these two tax bases lies in the
treatment of rents and the normal returns to existing assets. There should be no impact on the
incentives for inbound or outbound investment, just on asset values and the present value of
government revenues.5 Because there should be no impact on cross-border investments, there is
no reason why trade flows should be affected, either; with an immediate adjustment of exchange
rates, this irrelevance should be what we observe. That is, assuming no differences between the
two tax systems in terms of domestic or foreign price levels, a switch from an origin-based VAT
to a destination-based VAT should lead to a currency appreciation for the adopting country that
should just offset the incipient advantage of exporters and disadvantage of importers under the
destination-based system.6
To see why the exchange rate would change in this manner, consider the hypothetical
experiment in which the exchange rate rose by less than the predicted amount, or not at all. The
reduced relative price of domestic goods and services would lead to an improvement of the trade
balance that, by expression (3), would have to be offset by a reduction in the capital account
balance. But, assuming no change in the future expected path of currency appreciation or
deprecation, there would be no wish on the part of international investors to shift from their
5

See Auerbach (1997) for further discussion.

6

Note that this reasoning does not require perfect competition on the part of domestic firms. As an exchange rate
appreciation is equivalent to an ad valorem tax on exports from the point of view of domestic producers, a border
adjustment combined with an offsetting exchange rate appreciation leaves marginal revenue conditions unaffected.
The same argument holds on the input side with respect to the combined impact of a tax on imports combined with
exchange rate appreciation. Thus, regardless of whether firms are price-takers or not, there should be no change in
their behavior.

7

previous investment choices. Thus, there would be an imbalance in the international accounts
leading to a further adjustment in the exchange rate until the potential change in trade flows
disappeared.
The simplicity of this analysis has done little to offset the skepticism of policy makers
and trade “experts.” Many skeptics simply refuse to acknowledge the predictions of economic
theory or the validity of the national income identity. Others confuse the effects of adopting a
consumption tax with the effects of border adjustments per se. From (2’), we can see that any
tax policy that reduces consumption, as a shift to consumption taxation might, will increase the
trade balance, holding constant income and domestic investment. Yet others confuse the impact
of uniform border adjustments with the impact of industry-specific border adjustments. If border
adjustments only apply in a particular industry, for example, the exchange rate cannot fully
adjust in response, because this would reduce net export demand in other industries and hence
overall. Thus, there would be only a partial exchange rate adjustment and a shift in net exports
to the industries covered by the border adjustments. And some may think that border
adjustments would have the same impact as tariffs, which incorporate one part of the border
adjustment (the import tax) but not the other (the export subsidy).
Some skeptics also rely on more sophisticated (but not more compelling) arguments to
promote the importance of border adjustments. One argument, for example, is that the analysis
given above doesn’t apply in a world where countries peg their exchange rates to the dollar, for
then dollar appreciation under a destination-based VAT would be held in check by the reserve
transactions of foreign governments and central banks. While such transactions would, indeed,
lead to a violation of the assumptions needed for the equivalence of the two tax systems to hold,
proponents of this argument do not explain why a foreign government would choose to ignore

8

changes in the real exchange rate when setting its currency peg. For example, suppose a foreign
government seeks to enforce an exchange rate of e units of its currency per dollar under an
origin-based tax at rate t. Then, the United States shifts to a destination-basis for its tax, the
border adjustments increasing the relative price of foreign goods by a factor of (1+t) if the
exchange rate is unchanged. If the foreign government wishes to maintain its competitive
position, it will seek to devalue its currency by a factor of (1+t) to e(1+t), which should be easy
to accomplish because this should be the result if the previous level of reserve operations is
maintained. Put another way, if the government’s opportunity set has not changed, then why
should its choice from this set?
The equivalence of destination-based and origin-based taxes is not exact because of the
different treatment of net cash flows under the two systems. As discussed, a destination-based
tax would expand the tax base by the present value of rents and normal returns to existing capital
associated with a country’s net foreign asset position. For the United States today, the net
foreign asset position is negative, so the destination-based tax would tend to reduce revenues in
present value, to the extent that rates of return on U.S. and foreign assets are equal.7,8 To the
extent that a country’s net asset position is close to zero, this would make little difference in
terms of tax revenues. But there could still be a big difference in terms of the impact on asset
values, even with a zero net international investment position, because the valuation effects
would apply to gross asset positions. The cash flows of all U.S.-owned assets held abroad would

7

Net income from abroad, Rf, remained positive through 2005 for the United States, even though the U.S. net
international investment position has been negative for several years. This indicates that U.S. assets abroad have
been earning a higher rate of return than foreign assets in the United States. However, with the increasingly
negative U.S. international investment position, net income from abroad still is trending downward, virtually hitting
zero in 2005 and falling below zero in the final quarter of that year.
8
Ironically, another current argument favoring the U.S. adoption of a destination-based VAT is that, given large
current U.S. trade deficits, it would raise more money than an origin-based version. This highlights the distinction
between short-run and long-run revenue consequences.

9

be hit by the cash flow tax included in the destination-based VAT, and those of foreign-owned
assets held in the U.S. would be subsidized. The fact that the taxes would be collected on traded
commodities rather than on the capital flows themselves is irrelevant, because the exchange rate
adjustment would shift the incidence of the taxes onto the asset holders.9
As an example of the size of the potential asset revaluations associated with border
adjustments, consider the case of the United States at the end of 2004, when, according to the
Bureau of Economic Analysis, foreign-owned assets in the United States totaled $11.5 trillion
and U.S.-owned assets abroad were $9.1 trillion.10 The border adjustment of a domestic VAT at
a rate, say, of 30 percent, would require a 30 percent depreciation of foreign currencies relative
to the dollar – a $2.7 trillion loss for U.S. holders of foreign assets, and a gain of $4.9 ($11.5/0.7$11.5) trillion for foreign asset holders, relative to a 30 percent VAT with no border adjustment.
C. The Treatment of Financial Assets and Liabilities
Following expression (4) above, a tax on consumption requires that gross private income
be taxed and that gross investment purchases be deductible or in some other manner effectively
excluded from the tax base. Except to the extent that they represent holding of foreign assets,
financial positions do not show up in expression (4) because they net out. That is, we could also
write expression (4) as:
(4’)

C = W + (R − I ) + (R f − I f ) + (F − J )

9

Indeed, the incidence of these taxes and subsidies does not require full adjustment of the nominal exchange rate;
for example, if the domestic price level rose to offset the border adjustment in reaction to the shift from origin to
destination basis, no change in the exchange rate would be necessary to maintain equilibrium, but domestic assets
would rise in nominal value and hence still appreciate in units of the foreign currency, and U.S.-held foreign assets
would have their real values reduced when deflated by the U.S. price level.
10

http://www.bea.gov/bea/newsrelarchive/2005/intinv04_fax.pdf.

10

where F is net flows from financial assets and J is net purchases of financial assets, and these
would both equal zero if we were considering the economy as a whole.
Note that, as in the case of net foreign assets, the fact that F and J are each zero in the
aggregate does not imply the absence of wealth effects from a decision to tax the component
flows, simply that these wealth effects cancel. Imposing a cash flow tax on all financial assets
and liabilities places a tax on the returns to all existing financial assets and presents a subsidy of
equal magnitude to those with financial liabilities. Indeed, this effect would occur even if F and
J were not included explicitly in the tax base, if the price level rose and the financial assets and
liabilities were not indexed to the price level. Some have argued that the adoption of a VAT
would raise the price level by the extent of the tax; such a price increase would simulate the
imposition of a cash flow tax on net financial assets (and indeed on all positions not indexed to
the price level). It follows, of course, that including financial flows in the tax base and having
the price level rise by the extent of the tax would effectively impose the cash flow tax on net
asset positions twice.
Leaving aside these distributional effects of including financial flows in the cash flow tax
base, these flows would not equal zero if we considered only the flows of the private sector, for
then the net cash flows between the private sector and the government would be included in the
tax base. This would have the effect of adding the present value of flows from existing
government debt to the tax base; once again, nominal assets would be hit twice if the price level
rose, in this case raising the present value of tax collections twice because the tax applies to a
positive net asset position.
Another variation in the taxation of financial flows would be to impose a cash flow tax on
flows of the business sector. Flows within the business sector would, again, cancel out in terms

11

of revenue, assuming all businesses are subject to the same tax rate, but flows between the
business sector and the household sector would not cancel out. As the business sector is a net
debtor to the household sector, this would have the effect of reducing the cash flow tax base by
the present value of interest on net existing liabilities, assuming no special transition provisions.
Such a variant of the cash flow tax was described by the Meade Committee and an “R+F” base
cash flow tax.
An administrative advantage of the R+F base is that it makes it easier to tax the income
generated by the financial services sector. Recall that the objective of the consumption tax is to
include all capital income components of GNP, R, in the tax base. But some components of
capital income may be disguised as interest payments. Including all elements of R+F in the tax
base obviates the need to identify components of F that should really be included in R. Thus, an
R+F base VAT applied to a financial services company would automatically tax interest-rate
spreads that compensate the company for the services it renders, and would eliminate the
incentives of an integrated company offering both real and financial services to shift profits from
real to financial activities.
Unfortunately, as it eliminates one complicating distinction, the R+F base introduces
another. As the Meade Committee Report (Chapter 12) observed, the transactions of the
business sector are related by an identity which, using our notation, may be written
(5)

(R − I ) + (F − J ) + S = 0

where S equals net transactions in corporate shares and dividend payments, i.e., the net flows
between firms and their shareholders. Under an R base tax that ignores financial transactions
between the business and household sectors, both (F – J) and S are omitted from the tax base.

12

Thus, transactions between a firm’s creditors and shareholders are treated identically. Just as
new share issues and dividends are excluded from the tax base, so are borrowing and interest
payments. But, once (F – J) is included in the tax base, transactions with creditors are subject to
a cash-flow tax – with taxes on borrowing and deductions for interest expenses and repayment of
principal – while transactions with shareholders are still ignored.
How serious a problem this distinction in how the sources of funds are treated under the
R+F base depends on the extent to which firms can manipulate payments between debt and
equity, for example by issuing debt and equity to the same party and overstating deductible
interest payments while understating nondeductible dividends. The problem is similar to that
under the R base of shifts on the output side between the firm’s real and financial activities, so
the decision of whether to group financial flows with the firm’s transactions with its customers
or with the firm’s transactions with its shareholders depends in part on where the problem of
manipulation is greater.
There is also an analogy here to the problems attendant upon a decision to allow a choice
under an individual expenditure tax between registered/qualified assets and
unregistered/unqualified assets, to the extent that flows associated with individual assets can be
manipulated11
D. The Timing of Tax Payments
Aside from the differences in their treatment of rents and normal returns to existing
assets, the cash-flow and tax-exempt approaches also differ with respect to the timing of tax
collections. While tax-exempt treatment simply imposes no taxes, cash-flow treatment arrives at

11

See, e.g., Graetz (1979).

13

the same zero present value through deductions and taxes that offset. This distinction has two
potentially important effects.
First, with truncated windows for revenue calculations, the tax-exempt approach appears
less costly. The result can be distorted policy decisions, an example of which is the trend away
from traditional IRAs (which provide cash flow treatment to contributed funds) to Roth IRAs
(which provide tax exempt treatment) in recent years in the United States, including the use as a
revenue “source” provisions encouraging investors to switch from the former to the latter.
Another example, already cited above, is viewing border adjustments as a source of revenue
when, in present value, they likely would involve a net revenue loss.
Second, with tax rates that vary over time, the cash-flow tax no longer imposes a zero
effective tax rate on capital accumulation. Indeed, the effective tax rates could be very positive
or negative if large tax rate changes occur over short periods, given that gross investment is fully
deductible in one year and gross returns are fully subject to taxation in others. This led Bradford
(1998) among others to suggest replacing the immediate deduction of investment with a
procedure of carrying the basis of investment forward with interest and taking depreciation
deductions in accordance with the timing of economic depreciation. While the deductions would
have the same present value as expensing with tax rates constant, their timing would eliminate
the distortion of investment decisions: marginal investments would face a zero effective tax rate,
as only supernormal rents would be subject to taxation in any period.
This “basis with interest” approach thus combines the insulation from tax rate changes
and the timing of revenues of the tax exemption approach with the taxation of rents present under
the cash flow tax. However, this compromise has a major drawback relative to the simple cash

14

flow tax (and, obviously, relative to tax exemption) of requiring that investors keep track of asset
bases and calculate depreciation allowances over time.
Not having to measure capital income has generally been viewed as one of the major
simplifications of cash flow taxation. Indeed, rather than attempting to make a cash flow tax
look more like an income tax, Auerbach and Bradford (2004) adopted the opposite approach of
considering how to make an income tax look more like a cash flow tax. They developed a
method of using the cash flow tax with rising tax rates over time to simulate an income tax,
suggesting that the advantages of eliminating basis could outweigh the disadvantage of
susceptibility to time-varying tax rates, particularly with financial innovation making the
identification of specific assets more difficult.
E. Individual versus Business Taxation
Consumption taxes can be imposed either at the business level or at the individual level.
The working of the business-level VAT has already been discussed. A cash flow personal
expenditure tax, sometimes called a consumed income tax, would start with the individual
income base and subtract net saving. Assuming that saving is measured consistently with
income, all income that is not saved is consumed, so the result would be a consumption tax.
Similarly, one can adopt a mixed approach, as under the flat tax or the X tax, that starts with a
VAT and shifts the taxation of wages from the business to the individual level. While these
approaches are all equivalent at the abstract level, they would likely differ in practice.
First, the business-household borderline is not clear, and some income producing
activities might be included in the household sector under a business level consumption tax. For
example, how would a household’s speculative holding of land be treated?

15

Second, progressive taxation based on an individual’s circumstances can, realistically,
only be applied to taxes at the individual level. Hence, the flat tax and the X tax transfer the
wage component of the tax base to households in order to apply progressive rate schedules to
that base.
Third, the difference in statutory incidence would also affect the measured price level. A
value-added tax, or a retail sales tax, added to factor incomes, would have a higher measured
price level than if the same tax were collected from individual consumers through a consumed
income tax. Although this difference simply reflects a convention in how the price level is
measured – including indirect taxes but excluding direct taxes – it would have real effects to the
extent that the price level matters, as for example for the indexation of transfer payments. It
would also matter to the extent that wages were sticky, either through explicit rigidities due to
contract and minimum wage provisions, or due to other sources of sluggish adjustment.
Fourth, market prices of assets will differ according to the level at which taxes are
collected. In comparing the impact on market values of a VAT and a consumed income tax, it is
helpful to consider the treatment of traditional IRAs under current law. The securities inside an
IRA have one market value, but this is not the after-tax value of the IRA to its owner, i.e., what
the holder of the IRA could sell the account for if the future tax liability due on withdrawals was
transferred along with the asset. If all investments were through IRAs, as effectively would be
the case under an individual level consumption tax, the after-tax value of the existing IRA to the
investor would fully capitalize these deferred taxes, because a new IRA composed of the same
portfolio of securities would face no taxes in present value under a system with constant tax rates
over time.12 If the taxes were payable not by individuals holding the IRAs, but instead by the
12

The story is more complicated under the current system in which IRAs provide a higher rate of return than fully
taxed assets. If the alternative investment is subject to income taxes but not subject to taxes on withdrawal, then

16

firms issuing the securities held in the IRAs, then the market values of the securities would
already reflect the deferred taxes. There would be no difference in the after-tax value of the
securities to investors, but the market values would adjust to offset the shift in statutory
incidence of the tax from investors to firms.13
Because market values under economically equivalent consumption taxes can vary
significantly, the impact on market values of adopting a consumption tax depends very much on
how the tax is imposed, even if the ultimate economic impact of the tax does not. Consider a
shift from the current U.S. tax system to a consumption tax. As discussed above, a consumption
tax without transition relief incorporates a form of capital levy in its tax on rents and the normal
returns to existing assets. This capital levy, in itself, would cause the after-tax values of assets to
fall. An offsetting effect on asset values comes from an increase in asset demand due to a shift to
the more favorable treatment of new investment. Still, it is likely that the after-tax values of
existing assets to investors would fall.14 But the market values of the assets could rise if some
taxes were shifted from the business level to the individual level. Given that the depreciation
provisions of the current U.S. corporate income tax favor new assets over existing assets, the
values of corporate shares should capitalize this difference, simulating the impact of partial cash

there are offsetting effects on the value of the IRA, the relative impact of deferred taxes declining with respect to the
length of the holding period as the advantage of tax-free investment grows. See Poterba (2004) for further
discussion.
13

The same distinction will apply to the domestic prices of foreign assets. Recall that, under a VAT, border
adjustments will cause the home currency to appreciate against foreign currencies in proportion to the border
adjustment. As border adjustments effectively apply cash flow taxation to net foreign investment, this reduction in
the domestic value of existing foreign assets is analogous to the reduction in value of domestic assets under a VAT.
Under a consumed income tax, extending cash flow treatment to the purchases and sales of foreign assets would
impose the same tax treatment as would border adjustments under a VAT, but would not induce a change in the
exchange rate. Investors would be in the same after-tax positions under both systems, but the taxes would be
collected at the company level and hence capitalized under the border-adjusted VAT.
14

See the simulations in Auerbach (1996) or Altig et al. (2001).

17

flow taxation15. Going to full cash flow taxation, but shifting the entire tax to the individual
level, for example by replacing the current corporate and personal income taxes with a consumed
income tax, would lower the after-tax values of these assets to investors, but raise their market
values, because the taxes on asset sales would be due after the assets were sold.
Finally, some have argued that indirect consumption taxes are a more effective method of
collecting taxes from individuals who do not report income or pay tax under the income tax. The
logic is that these individuals currently pay no tax, but would be hit by sales tax or VAT on their
purchases. Presumably, this supposed benefit of indirect consumption taxes would not apply to a
household level consumed income tax, for the tax evader would be no more likely to file a tax
return than before. But the underlying logic itself is flawed, as the following discussion
illustrates.
F. Activities outside the Tax System
In a simple world without intermediate inputs or investment, where income equals
consumption, it is easy to see the flaw in the previous logic. Imagine that there are two sectors,
sector 1 that is covered by the tax system and sector 2 that is not covered. Under the income tax,
sector 1 pays taxes while sector 2 does not. Under an indirect consumption tax, sector 1 again
pays taxes, while sector 2 does not. Thus, there has been no change in the tax base, and hence no
possible reason for any change in tax incidence.
A somewhat more sophisticated analysis that takes intermediate inputs into account
doesn’t change the basic story. Suppose now that the first sector produces both investment
goods and consumption goods; that the investment goods serve as capital in both sectors; and
that both sectors are competitive, so that price equals marginal cost. Then, under an income tax,
15

See, e.g., Auerbach (1983).

18

the costs of production and hence prices in the covered and uncovered sectors will be,
respectively:

(6.1)

p1 =

w
r
l1 + p1
k1
1− t
1− t

;

(6.2)

p2 = wl 2 + p1rk 2

where w and r are the required after-tax returns to labor and capital, t is the income tax rate, and

li and ki and unit labor and capital requirements in each sector. Under an indirect consumption
tax at rate τ, the effective tax rate on capital income becomes zero in the covered sector, so these
expressions become:

(7.1)

p1 =

w
l1 + p1 rk1
1−τ

;

(7.2)

p2 = wl 2 + p1rk 2

Assuming that the tax change is revenue-neutral in present value, τ must be enough higher than t
to make up for the revenue lost by setting the effective tax rate on capital to zero. Since only
sector 1 is subject to taxation, this equal-revenue requirement implies that, for given values of w
and r, the solution for p1 in expressions (6.1) and (7.1) must be the same; hence, so are the
solutions for p2 in (6.2) and (7.2). Thus, with no change in w and r, there will be no change in
the relative production costs or prices of the commodities produced by the covered and
uncovered sectors. However, the reduction in the cost of capital relative to labor in sector 1 will
encourage a shift from labor to capital in production, and this increased demand for capital
relative to labor will raise r relative to w. As discussed further in Hines (2004), this change will
raise relative costs in whichever sector is more capital intensive, quite plausibly the covered
sector. Thus, the shift to an indirect consumption tax like a VAT may actually encourage the
expansion of activity in the uncovered sector.

19

G. Hybrid Tax Systems
It is frequently asserted that tax systems that have some of the characteristics of an
income tax and some of the characteristics of a consumption tax have effects on behavior that lie
between those of an income tax and those of a consumption tax. For example, the 2006

Economic Report of the President says: “the personal income tax is actually a hybrid incomeconsumption tax, so that some of the taxes collected through the U.S. tax system, and those of
other countries, might be thought of as taxes on consumption” (p. 115). The provisions to which
the passage refers include tax-sheltered saving such as IRAs and relatively low rates of tax on
dividends and capital gains. But having favorable treatment for some types of capital income,
while it does reduce taxes on capital income, reduces taxes in a different way than, say, shrinking
the income tax and replacing the lost revenue with a consumption tax. First, the differential
treatment of assets distorts the allocation of capital. Second, the differential treatment of assets
and liabilities and, in particular, the full deductibility of interest combined with reduced taxation
of capital income, encourages borrowing to invest in tax favored assets, rather than saving.16
III. The Consumption Tax and Economic Efficiency
There are several strands of the literature arguing that a consumption tax would be more
efficient than an income tax. I will not attempt a detailed survey of this rich literature here, but
will simply try to highlight some key results to provide a flavor of where things stand.17

16

One might argue that the borrowed funds still must come from somewhere and therefore require additional saving,
but even this is not necessarily true because the funds can come from one’s own sheltered investments. For
example, an individual’s pension fund saving can be used to purchase that same individual’s new interest-deductible
mortgage. In this example, there would be no net saving, as the increased borrowing would exactly equal the
increased pension assets.
17

For a good recent survey of much of this literature, see Zodrow (2005).

20

One of the most frequently cited papers in this literature is that of Atkinson and Stiglitz
(1976), who showed, under the assumption that preferences are weakly separable into
consumption and leisure, that a progressive labor income tax is optimal by itself, i.e., that no
variation in commodity taxes can improve social welfare. Although weak separability of
preferences is not assured, it is a relatively weak restriction and it is not clear in which direction
deviations would point in terms of differential commodity taxes. If one interprets the different
consumption goods in the Atkinson-Stiglitz analysis as consumption in different periods, then
the result may be interpreted as calling exclusively for a progressive tax on labor income or, in
their model equivalently (because there are no initial assets and no transfers to other individuals),
a progressive tax on lifetime consumption.
Even if the Atkinson-Stiglitz restriction on preferences is not satisfied, this violation does
not necessarily imply that one would want to have higher taxes on future consumption than on
current consumption, as would be effectively imposed by a capital income tax. A priori, a
capital income subsidy is just as likely to be optimal as a capital income tax. Indeed, as the
household’s horizon lengthens, in the limit to the infinite horizon, the case against any significant
tax on capital income is strengthened by another important result in the literature.
Perhaps the most striking result from infinite horizon models is the finding of Judd
(1985) and Chamley (1986) that, for a system with taxes on labor and capital income, the longrun tax on capital income should be zero. Thus, leaving aside the distinction already discussed
between consumption and wage taxes relating to the treatment of initial assets and rents, the
result calls for consumption tax treatment in the long run. This conclusion is quite general in
some respects, not depending on individual preferences taking a particular form, for example.
The intuition is also very simple. For any given set of individual preferences, we might improve

21

efficiency by taxing consumption in different periods at different rates. Taxing future
consumption more heavily than current consumption could be achieved by taxing capital income.
But it is implausible that we would want to tax consumption more and more heavily as we move
into later and later periods, as would be the case if positive capital income taxes continued to
apply. Thus, at some point, regardless of the exact form of preferences, the capital income tax
will have to converge to zero.
Although Judd and Chamley derived their results in simple representative agent models
without ability differences or progressive taxation, the logic would apply just as well in the
Atkinson-Stiglitz framework: even if one didn’t want uniform consumption taxation, one
wouldn’t want to have arbitrarily large distortions facing consumption at distant future dates.
Further, the intuition associated with the Judd-Chamley result still resonates for finite horizon
models, in that a positive capital income tax in every year would still impose a very high
effective tax rate on consumption, say, 50 years in the future.
Aside from the usual restrictions that any modeling assumptions impose, however, there
are particular problems in applying the Atkinson-Stiglitz result to the design of taxation over
time. First, Atkinson and Stiglitz assume that each household has just one form of labor supply.
Leaving aside the issue of how different members of a household should be treated at a given
point in time, this assumption also ignores the fact that there is labor income in different periods.
Even if consumption were separable from all forms of leisure, there is no presumption that
leisure at different dates should be subject to the same tax schedule. One might, for example,
think that age-specific labor income tax schedules would make sense.18 But, more importantly,
applying a static analysis like that in the Atkinson-Stiglitz paper to behavior over time ignores

18

See, e.g., Kremer (2001).

22

the fact that we observe the labor supply and consumption decisions of early periods before those
of later ones. Thus, we might wish to implement a tax system in future periods that is
conditioned on current decisions.19 Considering such a dynamic model, Golosov et al. (2003)
found that the Atkinson-Stiglitz result about uniform commodity taxation still applied across
commodities within a given period, but that a positive capital income tax was generally optimal.
The intuition is that higher capital income makes it more difficult for the government to impose
redistributive labor income taxation, because the cost to high ability individuals of not working
hard is reduced by the presence of additional resources. Taxing capital income therefore
weakens the self-selection constraints that the government’s tax system must satisfy, allowing it
more scope for redistribution.
Thus, even though capital income taxes distort consumption more and more over the
infinite horizon, zero taxes on capital income may not be desirable if we seek to implement a
plan for redistributive taxation. On the other hand, the literature lacks results suggesting that
labor income and capital income should be treated equally by the tax system, and there is no
obvious intuition suggesting that such a result might make sense, leaving aside practical
difficulties that arise in distinguishing capital income and labor income. It is no accident that the
literature has focused on whether it is efficient for capital income taxes to be zero, rather than on
whether there should be equal taxes on capital income and labor income. Even with all the
complications in the literature, then, there is a strong theoretical basis for thinking that
consumption taxes will be more efficient than income taxes. But theory typically fails to tell us
how great the efficiency difference might be. Given the transition costs of moving from one tax

19

This is distinct from the incentive that a government will have to deviate from a previously announced policy, for
example to announce a capital subsidy but then implement a capital income tax once capital has been accumulated.

23

system to another, it could easily be the case that a small efficiency gain in moving to a
consumption tax could be outweighed by the transition costs of doing so.

A. Previous Results from Simulation Models
Because the magnitude of the potential efficiency gain from adopting a consumption tax
is important and yet difficult to discern from theory, there have been substantial efforts to assess
the relative efficiency of income and consumption taxes using numerical simulations models
with an empirical basis for their parameter assumptions. One model commonly used for this
purpose is that of Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987). In addition to the results published there
comparing the transition from an income tax to either a wage tax or a consumption tax,
subsequent papers have considered transitions from a more realistic version of the current tax
system to a variety of specific tax systems, such as the flat tax or the X tax, in both the original
Auerbach-Kotlikoff model (Auerbach 1996) or an extended version of the model that has
individuals varying with respect to ability and lifetime income (Altig et al. 2001).
The findings in Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) are that a shift from an income tax to a
consumption tax would increase economic efficiency, while a shift to a wage tax would reduce
economic efficiency. The key difference between the two results for apparently similar tax
systems is the treatment of assets in transition. Both a consumption tax and a wage tax would
remove the distortion facing intertemporal consumption decisions, a change for which the
literature would lead us to expect an efficiency gain. But a consumption tax would include in the
tax base the returns to existing capital (there are no economic rents in the model), which
increases the estimated efficiency gain under the model’s assumption that this tax is an
unanticipated capital levy that can be used to reduce distortionary taxes further. A wage tax, on
the other hand, provides no such capital levy. Further, by eliminating capital income taxes that

24

those accumulating wealth had expected to pay, adoption of a wage tax in a sense provides a
capital bonus, which has the opposite impact on efficiency of a capital levy, working against the
efficiency gains from eliminating the intertemporal consumption distortion. Thus, as the
simulations confirm, it is possible for a shift to wage taxation to reduce economic efficiency even
as it removes the intertemporal distortion of consumption.
These simulation results do not tell us how large the potential efficiency gains are
exclusively from eliminating the intertemporal consumption distortions, because they combine
this change with a change in the treatment of existing assets. But the fact that the treatment of
existing assets can determine whether the overall efficiency gain is positive or negative suggests
that the choice of transition provisions is critical. Auerbach (1996) confirms that providing
transition relief within a given system, such as the flat tax, can have a significant impact on longrun output and economic efficiency, in some instances making the efficiency gains disappear
entirely. Altig et al. (2001) do not estimate efficiency effects but find generally similar results
with respect to the effects of transition relief on long-run output.20
None of the simulation results just cited incorporates the potential benefits of
consumption taxation of taxing capital income more uniformly (at a rate of zero, in this
instance). On the one hand, such benefits might be considerable, given the significant variation
in effective tax rates on different investments. On the other hand, such benefits may be largely
possible under the income tax. Although one of the argued advantages of the consumption tax is
20

As is discussed in the recent report of the President’s Advisory Panel on Tax Reform (2005, p. 174), how the
transition relief is provided can determine whether the long-run output gain from a consumption tax is reduced. In
Auerbach (1996) and Altig et al. (2001), the cost of transition relief was spread smoothly over the indefinite future
and thus permanently raised taxes and reduced output. If, instead, the cost of transition relief were paid for entirely
during a short transition period, the long-run impact on output and tax rates would be nil – the tax system would be
identical to the case without transition relief, and so the economy would look the same as well. But long-run output
gains and efficiency gains are distinct, and it is likely that concentrating the cost of transition relief would reduce the
efficiency gains from tax reform even more than paying for such relief smoothly over time, because of the nonlinear
relationship between deadweight loss and marginal tax rates.

25

that it is much easier to tax asset income uniformly under that system than under an income tax,
many of the very large distortions under the current income tax, such as the distinctions between
debt and equity and between owner-occupied housing and other assets, could be substantially
reduced without forsaking the income tax.
For example, Hubbard (1997) argues that one should think of the switch from our current
tax system to a consumption tax in terms of two steps, the first a move to a clean, broad-based
income tax that removes the inter-asset distortions of the current tax system, and the second a
move from this reformed income tax to a consumption tax. This decomposition gives credit for
removing inter-asset distortions to the initial tax reform step rather than to adopting a
consumption tax.
Hubbard further argues that since both the income tax and the consumption tax hit
economic rents, and since both tax the returns to risk-taking in the same manner, the only
distinction between their treatments of capital income is the income tax on the safe rate of return.
As this safe rate of return is not large, the distinction between the income tax and consumption
tax does not appear to be large, either.

B. New Simulation Results
If the safe rate of return is close to zero, then how large can be the gains from reducing
the tax rate on this return to zero? In particular, to what extent do the simulation results just
discussed, which are obtained from models in which entire rate of return is treated as the normal
returns to capital, overstate the efficiency gains from adopting a consumption tax? This is a
difficult question to answer, because there is no simple way of extending the models to
incorporate aggregate risk, in which the risky and safe rates of return are determined in
equilibrium and the risk premium will change as the tax system and equilibrium change. We can

26

get some idea of how the results might change, however, by considering a simpler experiment, in
which the economy’s capital intensity is held constant but the initial rate of return to capital is
taken to be substantially lower than in the simulation results discussed earlier.
Table 1 reports summary statistics for simulations using the basic Auerbach-Kotlikoff
model. For the base case simulations, all of the preference and production parameters are the
same as those used for the base case simulations in Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) and Auerbach
(1996), except that costs of adjustment are assumed to exist for investment. A 25 percent
proportional income tax is assumed, with no other taxes or government debt. For each
simulation of a transition to a new tax system, the table presents three summary statistics: the
percentage increase in output in the long run, the percentage gain in welfare of the representative
individual in the long run (expressed relative to full lifetime resources – the present value of the
individual’s labor endowment, out of which consumption and leisure are financed), and the
percentage gain in economic efficiency, calculated as the long-run gain in welfare when
generations born prior to the beginning of the transition are compensated for gains or losses in
welfare and all subsequent generations share equally the gains (or losses) from the change in tax
policy.21
The first row of Table 1 presents the results of a simulation of an immediate shift from
the income tax to a proportional consumption tax. The long-run output gain is nearly 8 percent
and the long-run gain in welfare is nearly 4 percent. The efficiency gain is considerably smaller,
just over 0.5 percent, because a large share of the long-run gains comes from intergenerational
redistribution. The second row of the table gives results for a simulation of an immediate switch
to a wage tax, showing a drop in long-run output and long-run welfare, and an efficiency loss
21

Further details of the simulation methodology and parameter assumptions may be found in Auerbach and
Kotlikoff (1987) or Auerbach (1996).

27

that is smaller in absolute value than the long-run welfare loss once the capital bonuses of early
generations are neutralized. These results are consistent with those simulation results discussed
earlier, in particular the efficiency gain under the consumption tax and the efficiency loss under
the wage tax.
Consider now the effects of reducing the rate of return. For these alternative simulations,
I reduce two parameters, the capital intensity of production and the rate of time preference, so
that the capital-output ratio remains constant in the initial steady state while the interest rate in
the initial steady state is reduced to 40 percent of its original value, from 7.90 percent to 3.16
percent.22
Before discussing the results of this experiment, it is useful to go through the intuition
regarding the effects that this change in assumptions should have. For the transition to a wage
tax, we should expect all the effects to be smaller in absolute value, for as capital income
becomes smaller as a share of total income, the differences between a wage tax and an income
tax become less significant; the capital bonus provided to earlier generations is reduced, as is the
efficiency gain from removing the intertemporal distortion. Although these effects work in
opposite directions, we know that as the rate of return converges to zero, the wage tax and the
income become identical and hence the net change in all summary statistics converges to zero.
As there is no reason to suspect that one of these effects should phase out more quickly than the
other as the initial interest rate goes down, we would expect that a partial reduction in the initial
interest rate would also reduce the impact of a transition to a wage tax.
In the model’s Cobb-Douglas production function, the capital intensity parameter in the production function, β,
equals capital’s share of output, rκ, where r is the before-tax interest rate and κ is the capital-output ratio. In the
base case, β = 0.25, consistent with capital’s observed income share of about one quarter. I reduce β to 0.10 and
then reduce the pure rate of time preference from its original value of 0.015 so that enough saving is generated to
maintain κ at its original value in the initial steady state. (The new value of the pure rate of discount is -0.009.)
Since κ stays the same, r must drop by the same percentage that β does, i.e., from 0.25 to 0.10, or by 60 percent.
22

28

For a consumption tax, the intuition is not quite as clear. Again, as the initial interest rate
falls, the efficiency gain from eliminating the intertemporal distortion falls. But, even at a very
low interest rate, the consumption tax’s capital levy seems, at least at first, to remain fully in
place. That is, consumption of existing assets will still be fully taxed under a consumption tax,
even if these assets generate a low rate of return. However, the value of the capital levy to the
government in terms of reducing distortionary taxes will still be reduced. If one thinks of the
capital levy as a government asset providing an infinite stream of future returns that can be used
to reduce wage taxes in future years, these returns will be lower, given the size of the capital
levy, if the rate of return is lower. Hence, under the consumption tax as well, we should expect
smaller efficiency gains for a lower initial interest rate.
The third and fourth rows of Table 1 confirm the intuition of the previous two
paragraphs. All measures move substantially closer to zero, particularly the efficiency effects of
the two tax policies. But, there may be more to the story.
First, recall that a consumption tax alleviates the tax on the safe return to capital, but not
on economic rents. To the extent that the higher observed return to capital in the economy,
which the original parameter choices of the Auerbach-Kotlikoff model aimed to match,
represents economic rents rather than returns to risk taking, the capital levy of the consumption
tax will provide a larger stream over time than those generated by the previous consumption tax
simulation. That is, even though the normal rate of return to new investment may be low, the
capital levy will capture both the normal returns and the rents from existing capital. If the
assumption of perfect competition still holds, then these rents are simply returns to fixed factors
and provide an efficient tax base.

29

To explore how much larger the efficiency gain could be in the presence of economic
rents, I consider the extreme case in which the entire gap between the observed return to capital
in the economy and the safe rate of return is attributable to economic rents; that is, the flow from
the capital levy is as large as in the base case simulations, but the efficiency gain from
eliminating the intertemporal distortion is still smaller because of the lower return to new
saving.23 The result of this simulation is given in the fifth row of Table 1. As expected, the
gains in output and efficiency are now much larger, although still smaller than those under the
base case, high-interest-rate simulation. That a gap remains makes sense, because even with the
restoration of the capital levy’s value, getting rid of the intertemporal distortion is still less
important. Recall, too, that this simulation reflects the extreme assumption that the entire return
to the existing capital stock is either rent or a normal return to capital. If rent accounts for a
smaller share of observed returns, the effects will be muted.

C. Caveats in the Interpretation of Simulation Evidence
There are two additional considerations that also point toward higher potential gains from
reducing taxing on capital income, relative to the low-interest-rate simulations in Table 1.
First, if economic rents are present, there may be more to take into account than just the
capital levy on such rents. One should also reconsider the standard assumption of perfect
competition. Rents could be generated in a competitive environment, but they also may be the
result of imperfect competition. If firms are restricting production to levels at which price
exceeds marginal cost, then to the distortions of taxation we must add the additional non23

To simulate this scenario, given that the model itself has no economic rents, I combine a higher consumption tax
with a wage subsidy, letting the consumption tax account for 250 percent of required revenue and using the excess
revenue for the wage subsidy. Because a consumption tax plus a wage subsidy is simply a capital levy, this policy
multiplies the capital levy in the transition to a consumption tax by 2.5. This magnification just offsets the lower
rate of return that the capital levy generates because the safe interest rate is 0.4 times its original value.

30

competitive mark-up. Assuming that capital goods markets are among those in which noncompetitive distortions exist, moreover, means that the departure from perfect competition will
not simply distort consumption by raising consumer prices, but will also discourage the use of
capital in production by raising capital goods prices.
This additional wedge in the capital goods market has two implications for polices that
reduce capital income taxation. First, the efficiency gains will be larger, because the reduction is
starting from a more distorted initial point. Second, the optimal capital income tax will be lower,
because even a zero capital income tax will leave the non-tax distortion of capital use in place.
Starting from an infinite horizon model in which the optimal long-run capital income tax would
be zero under perfect competition, Judd (1997) finds that the optimal capital income tax is quite
negative in a non-competitive environment calibrated to U.S. evidence. While the qualitative
implications of this analysis are clear – the efficiency gains from eliminating capital income
taxes are bigger than otherwise estimated – the quantitative implications for the life-cycle
simulation results discussed here are not clear without further efforts at simulation modeling that
incorporate different types of imperfect competition.
Second, one should remember that capital income taxes are not simply symmetric,
proportional taxes on capital income. If they were, then the effective tax rate on capital income
would not vary with the division of the observed rate of return into its components of safe return,
rent, and excess return to risk-taking – the tax base would be capital income, and all components
of the tax base would have the same tax rate applied. But the tax system is much more
complicated, and different factors suggest that as we take risk into account and recognize that the
safe rate of return is lower than the observed return to capital, our estimated effective tax rate on
that safe rate of return will be higher.

31

First, asymmetries in the tax system increase the tax burden on risky assets, a point
understood since the work of Domar and Musgrave (1944). That is, the tax burden on the excess
return is not zero, so for risky assets this must be added to the burden that the capital income tax
imposes on the safe rate of return. Second, because depreciation schedules are not based on
actual, ex post economic depreciation, the effective tax rate, even under a symmetric tax system,
will vary with the safe discount rate and the extent to which depreciation itself is risky. As
shown in the appendix, reducing the assumed discount rate and taking risky depreciation into
account will both tend to increase our estimate of the effective tax rate on investment.
Thus, the rate of return relevant in calculating the intertemporal distortion may be lower
than has been assumed in simulation models, but the tax rate applicable to that lower rate of
return is likely to be higher. How much higher is difficult to know, because it depends on an
asset’s riskiness, the extent to which the firm is able to offset one asset’s losses with another
asset’s gains, and how tax asymmetries interact with adjustments for risk.24

D. A Further Consideration of Taxation and Risk
Until now, the discussion of risk has maintained the assumption of market efficiency –
that taxation provides no insurance function because the private market has already efficiently
pooled risks and that the remaining aggregate risk has been allocated among individuals in an
efficient manner. While this may be a reasonably accurate assumption for securities markets, it
is more problematic for some assets, such as small businesses, and for the returns to human
capital as well. As has long been well understood, taxation can serve as a means of pooling risks

24
Auerbach (1983) calculates effective tax rates for different assets taking asymmetric taxation into account, and
performs separate calculations of the impact of risk adjustment on effective tax rates. But these calculations are
done separately and not integrated.

32

if markets to pool risks are incomplete. Even distortionary taxes might improve welfare by also
improving the efficiency of risk pooling and risk bearing.
Taking this market failure into account can change ones conclusions regarding the
desirability of certain tax policies. For example, Nishiyama and Smetters (2005) extend the
Auerbach-Kotlikoff model to include idiosyncratic risks to labor income and longevity, and find
that the transition from a progressive income tax to a proportional consumption tax would induce
an efficiency loss by reducing marginal tax rates on labor income and hence the tax system’s
implicit provision of insurance. Presumably, the same type of analysis would apply to reductions
in capital income taxes to the extent that individuals have idiosyncratic capital risks. In this case,
the consumption tax would diverge from the wage tax in its treatment of the return to risk-taking,
because the assumption that investors can scale up or down their risky asset positions would no
longer apply. The consumption tax, like the income tax, would provide insurance of risky capital
income, although, as in the Nishiyama-Smetters analysis, any reduction in marginal tax rates
would also reduce the tax system’s insurance function.
One needs to exercise some care, though, in thinking about the role of the tax system
when markets for risk are incomplete. An analysis needs also to consider why market failure has
occurred in the first place. As Weisbach (2004) points out, there are different reasons why
individuals might hold undiversified positions. One might be adverse selection. For example, a
small business whose owner seeks lay off some of its ownership risk might be perceived as a
lemon. In this, case, the tax system’s mandatory participation would provide a benefit, as the
analysis above suggested. On the other hand, some of the lack of diversification might be due to
moral hazard. For example, individuals who insure their human capital risk would have little
incentive to work if there is no way to separate the effects on observed income of effort and

33

stochastic shocks. A tax system that provided such insurance would have the same disincentive
effects, making the insurance function unattractive.

E. Other Behavioral Issues
Until now, I have said nothing about inheritances and bequests. There are many potential
explanations for bequests, and they differ in how they would affect the previous analysis. A
strong altruistic bequest motive, as in Barro (1974), turns the decisions of a life-cycle individual
into the infinite horizon calculations of a dynasty, thereby increasing the deadweight loss from
capital income taxation. On the other hand, accidental bequests that occur because of incomplete
annuity markets do not imply any extension of an individual’s planning horizon. As confirmed
by simulations presented in Altig et al. (2001), even planned bequests, if they are motivated by
the benefits of giving rather than the ultimate consumption of one’s heirs, need have little impact
on the desirability of consumption taxes. Moreover, as already discussed above, the distortions
of future consumption resulting from capital income taxation are already significant within the
long-horizon life-cycle context, so the potential lengthening of the horizon beyond one’s own
lifetime doesn’t make the efficiency argument for eliminating capital income taxes that much
stronger.
Perhaps a more important behavioral realm is the various departures from unconstrained
life-cycle saving behavior. As many recent authors have suggested, observed saving behavior, at
least on the part of a significant share of the population, seems at odds with fully informed
optimization. The implications for capital income taxes are not clear, however, even if
individuals fail to save adequately. Depending on the nature of the departure from the standard
rational choice assumptions, one might wish to increase tax incentives to save or, alternatively,
to tax capital income (Bernheim and Rangel 2005). On the other hand, the institutional

34

arrangements associated with saving, such as the default options of employer-sponsored pension
plans, may be quite important, even though such arrangements are of minor consequence in the
standard model.
Thus, the efficiency effects of a consumption tax may turn on how the change in taxation
influences the nature of institutional arrangements. For example, if a shift from targeted saving
incentives to a broad-based favorable treatment of saving reduces the appeal of coordinated
saving through employer-sponsored plans, saving might actually fall. This effect is by no means
certain, for tax reforms could be structured to maintain some advantages for coordinated saving.
But there is increasing appreciation that this developing line of research may be of central
importance in thinking about tax reform.
IV. The Progressivity of Consumption Taxes
One of the common concerns about shifting from an income tax to a consumption tax is
that a consumption tax would be less progressive than the income tax. There is little of a general
nature that can be said about this without reference to the consumption tax under consideration.
There is little doubt that a national retail sales tax would shift burdens away from groups with
high earnings, or that an X tax, with progressive rates on labor income, would be less likely to do
so. Indeed, the simulations in Altig et al. (2001) find that, in the long run, the distributional
effects of a switch from the income tax to the X tax would be quite neutral, with very similar
percentage increases in lifetime welfare for all lifetime-income classes, with the slight
differences among the groups favoring those with lower lifetime income.25 Rather than comment

25
It is of course conceivable that the percentage welfare gains under the X tax would have been higher for the very
highest lifetime income groups, had Altig et al. (2001) broken down the top 2 percent of he population, their highest
group, into still smaller groups.

35

on the progressivity of the consumption tax per se, it is more useful to touch on a few issues
regarding how this progressivity should be judged.
First, the conclusions of Altig et al. (2001) are based on lifetime tax burdens, not the
taxes paid in a single year. It is a simple implication of consumption smoothing that
consumption will fluctuate less than income, so that the consumption tax base will appear less
progressive when evaluated on an annual basis than on a lifetime basis. But it is not clear why
one would wish to evaluate progressivity on an annual basis.
Second, in the presence of bequests, the form of consumption taxation and the nature of
the bequest motive matter for incidence calculations. The model of Altig et al. (2001) included a
realistic level and pattern of bequests, modeled as resulting from a “utility of bequests” motive,
but also found that the long-run welfare consequences, including the roughly equal percentage
welfare gains by lifetime income groups, were not significantly affected by whether the bequest
motive was present. This finding may seem surprising, given that bequests are concentrated
among the highest lifetime income groups. One might think, for example, that with bequests not
being taxed as consumption, the most affluent would fare much better once bequests were taken
into account. Indeed, it has been a concern among many that it would be hard to replicate even
lifetime progressivity under a consumption tax, given how large a share of their lifetime
resources the rich do not consume. Altig et al. (2001) likely do not encounter this problem
because the cash flow component of the X tax is collected at the business level. As discussed
above, this means that the tax is capitalized into the value of assets.26 Thus, it hits not just
lifetime consumption, but also bequests.

26

Altig et al. (2001, Table 4) find that the long-run value of Tobin’s q, the ratio of market value to capital, is
reduced by 12 percent by the X tax.

36

Under a personal consumption tax like the consumed income tax, the same treatment of
bequests would require taxing bequests as consumption instead of taxing them upon eventual
consumption by heirs. But this shift in the timing of taxation would have no impact on heirs’
consumption and hence no impact on the lifetime welfare of donors unless the utility of bequests
was based on gross bequests, rather than on the level of consumption that bequests could finance.
Third, long-run calculations do not take into account the incidence of transition
provisions. If a consumption tax is implemented without transition relief, for example, the
effects of the capital levy on initial generations could be quite progressive. This would be even
more the case to the extent that the assets are inherited, given the concentration of bequests and
inheritances.
Fourth, it is difficult to analyze consistently the distributional effects of different
consumption tax proposals using an annual frame of reference because, as discussed above, the
timing of tax payments differs among approaches. For example, a consumption tax with
transition relief may impose the same burdens on all individuals as a wage tax, but consumption
tax payments will be aligned with consumption, not wages. This difference will wash out of
calculations done on a lifetime basis, but will be misleading on an annual basis, regardless of
whether individuals are grouped by current income, lifetime income, or some other measure of
ability to pay.
Finally, as is always the case in incidence analysis, one needs to distinguish between tax
burdens and tax payments. For instance, to the extent that capital income taxes, or consumption
taxes, fall on the excess returns to risky assets, the theory discussed above suggests that these
taxes impose no burden. Thus, these taxes should be left out when assessing the tax burdens of
the respective tax systems.

37

V. Conclusions
One can draw several conclusions from this paper’s analysis. Among them are:
1. There are several attributes that define a consumption tax and distinguish it from an income
tax, although not all of these attributes are found in every variant of the consumption tax.
Most versions of the consumption tax would impose a zero effective tax rate on the normal
returns to capital but a progressive annual consumption tax might not. Most would tax
economic rent and the excess return to risk-taking, but a wage tax would not. Most would be
imposed on a destination basis, but a flat tax would not. Most would eliminate any
consideration of asset basis, but an X tax in which undepreciated basis is carried forward
with interest would not.
2. Some of the key advantages seen by some in adopting some form of consumption tax don’t
stand simple scrutiny, notably its purported ability to improve the trade balance through
border adjustments and to reach economic activities that escape the income tax.
3. Evaluations of consumption taxes need to control for differences in their application, for
example with respect to the timing of tax payments, whether or not taxes are structured so as
to be capitalized into observed market values of assets, and whether excess returns to risktaking are included in the tax base. These differences are especially a problem when one
attempts to evaluate the distributional impact of a tax system using annual tax payments as a
measure.
4. The efficiency gains from adopting a consumption tax depend on how the tax is
implemented, particularly on how assets are treated during transition. Simulation evidence to
date has not taken into account a variety of issues that could significantly affect the estimated
efficiency gains from adopting a consumption tax. Some of these issue point toward smaller

38

potential gains, while others point toward larger gains. Recent contributions in behavioral
economics suggest that a variety of institutional characteristics beyond the effective tax rate
on capital income may be very important in determining the effects of adopting a
consumption tax.

39

References
Altig, David, Alan J. Auerbach, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Kent A. Smetters, and Jan Walliser. 2001.
“Simulating Fundamental Tax Reform in the United States,” American Economic Review 91(3),
June, pp. 574-595.
Andrews, William D. 1974. “A Consumption-Type or Cash Flow Personal Income Tax.”
Harvard Law Review 87(6), April, pp. 1113-1188.
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1976. “The Design of Tax Structure: Direct versus
Indirect Taxation.” Journal of Public Economics 6(1-2), July-August, pp. 55-75.
Auerbach, Alan J. 1983. “Corporate Taxation in the United States.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 14(2), pp. 1451-1505.
Auerbach, Alan J. 1996. “Tax Reform, Capital Allocation, Efficiency and Growth,” in Henry
Aaron and William Gale, Editors, Economic Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform. Washington:
Brookings, pp. 29-81.
Auerbach, Alan J. 1997. “The Future of Fundamental Tax Reform.” American Economic Review
87(2), May 1997, pp. 143-146.
Auerbach, Alan J., and David F. Bradford. 2004. “Generalized Cash-Flow Taxation.” Journal of
Public Economics 88(5), April, pp. 957-980.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1987. Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Barro, Robert J. 1974. “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political Economy
82(6), November, pp. 1095-1117.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. 2005. “Behavioral Public Economics: Welfare and
Policy Analysis with Non-Standard Decision Makers.” NBER Working Paper 11518, July.
Bradford, David F. 1986. Untangling the Income Tax. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Bradford, David F. 1998. “Transition to and Tax Rate Flexibility in a Cash-Flow Type Tax.” In
James M. Poterba, Editor, Tax Policy and the Economy 12, pp. 151-172.
Bradford, David F., and the U.S. Treasury Tax Policy Staff. 1984. Blueprints for Basic Tax
Reform, 2nd Edition. Arlington, VA: Tax Analysts
Bulow Jeremy I., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1984. “The Taxation of Risky Assets.” Journal of
Political Economy 92(1), February, pp. 20-39.

40

Chamley, Christophe. 1986. “Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium with
Infinite Lives.” Econometrica 54(3), May, pp. 607-622.
Domar, Evsey D., and Richard A. Musgrave. 1944. “Proportional Income Taxation and RiskTaking.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 58(3), May, pp. 388-422.
Fisher, Irving. 1939. “The Double Taxation of Savings.” American Economic Review 29(1),
March, pp. 16-33.
Golosov, Mikhail, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Aleh Tsyvinski. 2003. “Optimal Indirect and
Capital Taxation.” Review of Economic Studies 70(3), July, pp. 569-587.
Gordon, Roger H. 1985. “Taxation of Corporate Capital Income: Tax Revenues versus Tax
Distortions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 100(1), February, pp. 1-27.
Graetz, Michael J. 1979. “Implementing a Progressive Consumption Tax.” Harvard Law Review
92(8), June, pp. 1575-1661.
Hall, Robert, and Alvin Rabushka. 1985. The Flat Tax. Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press.
Hines, James R., Jr. “Might Fundamental Tax Reform Increase Criminal Activity?” Economica
71, August, pp. 483-492.
Hubbard, R. Glenn. 1997. “How Different are Income and Consumption Taxes?” American
Economic Review 87(2), May, pp. 138-142.
Institute for Fiscal Studies. 1978. The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation. London: Allen
and Unwin.
Judd, Kenneth L. 1985. “Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model.” Journal
of Public Economics 28(1), October, pp. 59-83.
Judd, Kenneth L. 1997. “The Optimal Tax Rate for Capital Income is Negative.” NBER
Working Paper 6004, April.
Kaldor, Nicholas. 1955. An Expenditure Tax. An Expenditure Tax. London: Allen and Unwin.
Kaplow, Louis. 1994. “Taxation and Risk Taking: A General Equilibrium Perspective.” National
Tax Journal 47(4), December, pp. 789-798.
Kremer, Michael. 2001. “Should Taxes be Independent of Age?” unpublished manuscript,
Harvard University.
Nishiyama, Shinichi, and Kent Smetters. 2005. “Consumption Taxes and Economic Efficiency
with Idiosyncratic Wage Shocks.” Journal of Political Economy 113(5), October, pp. 1088-1115.

41

Poterba, James M. 2004. “Valuing Assets in Retirement Saving Accounts.” National Tax Journal
75(2), June, pp. 489-512.
President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform. 2005. Simple, Fair, and Pro-Growth.
Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of the Treasury. 1977. Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform. Washington: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Warren, Alvin C., Jr., 1996. “How Much Capital Income Taxed Under an Income Tax Would Be
Exempt Under a Cash-Flow Tax?” Tax Law Review 52(1), pp. 1-16.
Weisbach, David A. 2004. “The (Non)Taxation of Risk.” Tax Law Review 58(1), pp. 1-57.
Zodrow, George R. 2005. “Should Capital Income Be Subject to Consumption-Based Taxation?”
Paper presented at the American Tax Policy Institute Conference on “Taxing Capital Income.”
September.

42

Appendix: Effective Tax Rates and the Safe Rate of Return
The standard formula for the effective tax rate, based on the user cost of capital (see, e.g.,
Auerbach 1983) is

τ=

(A1)

( r + δ )(1 − uz ) − ( r + δ )(1 − u )
( r + δ )(1 − uz ) − δ (1 − u )

where r is the real required return, δ is the rate of economic depreciation, u is the statutory tax
rate, and z is the present value of depreciation allowances.
Suppose τ has been calculated using the observed after-tax rate of return, and we now
wish to change the calculation to take into account the fact that the observed return is risky. As
discussed in Auerbach (1983), there are two changes necessary. First, the value of r that appears
in (A1) and in the calculation of z must be reduced to the safe rate of return. Second, as
uncertain depreciation is effectively equivalent to a faster rate of deprecation (a point first noted
by Bulow and Summers 1984), the value of δ must be increased. If we assume that τ equals u in
the original calculation, meaning that the acceleration of depreciation allowances just offsets the
effect of inflation at the original values of r and δ, then it may be shown that dτ/dr < 0 and dτ/dδ
> 0, so both adjustments (reducing r and increasing δ ) initially increase the estimated effective
tax rate.

43

Table 1. The Long-Run and Efficiency Gains from Adopting a Consumption Tax: Simple Model Simulations
Percentage Gain in
Simulationa
Consumption Tax, Base Case
Wage Tax, Base Case
Consumption Tax, Low Interest Rate
Wage Tax, Low Interest Rate
Consumption Tax, Low Interest Rate, Rentc

Long-Run Output

Long-Run Welfareb

Efficiencyb

7.94

3.95

0.55

-2.63

-2.78

-1.35

2.77

0.76

0.03

-0.91

-0.42

-0.14

6.42

1.53

0.15

Notes:
a

All simulations based on the standard Auerbach-Kotlikoff (1987) closed-economy model, starting with an income tax of 25%, except where specified,
and no other taxes or national debt. For the base case, preference and production parameters follow the original model’s base case assumptions, except
that adjustment costs in investment are assumed. For “low interest rate” simulations, the production share of capital is reduced from 0.25 to 0.09, and
the rate of time preference are adjusted to hold the initial capital-output ratio fixed while reducing the interest rate to 0.4 times its base case value.
b

Gains expressed as a percentage of lifetime resources. Long-Run Welfare Gain is gain of generations after the transition is complete. Efficiency Gain
is the gain of all generations born post-reform, when lump-sum taxes and transfers are used to neutralize welfare effects of all pre-reform generations.

c

The presence of rent is simulated by increasing the implicit capital levy, combining a higher rate of consumption tax with a wage subsidy.

