                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE BOSKIN COMMISSION REPORT:
                            A RETROSPECTIVE ONE DECADE LATER

                                            Robert J. Gordon

                                          Working Paper 12311
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12311


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




The author served as one of the five members of the Boskin Commission. Portions of the summary of the
Boskin Commission findings and its reactions to its critics are adapted from Boskin et al. (1998) and Gordon
(2000). The evaluations and opinions contained herein are those of the author only and should not be taken
to represent the view of any other member of the Boskin Commission. I am grateful to Jerry Hausman for
helpful discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Robert J. Gordon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Boskin Commission Report: A Retrospective One Decade Later
Robert J. Gordon
NBER Working Paper No. 12311
June 2006
JEL No. I1, I11

                                           ABSTRACT


        This paper provides a retrospective on the 1996 Boskin Commission Report, Toward a More
Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living, and its famous estimate that the CPI in 1995-96 was upward
biased by 1.1 percent per year. The paper summarizes the report's methods, findings, and
recommendations, and then reviews the criticisms that appeared soon after the Report was issued.
Post-Boskin changes in the CPI are summarized and assessed, as is recent research on related issues.
The paper sharply distinguishes two questions. First, with what we know now, what should the
Commission have concluded about CPI bias in 1995-96? Second, what is the bias now after the
many improvements introduced into the CPI since the Commission's Report?
       About the first question, my own recent research on apparel and rental housing indicates a
substantial downward bias in the CPI over much of the twentieth century, diminishing in size after
1985. Incorporating these findings into the Boskin matrix would reduce its 0.6 percent annual
upward bias due to quality change and new products to a smaller 0.4 percent bias. However, this is
more than offset by the stunning discrepancy over 2000-06 in the chain-weighted C-CPI-U compared
to the traditional CPI-U, indicating that the Commission greatly understated the magnitude of
upper-level substitution bias. This retrospective evaluation suggests that the Boskin bias estimate
for 1995-96 should have been 1.2 to 1.3 percent, not 1.1 percent.
     Current upward bias in the CPI is estimated to have declined from the revised 1.2-1.3 percent
in the Boskin era to about 0.8 percent today. Yet the Boskin report, like most contemporary studies
of quality change, failed to place sufficient value on the value of new products and on increased
longevity. Allowing for these, today's bias is at least 1.0 percent per year or perhaps even higher.


Robert J. Gordon
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
rjg@northwestern.edu
I. Introduction

         More than ten years have now elapsed since the formation of the Boskin Commission, more

formally the ʺAdvisory Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index,ʺ which was appointed by

the Senate Finance Committee in June, 1995. The Commissionʹs final report (Boskin et al, 1996) was

issued on December 4, 1996 and concluded that the U. S. Consumer Price Index (CPI) overstated

inflation by 1.1 percent per year for the time period of the Commission’s deliberations, 1995-96.

The report suggested that the CPI bias might have been larger before 1995 and predicted that it

would be lower after 1997.

         A sharp distinction must be drawn between the technical and scientific issues which led the

Commission to its bias estimate of 1.1 percent, and the political and redistributional implications

of that conclusion. The Commission report contained not only the technical background for its

overall bias estimate but also its estimates of the vast amount by which that bias had increased the

Federal budget deficit looking back into the past and would increase the deficit looking forward

into the future.1 The suggestion that the bias had caused excessive growth in Social Security and

other benefits evoked a sharp and damning political reaction, as the AARP (American Association

of Retired Persons) sent its lobbyists scurrying through the corridors of Congress to throw cold

water on those senators and representatives who had initially been sympathetic to reducing the

budget deficit by adjusting the indexation formula by some fraction of the Commissionʹs bias

estimate, the so-called ʺCPI minus Xʺ approach to indexation. This paper ignores the implications

of the bias estimate for fiscal policy and instead concentrates entirely on the issues of interest to the


         1. The Commission calculated that the 1.1 percentage point bias would contribute $1.07 trillion to
the U. S. national debt over the period 1997-2008 as compared to an alternative scenario in which Social
Security and other programs were indexed by a formula which subtracted the bias from the published CPI.
                                                The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 2



worldwide measurement community.

The Boskin Commissionʹs Approach and Method

       The Boskin Commission represented the first extensive external evaluation of the nation’s

price statistics in more than three decades; the previous report was the famous Stigler (1961)

Commission Report. There were several important differences between the two Commissions. The

Boskin report concerned only the CPI, while the Stigler report also covered the Producer Price

Index (PPI) and agricultural price indexes. The Stigler report did not produce any numerical bias

estimates, whereas the mandate of the Boskin Commission included the provision for a point

estimate of the overall bias in the CPI. The Stigler Commission had a substantial budget to

commission new research studies, whereas the Boskin Commission had no research budget at all.

Thus the Boskin Commission report of necessity was a survey article based on past on ongoing

research, not a producer of new research.

       A novel aspect of the Commissionʹs method was to divide up the CPI into 27 categories and

develop a separate estimate of quality change bias for each. This required some extrapolation from

categories for which research existed (e.g., personal computers and TV sets) to related categories

where no research existed (e.g., electronic toys). While some commentators have complained of

the subjective nature of the Commissionʹs assessment of quality change bias, the Commission felt

that to assume that the bias was exactly zero in categories which had not been the subject of

previous research was just as subjective as to extrapolate the results of related research.
                                                The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 3



II. Summary of the Commission’s Findings

Findings Related to Substitution

         The Commissionʹs findings are summarized in Table 1. In this section we discuss the

findings related to substitution, comprising the first three lines in the table. Next we discuss the

category of new products and quality change.



                                             Table 1
                             Boskin Commission Estimates of Bias
                             in the Consumer Price Index in 1995-96
                                  (percentage points per annum)


 Source of Bias                                                 Estimate


 Upper Level Substitution                                          0.15

 Lower Level Substitution                                          0.25

 Outlet Substitution                                               0.10

 New Products / Quality Change                                     0.60


 Total                                                             1.10

   Plausible Range                                            (0.80 — 1.60)




         The CPI relied on fixed weight Laspeyres indexes which did not account for consumer

substitution among commodities. These Laspeyres measures of inflation were inherently an upper

bound, and empirical studies led the Commission to conclude that this source of bias amounted

to about 0.4 percentage points per year. Of this 0.4 percent, 0.15 came from estimates of the effect
                                                  The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 4



of substitution among the upper-level ʺstrataʺ (apples vs. bananas) and 0.25 from the effect of

substitution among the lower-level categories (red delicious apples vs. Jonathan apples).

        In addition to substitution bias among commodities, there is an outlet substitution bias, the

third line in Table 1, which refers to the practice of the BLS in ignoring differences in prices for the

same item across outlets. Since price data are collected within outlets, the shift of consumers to

purchases from discounters does not show up in the CPI as a price decline even though consumers

reveal their preferences for these outlets by their purchases, measured by the steady shift in market

share. We estimated this adds another 0.1 percentage point of upward bias.


Findings and Recommendations related to New Products and Quality Change

       The three types of substitution bias listed in Table 1 account for just a little under half (0.5

percentage points) of the 1.1 percentage point bias identified by the Boskin Commission. Slightly

over half (0.6 percentage points) results from the difficulty of adjusting fully for quality change and

the introduction of new products. Economists have known since Hicks (1940) that the introduction

of a new product should be dealt with in a COL index by estimating its reservation price and

including the consumer surplus attributable to the introduction of the product. While accepting

this framework, the Boskin Commission did not make any of its own estimates of the consumer-

surplus value of new products. Instead, it took the more cautious view of primarily including

estimates of explicit dimensions of quality change and the late introduction of major new products

into the index. VCRs, cellular phones, and other products were included in the CPI a decade or

more after they had penetrated the market and after their price had fallen by 80 percent or more.
                                                         The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 5



Previous research allowed an estimate to be made of the bias in the CPI that occurred as a result

of the late introduction of these new products.

         The Commission attempted to identify commodity categories in which the CPI was biased

for failing to take account of improvements in quality. To carry out this task, it examined

separately 27 subcomponents of the CPI to determine the extent of quality bias, if any, and

established an estimate for quality bias within each of the 27 categories. In eight of the categories

the Commission discovered no research evidence or other factor that would indicate a bias other

than zero. In the other 19 categories bias estimates were assigned which ranged as high as 3.0

percent per year for medical and hospital services and 5.6 percent for appliances and electronic

goods.2 When these 27 bias estimates were weighted by the relative importance of each category

in 1995 (based on 1982-84 expenditure weights), the overall quality and new product bias was

determined to be 0.6 percentage point per year.3

         While the Commission formulated a point estimate of CPI bias related to quality change and

new products, it did not attempt any quantitative estimate of changes in the quality of life.

Nevertheless, it did present an informal discussion of changes in the quality of life and concluded

that the ʺgoodʺ outweighed the ʺbad.ʺ It cited a reduction in air and water pollution, a decline in


          2. Table 2 of the Boskin Commission report attempted to discriminate between different periods in
assigning the estimates for quality change and the late introduction of new products. Thus, for instance, the
bias estimate for prescription drugs was 3.0 percent for 1970-95 and 2.0 percent for 1995-96, reflecting
the change in CPI methodology in 1995 which recognized the introduction of a generic version of a given
drug as a price decline.

          3. The only case in which alternative weights were used was in the case of consumer appliances and
electronic goods, where the 1982-84 CPI weights were deemed to be too low, and weights were taken
instead from the National Income and Product Accounts. See Boskin et al. (1996), Table 2, note a.
                                                         The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 6



crime by various measures, a decline in the suicide and infant mortality rates, and an increase in

life expectancy.4 It also cited a wide range of improvements in goods related to quality and new

products for which the Commissionʹs estimates made no allowance, namely ʺthe faster speed and

reduced vibration of jet planes, improved reliability of appliances and automobiles, improved

sound quality of audio equipment in homes and automobiles, improved safety devices on home

power tools and power lawn mowers, reduction in the noise, weight, and installation cost of room

air conditioners, and immeasurably better picture quality of color TV sets.ʺ5                              As other

improvements for which no allowance was made, it cited the spread of cable and satellite TV and

the new availability of the World Wide Web to owners of personal computers (another product

which was introduced into the CPI long after it began to become common in homes).                               The

Commissionʹs section on quality-of-life issues concluded that ʺ . . the major increase in longevity

. . perhaps swamps everything else. Accordingly, our estimate of the current bias in the CPI is, if

anything, probably understatedʺ (p. 77).


The Commissionʹs Recommendations

         The Commission’s first and overarching recommendation was that the BLS should establish

the COL index as its objective in measuring consumer prices. All of the other, more specific

recommendations were aimed at achieving this goal. The emphasis on this first recommendation


          4. The one serious negative which was cited was the increase in births to unmarried women. Other
"intangible negatives" cited were "increased job insecurity, possible increased inequality, and decreased job
opportunities for workers with only a high school education" (p. 76).

        5. Although not identified as such in the Boskin report, this quote was copied directly from Gordon
(1990, p. 560).
                                                     The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 7



may seem strange to economists, but the BLS in its publications for decades had explicitly stated

that the CPI is not a COL index. The Commission stated that a fundamentally sound COL index

could and should be developed.6

        As part of the short-run set of recommendations, the Commission recommended that the

single current CPI, which can never be revised (due to its use in legal contracts and for indexation)

be supplemented by a second ʺresearch-basedʺ index which is published annually rather than

monthly and is continuously revised to incorporate new research results. The timely monthly

index would continue to be called the CPI and would move toward a COL concept by adopting a

“superlative” index formula to account for changing market baskets, abandoning the Laspeyres

formula at both the upper level and lower level of aggregation.

        At the upper level the Commission recommended that the BLS should move away from the

assumption that consumers do not respond at all to price changes in close substitutes, moving

instead to a “trailing Tornqvist” index (weighted geometric mean of price relatives) or another

approximation to a superlative index, and also, concurrently, to geometric means of price relatives

at the elementary aggregation level. These changes would eliminate the problem of the growing

irrelevancy of market baskets based on decade-old consumption patterns, reduce significantly the

substitution and (any remaining) formula bias, and facilitate the speedier introduction of new

goods and services into the index.

        The distinction between the ʺtimelyʺ CPI and the new annual research-based index rests on


         6. The BLS has stated (1997) that it has embraced the Commission’s overarching recommendation
concerning the objective of the CPI.
                                                The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 8



the fundamental proposition that the basic monthly CPI can never be revised. The Commission

recommended that as subsequent data became available, the weights were updated, and new goods

were introduced and the history of their price changes was extended backward, the information

incorporated in the published CPI could undergo retroactive revision of a new annual cost-of-

living index using a compatible “superlative-index” formula that would no longer be affected by

the lag in the availability of the required expenditure weight data. This alternative COL index

would be published annually, with a lag of a year or two, and would be subject to additional

revisions after new information emerges and new methodology is introduced.

       Continuing with recommendations that would require a somewhat longer term for

implementation, the Commission felt that the BLS should revise its approach to sampling. The

Commission was astonished at the number of price quotations that the BLS collected on ordinary

products like bananas that were not subject to quality-change or new-product bias, relative to the

effort devoted to collecting price data on new products like cellular phones, personal computers,

and computer peripherals. In addition to reducing the data collection effort devoted to apples and

bananas, the Commission believed that the data-collection effort should be divided up between

national and local goods. In this revised scheme there would no longer be any collection of data

on appliances, other consumer durables, and imported produce (like tomatoes and bananas) in each

separate city — data for these national goods could be collected in a much smaller sample applied

to the entire country. This would free up resources to do a better job of collecting prices for local

goods with components that might vary across cities, e.g., fuel costs, rent, household services, and
                                                The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 9



non-imported produce.



III. Criticism of the Commissionʹs Findings and Its Reaction

       The report of the CPI Commission received much attention. Most of the findings and

recommendations have generally been accepted by the economics profession, if we are to judge by

various symposia in which prominent academic economists have been invited to comment on the

Commissionʹs findings. External corroboration comes from several sources, including the Federal

Reserve’s study of productivity (Slifman and Corrado, 1996), Nordhaus’ (1998) analysis of survey

data on changes in economic well-being, and Diewert’s (1998) thoughtful complementary analyses

of bias by type.

        It is noteworthy that few if any criticisms addressed the Commissionʹs findings related to

substitution. Instead, most of the criticisms of the Commissionʹs findings centered on its treatment

of quality change and new products.

       1. The Commission did not give adequate attention to quality deterioration (Abraham,

1997, BLS, 1997, Abraham et al. 1998);

       2. The BLS already makes lots of quality adjustments, which the Commission did not

adequately credit (Abraham, 1997, BLS, 1997, Moulton, 1996, Moulton and Moses, 1997);

       3. The Commission made too many back-of-the-envelope calculations and was too willing

to generalize from research on one item to research on related items, both with respect to quality

change and with respect to the desirability of geometric means to deal with lower level substitution
                                                     The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 10



bias (Abraham et al. 1998, Nordhaus 1998);

        4. The Commission’s estimates, whether right or wrong, are of limited use because they

cannot be generated from a mechanical procedure implementable in a month-to-month price

program (BLS, 1997, Abraham, 1997);

        5. We should have been more aggressive in our estimates of the value of new products

(Hausman, 1997b, Nordhaus, 1998).


The Commissionʹs Response to the Critiques7

        Because there was so little criticism of the Commissionʹs estimates of substitution bias, it is

perhaps worth noting that research by Shapiro and Wilcox (1997) suggests that the bias could have

been a tenth of a percent or so higher than the estimate in our report, which was based heavily on

BLS research.8 The BLS response to our recommendations about lower-level substitution bias

pointed out that, while the degree of substitution between some goods like white shirts and blue

shirts may be very high, that between other goods like particular types of pharmaceuticals may be

very low (Abraham et al., p. 32). However, pharmaceuticals are the exception, not the rule, and

within the vast majority of the 207 strata there is ample latitude for substitution, whether we are

talking about types of food, shelter, apparel, cars, tires, appliances, entertainment, or personal care




        7. This section combines sections of the jointly authored paper by commission members (Boskin et
al. 1998) with my own further observations.

         8. Many of the best studies of substitution bias have been done by BLS researchers (see, e.g.,
Aizcorbe and Jackman, 1993). The studies from systems of demand equations at high levels of aggregation
generally also come to an estimate of 0.2 to 0.25 on both U.S. data and data from other countries. See
Greenlees (1997) for further elaboration of the BLS research.
                                              The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 11



items. In fact, pharmaceuticals comprise only 1.2 percent of the upper-level weight in the CPI. If

anything, the unitary elasticity of substitution embodied in the Commissionʹs recommendation of

geometric weights at the lower level probably understates the extent of substitutability within the

majority of the strata.


The Debate over Quality Change and New Product Bias

       Most of the criticism focused on our extensive analysis of quality change and new product

bias and our willingness to extrapolate a bias estimate from one category to another, and this

critique of “guesstimates” is a major theme of Triplett’s (2006) paper in this volume. The notion

that assuming zero bias is scientific, whereas attempting to generalize cautiously from related

goods or practical reasoning is not precise enough, throws out available information. For instance,

even though we will never precisely measure the value of the invention of the jet airplane, as

economists we know that consumer surplus triangles have an area that is positive rather than zero.

       Most of the Commission’s estimates of quality change were based on the collection of price

data from independent sources and the careful quality adjustment of those independent data.

Independent sources of price data were employed in our bias estimates for shelter, appliances,

radio-TV, personal computers, apparel, public transportation, prescription drugs, and medical care.

Estimates derived from these categories were extrapolated, sometimes partially rather than fully,

to other house furnishings, nonprescription drugs, entertainment, commodities, and personal care.

This left only a few remaining categories where we added a bias estimate to the CPI category in

which there were already quality adjustments, rather than computing the bias estimate indirectly
                                                       The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 12



by subtracting an independent estimate from the CPI estimate for the same category. These

categories were food and beverages, other utilities, new and used cars, motor fuel, and personal

expenses. The BLS did not object to our “down in the trenches” approach to the problem. Indeed,

Moulton-Moses (1997, p. 308) state, “This is the first time that a systematic analysis of quality bias

has been done category by category, which we consider to be a noteworthy accomplishment of the

Commission . . .[the] overall approach seems to us to be a sensible and useful way to approach the

problem of coming up with an overall assessment of bias, and we expect this type of structure will

prove to be useful in the future.”

          Some outside critics of the Commission argued that the BLS already does a great deal of

quality adjustment, and that the Commission report is flawed for ignoring the extent of the BLS

adjustments.9 However, for most categories, the extent of current BLS quality adjustments is

irrelevant to an assessment of the Commissionʹs treatment of quality change. We were comparing

our own evidence to the corresponding CPI indexes — however they are quality adjusted, in a

major or minor way — and thus our estimates of quality change bias are a residual that remains

after the BLS has completed its efforts.

          However, it is still instructive to discuss what the BLS calls quality adjustment, since it

illustrates the substantive and communication difficulties in this field.10 There is very little explicit



         9. In fact most of the Moulton-Moses paper (1997) is devoted not to a direct critique of the
Commission's estimates but to an explanation of how the CPI is adjusted for quality change and to an
attempt to estimate the quantitative significance of those adjustments (see pp. 322-48).

          10. Some of the material in this section comes from my published discussion of Moulton-Moses
(1997).
                                              The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 13



adjustment for quality change (Nordhaus, 1998). Most of the reported “quality adjustment” by the

BLS, 1.65 out of the 1.76 percentage points in Moulton and Moses (1997) comes from “linking”

procedures, where a missing item is replaced by another (excluding outliers, commodity pairs

where the implicit price-quality differential exceeds 100 percent, the quality adjustment number

shrinks to 0.3 percent). No judgment at all is made about the quality differential between the new

and old item. Roughly one out of three items disappear sometime during the year and have to be

replaced by a different item in the same general class, such as a larger versus a smaller package of

yogurt or a blue raincoat versus black. But this churning is not what we had in mind by “quality

change,” which rather involves the appearance of new and improved goods, greater speed,

durability, variety, convenience, safety, and energy efficiency.

       The area in which the Commissionʹs bias estimates are surely likely to be too low, rather

than too high, is in the area of new products. We did not make explicit allowance for the late

introduction into the CPI of numerous new products. We indicated that the appropriate way to

deal with new products is to value the consumer surplus from their introduction, as first

demonstrated by Hicks (1940), and recently elaborated and applied by Hausman (1997a, 1998) to

the case of cellular telephones. We chose to deal with this by being deliberately cautious, but

indicating that there was an asymmetrical bias with more potential bias on the upside than the

downside. We believed that our overall estimates were conservative, both by ignoring the many

intangible aspects of quality change, such as the improved safety of home power tools or the

improved quality of stereo sound and TV pictures, and by omitting any explicit valuation of truly
                                                    The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 14



new products.


Problems of Implementation

        The BLS response to some of the Commission’s recommendations has been that they are

very difficult to implement in real time in a monthly CPI program using mechanical rules that are

straightforward to implement. These difficulties explain why we proposed that the BLS calculate

a second index, published annually, that would constantly be updated and continuously revised,

and which need never be final. This second index, if it had been implemented, would have

addressed many — not all — of the BLS concerns about practicality.11



IV. Changes in the CPI Since the Report

        Despite its initial set of critical comments, the BLS moved with surprising speed to

implement some of the Commissionʹs recommendations. At the same time the BLS has introduced

other changes which were planned previously to the release of the Commission report and for

which the Commission can take no credit. Subsequently we will discuss the new experimental BLS

index based on chain weights at the upper level; this is not included in the following list of CPI

improvements because it has not been incorporated into the basic CPI-U. Here we list the most

important changes changes that the CPI has introduced since the December, 1996, release




         11. The Stewart-Reed (1999) paper introduces a research-based and retrospective CPI as a one-
time project, not as an ongoing annual activity of the BLS.
                                                    The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 15



of the Commission report.12             Additional perspective on these changes is provided by

Greenlees (2006).

        1. Lower-level Geometric Weighting. Effective with data for January, 1999, the BLS

introduced the geometric mean estimator for index categories that comprise approximately 61

percent of total consumer spending in the CPI. This was expected to reduce the rate of increase of

the CPI by about 0.2 percent (Dalton, Greenlees, and Stewart, 1998), and this estimate was later

confirmed by Greenlees (2006).

        2. More Rapid Change in Upper-Level Weights. In another major change that appears

to be a response to the Commissionʹs recommendations, the BLS now changes upper-level weights

much more rapidly than in the past (see U. S. BLS, 1999). Eleven years elapsed between the initial

use of 1982-84 weights in 1987 and the switch to 1993-95 weights in 1998. More recently the lag has

dropped to a mere three years: 1999-2000 weights were introduced in January, 2002 and apply

to CPI calculations for the years 2002 and 2003, implying an average three year lag between the

middle of the 1999-2000 period used to calculate the weights and the 2002-2003 period over which

the CPI is calculated using those weights. With the same three-year lag structure, new weights

were introduced in January, 2004, January, 2006, and so on in the future.

        3. Change from Area- to Item-Based Sample Rotation Procedures. In a change planned

before release of the Commission report, the CPI switched its sample rotation methodology in 1998



         12. The list of changes comes from background material supplied to Commission members with a
1999 General Accounting Office (GAO) survey regarding post-Boskin CPI measurement changes. This list
has been checked against the list in Greenlees (2006).
                                                     The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 16



(Cage, 1996). It shifted its point-of-purchase survey from time-consuming in-person visits to

computer-assisted telephone surveys, which allow for an increase in sample size and focus on

specific item categories where products turn over rapidly and where new products are frequently

introduced.

       4. Changes in the Methods for Pricing of Hospital Services. In another change planned

before the release of the Commissionʹs report and implemented in January, 1997, the BLS has

improved its procedures for pricing hospital services (Cardenas, 1996). Instead of the old approach,

which was a straightforward input cost index that did not reflect shifts in the use of inputs (e.g.,

shorter hospital stays for a given procedure or a shift from inpatient to outpatient treatment), the

new methodology obtains prices for a sample of specified treatments for particular diseases, rather

than for a day in the hospital. This approach had been introduced into the PPI in 1992.13 Even

though the PPI made no explicit allowance for improvements in medical technology of the types

incorporated into the research reviewed by the Boskin Commission, during the 1992-96 period the

PPI for hospital services increased at an annual rate 2.0 to 2.5 percent less than the equivalent CPI

index, not far from the Commissionʹs estimate of a 3.0 percent upward bias in the CPI for medical

care services. Allowing for the value of technological advances might imply a CPI bias above 3.0

percent for the pre-1997 period.

       5. Treating Mandated Pollution Control Measures as Price Increases. As discussed in

Fixler (1998), the BLS switched in January, 1999 to treat changes in vehicle or motor fuel



       13. This shift in methodology is discussed in Triplett (1999, pp. 3-4).
                                                        The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 17



characteristics arising from air pollution mandates as a change in price rather than quality. This

reverses a BLS policy in effect since 1971 and follows from a recommendation in the Commission

report. Since most of the changes in automobile technology introduced to reduce air pollution

occurred during the 1970s and 1980s, this change will have little future effect on the CPI. This

change provides another example of the need for a second, annual research-based index that can

be revised into the past, and in this case the revisions would raise the growth rate of the CPI.14

         6. Hedonic Price Indexes for Electronic Products. Again following in the footsteps of the

PPI, which had used the hedonic regression technique to adjust personal computer prices as long

ago as 1991, the CPI adopted the hedonic regression approch for personal computers in 1998.

Similarly, the CPI introduced a hedonic regression approach to adjusting television set prices,

beginning in January, 1999. This technique was introduced following the research of Moulton,

LaFleur, and Moses (1998). Greenlees (2006) shows that so far this additional research on quality

change has had a very small impact on the overall CPI, because the weights of the products

involved are small, and that small sample sizes often preclude developing hedonic indexes from

the regular CPI sample.

The Big Surprise: Upper-level Substitution Bias is More Important than We Thought


          14. Gordon (1990, p. 351, Table 8.10) exhibits a table showing the time series of BLS quality
adjustments for new automobiles divided among safety, environmental mandates, and other factors. The
environmental adjustments had the effect of reducing the rate of inflation of new auto prices by 1.22 percent
per year over the period 1967-85. The Boskin Commission report found no net bias in the CPI for autos,
taking a 0.94 percent per year downward bias due to the treatment of environmental adjustments as a quality
change, and cancelling that out by a 0.95 percent upward bias due to the CPI’s neglect of the increased
durability of autos. The Commission’s treatment of increased auto longevity is validated by White (2006),
who contrasts a median auto lifetime of 10.5 years and 107,000 miles in 1977 with 13 years and 152,000
miles in 2001.
                                                     The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 18



        The above list of changes refers to the basic, most-often quoted version of the CPI

known as the CPI-U. The list does not include the introduction of chain weights at the

upper level, because the BLS decided not to take this step in the CPI-U. Instead, in a

history described in detail in Cage et. al. (2003) and in Greenlees (2006), the CPI decided to

use chain weights not in the basic CPI-U but in a new index called the C-CPI-U that is

intended as an official supplemental index rather than an experimental research index.

        The remarkable surprise after six years of experience with the C-CPI-U, which the

BLS currently publishes from January 2000 to the most recent month, is that the bias

between upper-level chain weights and Laspeyres weights is much larger than anyone

would have guessed, including BLS staff and the Boskin Commission. Despite the more

frequent updating of weights in the Laspeyres CPI-U now than in 1996, the difference

between the C-CPI-U and the CPI-U is very large, 0.38 percent per year over the six years

between January, 2000, and January, 2006.15                   In an amazing coincidence, the difference over

essentially the same period, 1999:Q4 to 2005:Q4, between the chain-weighted PCE deflator and the

CPI-U is exactly the same, 0.38 percent.16

        These facts lead to a reassessment of the quantitative importance of the Boskin evaluation



       15. The annual growth rate of the CPI-U over this six-year period was 2.68 percent and of the C-
CPI-U was 2.31 percent (the 0.38 difference quoted in the text allows for rounding error).

          16. The annual growth rate of the CPI-U over this period was 2.75 percent and of the PCE
deflator was 2.37 percent.
                                                       The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 19



and the changes in the CPI over the past decade. The Boskin Commission found substitution bias

at the upper level of 0.15 percentage points and at the lower level of 0.25 points. One would have

thought that more rapid updating of weights at the upper level and the movement to geometric

weights at the lower level would have eliminated all but perhaps 0.1 points. But we now are faced

with six years of evidence of upper-level bias of 0.38 points, suggesting that the Boskin

Commission, relying primarily on previous BLS research, substantially underestimated the amount

of upper-level substitution bias.17



V. Implications of Research Since the Boskin Commission Report

         The final section of this paper examines the implications of research carried out since the

1996 release of the Commission Report. Our topics are recent research on outlet substitution bias,

long-term historical evidence on CPI bias, and further research on quality change and new

products.

Outlet Substitution Bias and the Wal-Mart Effect

         The Commission had estimated outlet substitution bias to contribute 0.1 percent per year

to the overall upward bias in the CPI, which ignores changes in the level of prices between full-

priced and discount stores, assuming that the price differential is fully offset by a service

differential. But shifts in market share contradict that assumption; when shoppers shift from full-



          17. The matter is more complicated than this, because there are numerous differences between the
CPI-U and the PCE deflator other than weighting schemes, whereas the difference between the CPI-U and
C-CPI-U results only from upper-level weighting differences. Thus the identical differences cited above over
the past six years may be in part a coincidence.
                                                The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 20



price to discount outlets, they are “voting with their feet” that the price differential is worth more

to them than any service differential. In fact, much of the shift in market share over the past two

decades has been from higher priced self-service stores like Sears and K-Mart to lower-priced and

more efficient self-service stores like Wal-Mart and Target. The level of service is often not an issue,

as shoppers move from one type of self-service outlet to another.

        Important new evidence on the Wal-Mart effect for food at home is provided by Hausman

and Leibtag (2005), who study both bar-code data on prices charged by each outlet as well as

household panel data that can track household shopping patterns over time. Their discount sellers

of food include supercenters, warehouse clubs, and mass merchants, and they cite sources

estimating that these outlets began selling food in the late 1980s and by 2003 had achieved a 25

percent market share of total food expenditures. They find an average benefit of the introduction

of discount outlets to be 25 percent of food expenditures, consisting of 20.2 percent for the direct

effect of lower prices at the supercenters, and an additional 4.8 percent coming from the

competitive responses of lower prices at traditional outlets. They also find that the average rate

of price change at the supercenters and the traditional outlets is the same; that is, the benefit of the

supercenters comes from their much lower prices when each supercenter opens for business, a

consumer benefit that is linked out by the CPI.

        If we assume that the 4.8 percent price decline at traditional outlets is accurately measured

by the CPI, then we can calculate the impact of the supercenters as a 25 percent market share, times

a 20 percent price differential, or 5 percent, spread over roughly 15 years between 1988 and 2003,
                                                        The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 21



or an outlet substitution bias of 0.33 percent per year for food, which has a 12 percent weight in the

CPI. Thus food alone would contribute 0.04 percent to the outlet substitution bias estimated by the

Boskin Commission to be 0.1 percent. Presumably other durable and nondurable goods would

contribute the rest. It is doubtful that the total of outlet substitution bias could be appreciably

above the Boskin estimate of 0.1 percent, because housing, medical care, and numerous other types

of consumer services are not sold by discount stores.18

The Hulten-Brueghel Paradox and its Implications for Quality Change Bias

         The Boskin Commission’s CPI bias estimate of 1.1 percent per year was explicitly applied

to the period 1995-96, and the Commission suggested that the bias was 0.25 points higher prior to

1995 and extending back to 1978, due to so-called “formula” bias in the arithmetic mean formula

used to combine individual item prices.19 What do we know about the bias prior to 1978?

Conjectures by Nordhaus (1997) and responses by his discussant Hulten (1997) led to the

recognition that an upward bias in the CPI in the order of magnitude of 1.5 percent a year cannot

be extended back for a century or two without the implication that the standard of living in 1800

(Hulten) or in 1569 (Gordon, 2005) was implausibly low. By Gordon’s calculations, which extended

Hulten’s back several more centuries, an annual price index bias of 1.5 percent implies for 1569 a

median annual income in today’s prices of only $5.60, enough to buy 0.8 ounces of potatoes per day,




          18. We note that discount chains now sell haircuts, and that big box retailers like Pet Smarte now
offer both dog grooming and veternarian services.

         19. The formula bias was partly eliminated by the January, 1995, introduction of a procedure called
“seasoning” that is explained in Greenlees (2006).
                                                          The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 22



with nothing left over for food or shelter. Gordon had chosen the year 1569 as the year of death

of Pieter Brueghel the Elder, who had painted happy burghers “often shown as overfed, content,

well-clothed, and with solid-looking houses in the background” (Gordon, 2005, p. 4).20

           To resolve the paradox Gordon suggested that at some point in the past the CPI bias must

have been zero or even negative, and to address this possibility he carried out research on two of

the three major necessities, clothing and shelter. For apparel his major finding is based on applying

two methodologies to the same data for womens’ dresses from the Sears Roebuck catalog over the

period 1914-88. Hedonic regressions are compared with a matched-model index that duplicates

the CPI pre-1988 methodology by comparing dresses from one year to the next that are absolutely

identical in every quality attribute.               It had long been suggested that the matched-model

methodology would miss price increases that occur with model changes, and indeed this is what

occurred in the Sears data. The annual growth rate of the hedonic index was fully 2.9 percent faster

than the matched model index based on the same data and 1.3 percent faster than the CPI for

womens’ dresses.21 Gordon’s results include a close comparison of quality in the 1914 and 1988

dresses, something that is not possible with the CPI, with the conclusion that quality in the Sears

sample deteriorated over the full period. He suggests that the CPI for apparel is roughly accurate




           20. Brueghel dropped the “h” from his name in the last ten years of his life, but his sons retained
the “h”.

         21. These results are taken from Gordon (2005, Table 13). The fact that the Sears matched-
model index grew 1.62 percent slower than the CPI could reflect differing sample sizes that causes the Sears
index to miss more of the price changes, and also a kind of outlet substitution bias reflecting Sears’ relatively
low prices compared to other merchants in the first two-thirds of the sample period.
                                                     The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 23



for 1914-47 but is downward biased by roughly 1.5-2.0 percent per year for 1947-88.                        He also

suggests that methodological improvements in the CPI after 1988 may have largely or completely

eliminated the downward bias, and in any case he has no evidence after that date based on hedonic

regressions.

        Rental housing is the most important single component of the CPI, because the price of

rental housing is used as a proxy for owner-occupied housing. Gordon and vanGoethem (2005)

examine a wide variety of evidence, including a large biennial set of panel data on rental

apartments from the American Housing Survey, and conclude that the CPI for rental housing is

downward biased for most of the period from 1914 to 2003 at an average rate of roughly one

percent per year. They find that the period of most rapid downward bias was in the first half of

the postwar era, the same time interval that yielded the most rapid downward bias in the Gordon

apparel results, and that methodological improvements in the CPI had reduced the downward bias

to roughly one-third point per year from 1995 to 2003.

        These results on apparel and rental shelter require a retrospective downward revision in

the Boskin Commission estimates of quality change bias. The Boskin bias estimate for apparel was

+1.0 percent per year, and this should be reduced to zero.22 The Boskin bias estimate for rental

housing was +0.25 percent per year, and this should be reduced to the Gordon-van Goethem




          22. The Boskin estimate had been based on an earlier version of the Gordon paper that compared
the CPI with a matched-model index for all apparel (not just womens dresses) based on Sears catalogue
data. The hedonic study of womens’ dresses had not yet been performed at the time of the Commission
deliberations.
                                                          The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 24



regression-based estimate of -0.46 percent per year.23 Taking these together and using the weights

in the Boskin report reduces the Boskin estimate of quality change bias from 0.612 to 0.429 points

per year for the 1995-96 period.

Post-Boskin Research on Quality Change: Medical Care and Pharmaceuticals

         In looking back to the Commissionʹs estimate of a 3.0 percent per year upward bias in the

CPI for medical care services, fully 2.0 percent is accounted for by the change from input costs to

a treatment basis, introduced into the PPI in 1992 and the CPI in 1997. This leaves only 1.0 percent

for all remaining improvements in medical care technology, and if anything, recent studies suggest

that medical care technology improvements may be reducing the true price of medical care by more

than 1.0 percent per year.24

         In a newer version of research that the Commission had reviewed, Cutler, McClellan, and

Newhouse (1999) use information from hospital records to price heart attack treatments using the

CPIʹs traditional input-cost approach and find an upward bias of 2.0 percent. Adding in the value

of improved life expectancy from better treatment procedures, the bias rises to the range of 3.1-3.5

percent, and further research raises the bias estimate to 5.0 percent per year.25 A study that implies

a much larger bias was carried out by Frank, Berndt, and Busch (1999) on treatments for mental


         23. This is the average of their estimate for 1985-95 of -0.58 and for 1995-2003 of -0.33.

         24. Some of this research appears in Triplett (1999), a book with a comprehensive and thoughtful
introduction that provides the best available introduction into the issues, problems, techniques, and results in this area.

          25. See also the other references under Cutler et al. in the list of references. The second 1999
paper (NBER 7089) contains larger bias estimates, with a synthetic index based on pre-1997 BLS methods
rising at an annual rate of 3.3 percent for 1984-94 contrasted with a COL index measuring changes in the
quality of life which declines at 1.7 percent per year, for a total difference of 5.0 percent per year.
                                                       The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 25



depression. There is no component of the CPI that is directly comparable, but this research implies

a possible bias of more than 10 percent per year.26 Ellison and Hellerstein (1999) analyze a large

data set on the prices of the cephalosporin class of antibiotics and find a price increase for 1988-96

of 0.76 percent per year compared to the PPI cephalosporin component which rose at 4.54 percent

a year, for a bias estimate of 3.78 percent per year.27 Newhouse (2001, Table 5) surveys available

evidence at that time and considers a 3 percent upward CPI bias to be conservative.

         The number of aspects of medical care subject to research has been growing, and it seems

reasonable to extrapolate from areas where studies have occurred to those which may have similar

characteristics. Shapiro, Shapiro, and Wilcox (1999) point to the numerous dimensions of cataract

surgery. An operation that once required a week in the hospital is now a brief outpatient

procedure. Subsequent recovery is much faster; complication rates have declined; intraocular

lenses have replaced cumbersome cataract spectacles. As a result of improved technology and a

drastic decline in prices, the rate of cataract surgery among individuals in the U. S. aged 65 years

has increased by almost a factor of four. Because the operation now occurs earlier in the disease,

the period of steadily obscured vision has been eliminated, with enormous benefits in welfare. The

authors point to similar benefits in angioplasty, joint replacement, and laparoscopic removal of gall

bladders.




          26. A follow-up study by Berndt et. al. (2000, p. 15) supports the earlier paper and “does not
materially change findings from previous research on treatment of depression.”

         27. Related research available to the Commission was Griliches-Cockburn 1994 and Berndt et al.
1996.
                                               The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 26



Post-Boskin Research on Quality Change: Other Products

       Scattered pieces of new research have emerged for other products. Moulton et al. (1998)

concluded that there was an upward bias in the CPI for television sets of three to five percent over

the period 1993-97. Ohashi (1999) developed hedonic price indexes for VCRs during the first

decade of their introduction (1978-87) prior to their introduction into the CPI and found an average

rate of price decline of 12 percent per year over that period. Hausman (1998) criticizes the Boskin

Commission for understating the CPI bias related to cellular phones and estimates that the CPI for

telephone service (taking account of the gradually increasing weight on cell phones) is biased

upward for 1985-97 by between 0.8 and 1.9 percent per year.

       Abel, Berndt, and White (2003) find that the prices of Microsoft software declined over 1993-

2001 at an annual rate of 4.26 percent, even without taking into account any improvements in

quality. A much more rapid rate of decline of 15 to 18 percent is recorded by White et. al. (2004) for

personal computer operating systems and of 13 to 16 percent for software productivity suites. An

even faster annual rate of decline of 21 to 26 percent for PDAs (Personal Digital Assistants) is found

by Chwelos et. al. (2004).

       Other than Hausman’s studies of Cheerios, cellular phones, and Wal-Mart, there has been

relatively little new research on the impact of new products and new outlets, and yet speculative

estimates of the value of these improvements were at the core of the Boskin Commission estimates

of CPI bias for quality change and new products. The traditional supermarket industry is in a state

of upheaval as consumers shift market share both toward the cheaper supercenters studied by
                                               The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 27



Hausman and Leibtag (2005) and at the same time toward the greater variety offered by such

upscale markets as Whole Foods. Both low-priced supercenters and high-priced markets that

emphasize organic and in-house prepared foods are viewed as attractive new products, as shown

by the revealed preference of consumer behavior.



VI. Conclusion

       In evaluating the Boskin Commission report ten years later, two issues must be sharply

distinguished. First, did the Commission overstate the CPI bias for the period to which it referred,

1995-96? Second, how much have improvements in the CPI reduced that bias?

       On the first question, recent research on apparel and housing suggests that the

Commissions’s estimate of quality change and new product bias may have been roughly 0.2

percent per year too high. However, the striking 0.38 percent annual difference over 2000-2006

between the CPI-U and the chain-weighted C-CPI-U suggests that the Commission’s estimate of

0.15 points greatly understated the significance of upper-level substitution bias. This is especially

true, given the much more rapid updating of upper-level weights in the CPI for the 2000-06 period

from which the 0.38 percent number is calculated. It is possible that, with this new information,

the Commission’s estimate of upper-level substitution bias for the 1995-96 interval might be 0.45

to 0.50 points, instead of 0.15 points, more than offsetting the Boskin overstatement of quality

change and new product bias. Thus my own retrospective view is that the upward bias in the CPI

in 1995-96 was if anything higher than the Boskin estimate of 1.1 percent and was perhaps 1.2 or
                                               The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 28



1.3 percent.

       An important piece of evidence on the nature of CPI bias comes from the longstanding

excess of the annual growth rate of the CPI over the PCE deflator. Any such excess is notable,

because the PCE deflator uses the same underlying micro price indexes as the CPI but weights them

differently. As discussed above, the CPI-U grew 0.38 percent faster than the PCE deflator during

1999:Q4 to 2005:Q4, a period when most of the improvements in the CPI were already in effect.

Over the period more relevant to the Boskin Commission bias estimates, 1992-98, the CPI-U grew

0.63 percent faster than the PCE deflator. This 1992-98 difference, which can be explained only by

item and category substitution effects (because the PCE has the same exact treatment of outlet

substitution, quality change, and new product effects), provides prima facie evidence that the Boskin

bias estimate may have been understated.

       What about the second question, reductions in the bias due to CPI improvements since

1996? The greatest amount of progress has been made in reducing substitution bias, both at the

upper level and lower level, although the thorny issue of outlet substitution bias remains

untouched. However, in light of the continuing large difference in growth rates of the C-CPI-U and

CPI-U, these improvements have reduced substitution bias from a higher base than the

Commission recognized.       Several specific improvements address part of the Commissionʹs

estimated upward bias involving quality change and new products, including new hedonic indexes

for television sets and personal computers as well as an improved treatment-based methodology

for measuring medical care prices.
                                              The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 29



       What is my own estimate of the current CPI bias? The new C-CPI-U evidence suggests that

category and item substitution bias appears to remain at about 0.4 percent per year, outlet

substitution bias remains at about 0.1 percent per year, and bias attributable to quality change and

new products has been reduced from the Boskin-era 0.4 percent (revised downward from 0.6

percent as explained above) to perhaps 0.3 percent primarily as a result of the switch from input

prices to treatment prices for medical care. This sums to 0.8 percent per year.

       Concluding as did the Boskin Commission on issues of unmeasured improvements and

deterioration, I think that these point estimates substantially understate the value of inventions,

new products, and increased longevity. A century ago, our forefathers had to shovel coal, carry

water into their dwellings, and heat it manually before bathing or the tedious scrubbing of clothes

could take place. The value of running water, water heaters, forced air heating fueled by natural

gas and the cleaner air that has resulted, is enormous, even if converted to an annual growth rate

over 100 years. Recent research on the value of increased life expectancy creates growth rates in

welfare that swamp the Boskin debates about 10 basis points here or there. In particular, Nordhaus

(2002) and related research concludes that the value of increased longevity over the past century

is as large as the value of measured growth in all non-health goods and services.

       Let me conclude with a small personal example. Despite global warming, it still snows

occasionally in Chicago, but I don’t have to touch a snow shovel. My trusty Toro snow blower is

a new product from the perspective of 50 years ago. The value of its invention is not included in

the CPI. But, not only does it greatly ease the job of removing the snow compared to the old-
                                             The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 30



fashioned snow shovel, but it indirectly has contributed to my life expectancy.
                                             The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 31



                                          References

Abel, Jaison R., Berndt, Ernst R., and White, Alan G. (2003). “Price Indexes for Microsoft’s
        Personal Computer Software Products,” NBER Working Paper 9968, September.

Abraham, Katharine G. (1997). “The CPI Commission: Discussionʺ, American Economic Review,
      87 (2), May, pp. 94-98.

Abraham, K., Greenlees, John S., and Moulton, Brent R. (1998). “Working to Improve the
      Consumer Price Index,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12 (1), Winter, pp. 27-36.

Aizcorbe, Ana M. and Patrick C. Jackman (1993). ʺThe Commodity Substitution Effect in CPI
       Data, 1982-1991,ʺ Monthly Labor Review, 116 (12), December, pp. 25-33.

Berndt, Ernst R., Iain Cockburn and Zvi Griliches (1996). ʺPharmaceutical innovations and
       market dynamics: Tracking effects of price indexes for anti-depressant drugs,ʺ Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 133-99.

__________, Bir, Anupa, Busch, Susan H., Frank, Richard G., and Normand, Sharon-Lise T.
       (2000). “The Medical Treatment of Depression, 1991-1996: Productive Inefficiency,
       Expected Outcome Variations, and Price Indexes,” NBER Working Paper 7816, July.

Boskin, Michael J., E. Dulberger, R. Gordon, Z. Griliches, and D. Jorgenson (1996). “Toward a
       More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living,ʺ Final Report to the Senate Finance
       Committee, December 4.

Boskin, Michael J., E. Dulberger, R. Gordon, Z. Griliches, and D. Jorgenson (1998). ʺConsumer
       Prices, the Consumer Price Index, and the Cost of Living,ʺ Journal of Economic
       Perspectives, 12 (1), Winter, pp. 3-26.

Cage, Robert (1996). ʺNew Methodology for Selecting CPI Outlet Samples,ʺ Monthly Labor
       Review, 119 (12), December, pp. 49-61.

Cage, Robert, Greenlees, John S., and Jackman, Patrick (2003). “Introducing the Chained
       Consumer Price Indices,” in Thierry Lacroix, ed., International Working Group on Price
       Indices (Ottawa Group): Proceedings of the Seventh Meeting. Paris: INSEE, pp. 213-246.

Cardenas, Elaine M. (1996). ʺRevision of the CPI Hospital Services Component,ʺ Monthly Labor
      Review, 119 (12), December, pp. 40-48.
                                             The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 32




Chwelos, Paul D., Berndt, Ernst R., and Cockburn, Iain M. (2004). “Faster, Smaller Cheaper: An
      Hedonic Price Analysis of PDAs,” NBER Working Paper 10746, September.

Cutler, David and McClellan, Mark (1996). ʺThe determinants of technological change in heart
        attack treatment,ʺ NBER working paper 5751, September.

___________, McClellan, Mark, Newhouse, Joseph P., and Remler, Dahlia (1996). ʺAre Medical
       Prices Declining?,ʺ NBER working paper 5750, September.

___________, McClellan, Mark, and Newhouse, Joseph P. (1999). ʺThe Costs and Benefits of
       Intensive Treatment for Cardiovascular Disease,ʺ in Triplett, ed., 1999, pp. 34-71.

Dalton, Kenneth V., Greenlees, John S., and Stewart, Kenneth J. (1998). ʺIncorporating a
       Geometric Mean Formula into the CPI,ʺ Monthly Labor Review, 121 (10), October, pp. 3-7.

Diewert, W. Erwin (1998). “Index Number Issues in the Consumer Price Index,” Journal of
      Economic Perspectives, 12 (1), Winter, pp. 47-58.

Ellison, Sara Fisher, and Hellerstein, Judith K. (1999). ʺThe Economics of Antibiotics: An
        Exploratory Study,ʺ in Triplett, ed., 1999, pp. 118-143.

Fixler, Dennis (1998). ʺTreatment of Mandated Pollution Control Measures in the CPI,ʺ CPI
        Detailed Report, September, pp. 4-7.

Frank, Richard G., Berndt, Ernst R., and Busch, Susan H. (1999). ʺPrice Indexes for the
       Treatment of Depression,ʺ in Triplett, ed., 1999, pp. 72-117.

Gordon, Robert J. (1990). The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press for NBER.

__________ (2000). “The Boskin Commission Report and its Aftermath,” in Mick Silver and
       David Fenwick, eds., Proceedings of the Measurement of Inflation Conference (Cardiff UK:
       Cardiff University), pp. 258-82. Also available as NBER Working Paper 7759, June.

__________ (2005). “Apparel Prices 1914-93 and the Hulten/Brueghel Paradox,” in C. Corrado,
       E. Diewert, and C. Hulten, eds., Price Index Concepts and Measurement, Conference on
       Research in Income and Wealth (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER,
       forthcoming). Also NBER Working Paper 11548, August.
                                             The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 33



__________ and vanGoethem, Todd (2005). “A Century of Downward Bias in the Biggest CPI
       Component: The Case of Rental Shelter, 1914-2003,” in E. Berndt and C. Hulten, eds.,
       Hard-to- Measure Goods and Services: Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches, Conference on
       Research in Income and Wealth (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER,
       forthcoming). Also NBER Working Paper 11776, November.

Greenlees, John S. (1997). “Expenditure Weight Updates and Measured Inflation,”
       unpublished.

Griliches, Zvi, and Iain Cockburn (1994). ʺGenerics and New Goods in Pharmaceutical Price
       Indexes,ʺ American Economic Review, 84 (5), December, pp. 1213-1232.

Hausman, Jerry (1997a). ʺValuation of New Goods Under Perfect and Imperfect Competition,ʺ
     in Bresnahan, T, and Gordon, Robert J., eds., The Economics of New Goods (Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press for NBER), pp. 209-37.

__________ (1997b). “The CPI Commission: Discussionʺ, American Economic Review, 87 (2),
       May, pp. 94-98.

___________ (1999). “Cellular Telephone, New Products and the CPI,ʺ Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics.

___________, and Leibtag, Ephraim (2005). “Consumer Benefits from Increased Competition in
       Shopping Outlets: Measuring the Effect of Wal-mart,” NBER Working Paper 11809,
       December.

Hicks, John R. (May). ʺThe Valuation of the Social Income,ʺ Economica, 7 (26), May, pp. 105-24.

Hulten, Charles R. (1997). Discussion of Nordhaus (1997), pp. 66-70.

Moulton, Brent R. (1996). ʺBias in the Consumer Price Index: What is the Evidence?ʺ Journal of
      Economic Perspectives, 10 (4), Fall, pp. 159-177.

___________, and Moses, Karin E. (1997). ʺAddressing the Quality Change Issue in the
       Consumer Price Index,ʺ Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 28 (1), pp. 305-49.

___________, LaFleur, Timothy J., and Moses, Karin E. (1998). ʺResearch on Improved Quality
       Adjustment in the CPI: The Case of Televisions,ʺ presented to the Conference of the
       Ottawa Group, April.
                                                 The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 34



Newhouse, Joseph P. (2001). “Medical Care Price Indices: Problems and Opportunities, the
     Chung-Hua Lectures,” NBER Working Paper 8168, March.

Nordhaus, William D. (1997). “Do Real-Output and Real-Wage Measures Capture Reality? The
      History of Light Suggests Not,ʺ in Bresnahan T., and R.J. Gordon, eds., The Economics of
      New Goods (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER), pp. 29-66.

___________ (1998). ʺQuality Change in Price Indexes,ʺ Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12 (1),
       Winter, pp. 59-68.

___________ (2002). “The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved Health to Living
       Standards,” NBER Working Paper 8818, March.

Ohashi, Hiroshi (1999). ʺQuality-Adjusted Price Indexes for Home Video Cassette Recorders in
      the US, 1978-87,ʺ presented at NBER Summer Institute, July 21.

Shapiro, Matthew D., and David W. Wilcox (1997). ʺAlternative Strategies for Aggregating
       Prices in the CPI,ʺ NBER working paper 5980, March.

Shapiro, Irving, Matthew D. Shapiro, and David W. Wilcox (1999). ʺQuality Improvement in
       Health Care: A Framework for Price and Output Measurement,ʺ NBER working paper
       6971, February.

Slifman, L., and C. Corrado (1996). “Decomposition of Productivity and Limit Costs,”
       Occasional Stuff Studies, Federal Reserve Board, November 18.

Stewart, Kenneth J. and S. B. Reed (1999). ʺCPI Research Series Using Current Methods, 1978-
       98,ʺ Monthly Labor Review, 122 (6), June, pp. 29-38.

Stigler, George, ed. (1961). The Price Statistics of the Federal Government. Report to the Office of
         Statistical Standards, Bureau of the Budget. New York, National Bureau of Economic
         Research, 1961.

Triplett, Jack, ed. (1999). Measuring the Prices of Medical Treatments, Washington, Brookings.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1997). “Measurement Issues in the Consumer Price Index,” June
       1997, response to the U.S. Congress, Joint Economic Committee.

U. S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1999). ʺScheduled Updates for Expenditure Weights in the
        Consumer Price Index,ʺ CPI Detailed Report, February, pp. 5-6.
                                             The Boskin Report One Decade Later, Page 35



U. S. General Accounting Office (2000), Consumer Price Index: Update of Boskin Commissionʹs
       Estimate of Bias. Washington, draft report, January.

White, Alan G., Abel, Jaison R., Berndt, Ernst R., and Monroe, Cory W. (2004). “Hedonic Price
       Indexes for Personal Computer Operating Systems and Productivity Suites,” NBER
       Working Paper 10427, April.

White, Joseph B. (2006). “Cars Last Longer, Driving a Shift in All Aspects of the Auto Sector,”
       Wall Street Journal, February 28, p. D3.
