NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WORKER NEEDS AND VOICE IN THE US AND THE UK
Alex Bryson
Richard B. Freeman
Working Paper 12310
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12310
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006

We would like to thank participants at the 2005 SOLE in San Francisco and seminars at Cornell ILR,
Dartmouth, the University of Michigan, and the University of South Carolina for comments on earlier
versions of this paper. We acknowledge the Department of Trade and Industry, Acas, the Economic and
Social Research Council and the Policy Studies Institute as originators of the WERS data and the Data
Archive at the University of Essex as the distributors of the data. Alex Bryson thanks NBER and Harvard
Law School for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Alex Bryson and Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Worker Needs and Voice in the US and the UK
Alex Bryson and Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 12310
June 2006
JEL No.
ABSTRACT
Workers have responded differently to declining union density in the US and UK. US workers have
unfilled demand for unions whereas many UK workers free-ride at unionized workplaces. To explain
this difference, we create a scalar measure of worker needs for representation and relate desire for
unionism to this measure and to the choices that the US and UK labor relations systems offer
workers. Our measure of needs has similar properties across countries and is the single most
important determinant of worker desire for unions and collective representation. Conditional on
needs, we find that in both countries workers are more favourable to unions when management is
positive toward unions, but also favor them when management strongly opposes unionism, compared
to management having a neutral view. Much of the difference in the response of US and UK workers
to declining unionism appears to be due to the different institutional arrangements for voice that the
countries offer to workers.
Alex Bryson
Principal Research Fellow
Policy Studies Institute
50 Hanson Street
London W1W 6UP
UNITED KINGDOM
a.bryson@psi.org.uk
Richard B. Freeman
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
freeman@nber.org

1

Membership in trade unions has fallen in the US and UK, creating a potential gap between
the representation and participation workers want and the voice they get at their workplace.
Workers have responded to declining unionization in the two countries differently. In the US a
large proportion of non-union workers want union representation, which they cannot obtain. In the
UK a large proportion of workers free ride at sites where employers recognize unions.
What explains the difference in worker responses to falling unionism in the two countries?
Do UK and US workers respond differently because they have different needs for representation or
because the two countries offer different menus of options to meet those needs?
We use data from the US’s Workplace Representation and Participation Survey (Freeman
and Rogers, 1999) and the comparable British Workplace Representation and Participation Survey
(Diamond and Freeman, 2002), and from the UK’s Workplace Employment Relations Survey
(Cully et al., 1999) to examine these questions.1 We generate a single scalar variable – needs for
representation – to measure the likely factors that lead workers to seek collective voice and examine
its determinants and relation to the desire for union representation. We find that the distributions of
workers’ perceived needs for representation are similar in the two countries and are the chief
determinant of desire for union representation. We attribute US-UK differences in worker desires
for different forms of voice to differences in the institutional choices on offer in the countries rather
than to differences in needs or in attitudes toward collective or individual solutions to problems.
Unionisation and worker attitudes
To begin with, union density has fallen in both countries. Density in the US fell from the
mid-1950s through the mid-2000s to reach 12.5% overall and 7.9% in the private sector in 2005
despite the organization of public sector workers in the 1960s (BLS, 2006). Density in the UK rose
in the 1970s and then fell in the 1980s and 1990s, largely in the private sector, before stabilizing at
29% of all employees and 17% of employees in the private sector in 2005 (Grainger, 2006).

1

These data sets are described in Appendix A.

2

The US response to declining union density shows up in high levels of unfilled demand for
unionism. The standard measure of unfilled demand is the proportion of non-union workers who
say they would vote for a union in an NLRB representation election. Freeman and Rogers’ WRPS
found that 32% of non-union workers in private sector workplaces with over 25 employees would
vote for union representation but did not have it in 1994-95. Lipset and Meltz’s Angus Reid survey
reported that 16% of US workers would definitely vote union and that 32% would probably vote
union, giving 48% support for unionism, in 1996.2 More recent data from Peter D. Hart Research
Associates shows a rising trend in the proportion of workers who say they would vote in an NLRB
election from 1993 to 2005 (Figure 1) to exceed 50% in 2003 and 2005.3 The upward trend runs
against explanations of declining union density in terms of falling worker interest in unions.4
As for the UK, the BWRPS asked workers at workplaces without union recognition the
likely effect a union would have on conditions at the site. Sixty six percent of respondents reported
that they thought a union would not affect anything; while 22% thought the workplace would be
better with unions and 13% thought it would be worse. The BWRPS also asked non-union workers
in non-union workplaces: ‘If a group of workers at your workplace formed a union and asked you to
join, how likely is it that you would join that union?’ Sixteen per cent said it was ‘very likely’ they
would join, while 30 per cent said ‘quite likely’. If we define British workers wanting a union as
those who report that they are ‘very likely’ to join and who believe a union would make their
workplace better, just 10% of non-union employees in non-union UK workplaces would be

The unfilled demand for unionism in the US exceeds the comparably defined level in Canada and
estimates of the desire for unions in other English-speaking countries. See Lipset and Meltz (2004) for
Canada and Boxall, Freeman and Haynes (2006) for other countries
3
A 2005 Zogby poll reported a lower rate of workers seeking unionism than the Hart survey: 35%
would vote union (http://www.zogby.com/news/ReadNews.dbm?ID=1011). This is below the 45%
Zogby reported as wanting to join in 2004, but still higher than the WRPS estimate for 1995.
4
Farber and Krueger (1992) argued that falling interest in unions contributed to the decline in density.
If desire for unionisation is constant, declines in density should raise the proportion of non-organized
workers who want unionism. Since the percentage of non-union workers saying they would vote union
was roughly constant in the period they examined, they attributed some of the decline to loss of interest
in unions. The Hart Poll increase in the proportion saying they would vote union runs against this story.
2

3

classified as wanting unionisation.5 In fact, rather than joining unions when they can, British
workers have increasingly chosen to free ride at workplaces with recognized unions.
The end of the closed shop in the early 1990s gave British workers in unionised
establishments the choice to join or not at unionised workplaces. Figure 2 shows that the
proportion that chose to free ride increased greatly from the 1980s to the 1990s. The WERS
establishment data shows a doubling in the rate of free riding from 1980 to 1998. The British
Social Attitudes Survey shows a large rise in free riding from 1983-85 to 1999-2001. Shift-share
analysis suggests that around 10 percentage points of the 12–13 percentage point decline in mean
union density in unionised workplaces between 1990 and 1998 is due to “a reduced propensity
among employees to join trade unions, even when encouraged to do so [by management]”
(Millward et al. 2000: 149–151).6

British trades unions refer to the problem of enlisting workers

in organized workplaces as the “in-fill problem” since it involves filling membership at sites where
the employer recognizes the union and may even encourage workers to join.7
The free rider behaviour of UK workers exceeds that of US workers in right to work states,
where workers can choose to free ride as well but where 90% join the union (Farber and Western,
2000). As Figure 2 shows, 9 per cent of covered workers in the US were non-members in 2005,
declining marginally since the early 1980s due to a fall in free-riding in the public sector.
Workplace Needs or Problems as Determinants of What Workers Want
To understand why American workers have huge unfilled demand for unionism while
British workers increasingly free ride at workplaces where the firm recognizes unions, we analyze

The 1998 British Social Attitudes Survey asked nonunion workers at nonunion workplaces if there
were a trade union at the workplace the likelihood they would join: 15 per cent said they would be
‘very likely’ to join, and 24 per cent said ‘quite likely’.
6
Management respondents attributed declining union membership in their workplace during the 1990s
mainly to a decline in employee support for their union (Millward et al., 2000: 92). Blanchflower (2006)
presents European Social Survey 2002/2003 data that British workers are among those in Europe least
likely to agree that “Employees need strong trade unions to protect their working conditions and wages”.
7
Consistent with this, BSAS data for 1983-2002 show that among workers in unionized workplaces the
probability of having once been a member and no longer one rose from 15-17 per cent of the '
evermember'pool through 1993 to 21-22 per cent since 1995.
5

4

how workplace problems affect worker desires for collective voice. We assume at the outset that
labor problems arise naturally at all workplaces. Management makes errors, workers and
management differ in information and perspectives and disagree about the division of rewards.
Some of the problems are collective in nature and may impel workers to look to unions or other
employee groups for resolution. Other problems are individual, which affect workers singly and
which are less likely to lead them to look for collective solutions.
All the micro-data sets we examine asked employees about particular problems at their
workplace and about their workplace’s general climate. The WRPS and BWRPS also asked about
the influence workers had and wanted in different workplace decisions, and the grades workers give
to management in dealing with workplace issues. To compare the reported needs across different
questions and surveys, we developed a NEEDS scalar measure, using a scale from 0 to 1. We
coded responses to questions relating to needs for representation as 0/1 variables, where 0 means no
problem/need and 1 means a problem/need. We then summed these measures to obtain the total
number of needs and divided the sum by the total number of questions, to obtain the fraction of
needs reported, relative to the maximum possible in the survey. This approach facilitates
comparisons of the reported needs across the different questions and surveys.
We illustrate how we measure needs with the BWRPS. The influence questions asked how
much influence workers wanted in an area and how much influence they had. We coded workers as
having a problem when they said they wanted a lot of influence in an area and did not have it.
British workers had problems in determining pay raises and perks and bonuses – traditional trade
union domains (Diamond and Freeman, 2002). The grade question on the BWRPS asked workers to
grade management with a school grade scale from A to F. We coded D/F grades as a 1 for problem
or need. Few British workers give management D/F on understanding and knowledge of the
business but a sizeable number gave them those grades in granting pay increases, sharing authority,
and making work interesting. On the questions about unfair practices, the most common unfair
practice was preferential treatment by management or senior staff; the second most common was

5

payment of unfair wages; followed by unfair dismissal and discipline and bullying; discrimination
was the least cited problem. Thirty-nine percent of workers cited at least one unfair practice as
being a problem at their current workplace. We counted responses to questions about general
workplace climate, such as trust in management, security of employment, pleasantness of jobs, and
employee management relations as a problem only when workers reported it as particularly bad.
In sum, we used 26 different BWRPS items to measure problems at workplaces. Because
the survey had a split sample design, however, some items were asked of only half of respondents,
so that we have observations for each individual on only 23 items. We then divided the number of
needs by 23, so that the NEEDS variable can vary from zero (no problems reported) through 1.0
(worker reports problems for every item they answered on the survey).
We followed a similar strategy in analyzing the 13 different WERS questions on
problems/needs at the workplace. We coded responses 1 if workers reported a problem or were
dissatisfied with their situation and zero otherwise. We then summed the responses and divided by
13 to form a single scale of workplace needs. The WERS scale takes the value 0 when workers
report no problems and 1 when they report the maximum number of problems.
Turning to the US, the WRPS asked employees about employee needs for representation or
participation in terms of the influence workers had in workplace decisions and the influence they
wanted in those decisions. The difference between the influence workers had and the influence they
wanted is Freeman and Rogers’ (1999) representation and participation gap. When workers said
that they wanted "a lot" of influence in an area and also said that they did not have “a lot” of
influence, we counted this as 1, indicating a need or problem in the area. The survey also asked
about general workplace climate, trust in management, security of employment, pleasantness of
jobs, and employee management relations, etc. We coded responses to each relevant question as 1 if
the worker had a need/problem and 0 otherwise. Given the split sample design of the survey, each
worker on the WRPS answered 13 questions about needs. From these data, we constructed a needs
measure that varied from zero (no needs) to 1 (all 13 items coded as 1 in terms of needs).

6

In sum, for all of our data sets we computed a new variable Workplace Needs, which we
treat as the primitive factor likely to create desire for collective voice. 8
The distribution of needs
Figure 3 graphs the distribution of the Workplace Needs variables from the surveys. All of
the distributions have the same shape. The mode occurs at zero needs/problems and the proportion
of workers reporting positive numbers of needs declines nearly monotonically. Panel A shows that
in the BWRPS 23% of workers reported no needs or problems; 54% reported problems on less than
three of the items, while just 23% reported problems on three or more items. As a result of this
concentration, 10% of workers accounted for 52% of all the reported problems/needs. Panel B
shows a comparable bunching of responses at zero followed by a declining proportion reporting
higher numbers in the WERS. Finally, Panel C for the US WRPS also shows that thirty-two
percent of workers report no problems while 74% report problems on less than three items.
The figure gives the mean and variance for the scalar measure of needs for each survey. The
mean and variance of needs are as follows: WRPS 0.134 and 0.022; BWRPS 0.156 and 0.030;
WERS 0.211 and 0.057. All three distributions diverge from the distribution of needs/problems that
would be generated by a binomial distribution in which a worker had an independent random
chance of reporting a problem on an item at the average rate reported in the sample. In the binomial
case, there would only be a small mass at zero needs/problems, and the distribution would look
more or less normal around the average rate. The variance of the distribution would be (1-P) P,
where P is the fraction of responses that reported a workplace need, and. Instead, the distribution is
shaped like a power law or exponential,9 and the variances are much larger than those from a

Appendix B gives the questions and decision rule for each measure. An alternative approach is to
use the full information in the distribution of responses on each question so that the additive scale
weights responses according to how much of a problem it was. Using a simple scale with 1 to
reflect the lowest possible response to problems/needs, 2 to reflect the next level, and so on, we
formed a summated rating of these responses and obtained results that parallel those in the paper.
9
We regressed ln (the % reporting number of needs) on the number of needs to fit an exponential
distribution and regressed ln (the % reporting number of needs) on ln (the number of needs) to fit a
8

7

binomial distribution. The reason the distribution takes on the non-normal shape is simple: the
needs of workers on different items are not independent. Knowing that a worker reports needs on
any item gives information about their likelihood of reporting needs on other items.
There are two possible reasons for the non-independence of the reports of needs. One
possibility is that it reflects workers’ personal characteristics. A given worker may see more
problems or get into more problems than others. In this case, the individual nature of needs is
unlikely to translate into a collective response. The other possibility is that the non-independence
reflects attributes of the workplace, which most workers would report. One workplace would
generate many problems while another would not. The former would likely produce a general
desire for representation at a workplace, while the latter would not
The BWRPS and WRPS surveys do not allow us to identify the workplace component of
needs, since they do not identify workers at the same workplace. Nor do they permit identification
of the individual component of needs since they do not follow workers from one workplace to
another. But the WERS sample design allows us to identify the workplace component because it
surveyed up to 25 employees at each of the sampled workplaces. Where the workplace had 25 or
fewer workers, all employees were selected. In larger workplaces 25 workers were drawn randomly
for the employee survey. The result is a data file that contains reports by different workers in the
same workplace – the information necessary to identify a fixed workplace effect in needs.
Needs at the same workplace
Accordingly, we created a data file from WERS that gave the number of needs reported by
25,451 employees at 1,759 workplaces. This gave us an average of 14.5 worker reports on needs
per workplace. We tabulated the needs reported by workers for each workplace and ranked the
workplaces by average needs. This tabulation shows that workplaces in the upper ten percent of the
distribution of needs averaged 6.23 needs on the WERS scale from 0 to 13 – giving it a needs scale

power law. The exponential fits the BWRPS and WRPS better than a power law, whereas the power
law fits better for the WERS.

8

measure of 0.48 -- whereas workplaces in the lower ten percent of the distribution of needs
averaged 0.74 needs for a scalar measure of 0.06.10 Such wide variation by workplace makes a
prima facie case that the differing labor situations at workplaces are a key factor for worker reports
of problems or needs. We also compared the variance in needs explained by individuals’
demographic and job characteristics with the variance explained by workplace fixed effects. As
table 1 shows, the R2 is around 0.2 in models containing only workplace fixed effects and 0.1 in
models containing individual and job characteristics. When the two are combined the R2 rises to
around 0.25 and the workplace fixed effects remain jointly highly significant.
These data thus show that workers at a given workplace report sufficiently similar numbers
of needs to identify “good” and “bad” workplaces, which in turn suggests that workers who report
lots of needs are likely to seek some form of representation to redress workplace problems.
Determinants of needs
In addition to workplace factors, the demographic and economic characteristics of workers
affect the number of needs that they report. To analyze these patterns, we estimated regression
equations linking needs to characteristics, union membership, and selected management human
resource (HR) policies in the US WRPS and UK BWRPS. Table 2 gives the regression coefficients
and t-statistics for estimates of the effect of HR policies and management attitudes toward unions
for all workers (column 1-2), for non-union members (column 3-4) and for union members (column
5-6). The regression models include extensive control variables as listed in the notes to the table.11
The coefficients on variables in table 2 for the two countries are qualitatively similar,
suggesting that the same labor policies affect workers in the same manner, albeit with different
magnitudes. Consider first the positive estimated coefficients on union members in columns 1 and
2: these estimates indicate that, all else the same, union members report more needs than nonAlternatively, needs averaged 1.25 at the 10th percentile and 5.09 at the 90th percentile.
11
The control variables show that the strongest relations are for workplace factors. The number of
workers in an organization and workplace are positively correlated with needs. In addition, workers
with greater job tenure have higher needs than newer workers, white collar workers have fewer
needs, while most other factors have modest effects on needs.
10

9

members, potentially because unions seek out problems for resolution, through the voice
mechanism (Freeman and Medoff, 1984). The next set of variables are human resource
management policies measured as dichotomous variables: either the firm has a policy or it does not.
Presence of policies reduces the number of needs substantially. An open door management system
has a massive impact on needs, followed by the presence of worker committees – employee
involvement committees in the US and joint consultative committees in the UK. Most of the other
policy measures also reduce the number of needs, though the presence of grievance procedures in
the UK raises the number of needs. The coefficients on these variables in columns 3-6 for nonunion members and members show that the policies have generally similar effects for the two
groups.12
The coefficients on the variables “management opposed to unions” and “management
favorable to unions” show the impact of those attitudes, as reported by workers, compared to the
reference group, where the worker judges management as indifferent or with policies the respondent
does not know. Management opposition to unionism is associated with more needs, suggesting that
this stance may reflect a harsh policy toward worker concerns. By contrast, management in favour
of unions has a negative but non-significant effect on needs in the US and a substantial negative
effect in the UK. The regressions for non-members and members in columns 3-6 show that the
reduction in needs in UK firms where managements are favorable to unions occurs solely in
organized workplaces.
Because the regressions are sufficiently similar in the two countries, we ran a regression for
the pooled country data. In this pooled regression the dummy variable on the US is negative and
significant for all workers, and for non-members and members. The implication is that conditional
on all other factors, the major difference between the US and UK is that American workers have
lower needs. This means that the greater desire of US non-union workers than of UK non-union
workers for unions cannot be attributed to needs. To explain this difference in what workers want
12
The exceptions are profit-related pay, which has a negative effect on non-members’ needs but a positive effect on
members’, and grievance procedures for the US which is negative for nonmembers but positive for members.

10

in the two countries, we turn to differences in the institutions for collective voice that the two
countries offer workers.

Determinants of What Workers Want: Institutions On Offer
The second part of our analysis links worker desire for unions/other forms of collective
voice to the voice options available to workers. Firms affect what is available by offering nonunion channels of voice and by responding positively or negatively to worker efforts to form unions
or other independent organizations. Unions affect what is available by delivering services to
members at organized workplaces and by campaigning to organize workers in sites that do not have
union representation/recognition. The state affects what is available by legal enactment and
enforcement of labor laws. Our analysis takes the institutions on offer from employers, unions, and
the state as exogenous, and thus falls short of a complete model of a labor relations system that
would treat the decisions of employers, unions, and the state to offer those choices as endogenous.
We begin by considering the attributes of institutions that workers want to deal with their problems
and then turn to their preferences among the institutions on offer.
Workplace institutions to solve problems
The WRPS and BWRPS asked workers several questions about the types of workplace
organizations they wanted to deal with problems. They asked if workers wanted groups of workers
for support on workplace issues or if they preferred to deal with problems on their own. They asked
about the relation they wanted any worker-based organization to have with management. The
surveys have similar findings. Most workers wanted some form of organization to deal with
collective goods problems at workplaces; and most wanted employee-based organizations that work
cooperatively with management as opposed to those involved in continual conflict with
management.
Table 3 presents the evidence for these conclusions. Panel A shows that a majority of
workers in both the US and UK prefer collective solutions for problems likely to affect the entire

11

work force: benefits and health and safety issues in the US case; and salary and workplace
conditions in the UK case. By contrast, a majority of workers in both countries prefer to deal with
career development issues by themselves: training in the US case and training and promotion in the
UK case. Where US and UK workers differ is in how they want to deal with problems of protection
against bad treatment at the workplace. US workers prefer to deal with unfair treatment or
harassment by themselves, possibly because US employment law provides considerable legal rights
to workers who face discrimination at the workplace, while UK workers prefer to have the help of
fellow employees with these sorts of problems.
Panel B shows that workers in both countries prefer worker organizations with which
management cooperates to organizations that conflict with management. The majority of US
employees would choose a workplace organization with no power but with which management
cooperates to an organization with power but which management opposes. The reason is that the
majority believe that an employee organization cannot be effective without cooperation. Similarly,
UK workers prefer an organization that “work(s) with management to improve the workplace and
working conditions” to an organization that declares its main function as “defend(ing) workers
against unfair treatment by management.” They prefer this even though most union members
regard defending workers against unfair treatment to be one of the principal goals of their union
(Bryson, 2005).13
Given that workers in the US and UK report similar needs/problems at their workplaces and
have similar preferences for dealing with workplace needs with the help of employees and through
worker organizations that have cooperative relations with management, why do US workers have
such a large unfilled demand for unions while UK workers increasingly free ride at workplaces with
recognized unions?

One reason for the desire for cooperative relations is that the number of workplace problems falls when
management and unions work cooperatively (Bryson and Freeman, 2006).
13

12

We consider next three factors likely to affect the differential response of US workers and
UK workers to falling unionization.
Difference in Management Policies toward Unions and Voice
Since union premiums shift profits from shareholders to workers, it is natural for firms to
seek to oppose unionism and to offer voice solutions that may substitute for unions.
Management opposition to unionisation is stronger in the US than in the UK. For the US,
the WRPS finds that 53% of managers in non-union firms say they would oppose efforts by
employees to unionise, 27% said they wouldn’t care, and 15% said they would welcome the effort
(Freeman and Rogers, 1999). Many labor-management consulting firms specialize in helping
business maintain a “union-free environment” (Logan, 2002). By contrast, in the UK, most
employers are neutral towards unions: 65% of non-unionised private sector employers in WERS
1998 expressed neutrality about union membership among its employees, 30% expressed
opposition and 5% were favourable (Bryson, et al., 2004).14 An obvious reason for this difference
in management attitudes is that the US union wage premium is among the highest in the world,
whereas the UK premium is modest.
At the same time management in both countries have developed positive labor relations in
the form of modern human resource programs that arguably could substitute for unionism. In the
US Section 8(a)(2) of the US’s National Labor Relations Act outlaws company sponsored systems
of collective voice as company unions designed to undermine workers setting up their own
organization, and thus limits management ability to develop such substitutes (LeRoy, 2006). By
contrast the UK’s historically voluntaristic labour-management system makes it easier to develop
alternatives to unionism.
Differences in the Legal Choice Set

Managers were asked: ‘How would you describe management’s general attitude towards trade union
membership among employees at this establishment? Is management...in favour of trade union
membership, not in favour of it, or neutral about it?’
14

13

The UK and the US offer workers and management different choice sets for worker
representation and participation. In addition to unions, the UK offers a range of workplace
institutions including employer sponsored workplace committees. It has added works councils
under the EU Social Charter. Lay representatives deliver union services at workplaces. Managerial
employees as well as those without supervisory roles often join unions.15 At the end of the 1980s the
Conservative government removed legal protections from the closed shop, which allowed for the
large increase in free riding. At the end of the 1990s, the Labour government introduced elections
for union status when firms refused to recognize employees seeking union status, but this has been
used infrequently.
The US’s National Labor Relations Act offers a narrow range of choices for workers in the
private sector. In principle US law protects minority unionism, but the de facto choice has been
between a collective bargaining majority union and no worker organization. By posing the choice
of workplace labor institutions as 0/1 union/no union, the US system stokes employer opposition to
unionism and encourages firms to develop policies for individual voice, but not for collective voice.
Differences in Union Effectiveness
Another potential reason for the differing attitude of US workers and UK workers to the
decline of union representation is that union effectiveness differs. The higher union wage premium
in the US than in the UK (Blanchflower and Bryson, 2003, 2004) suggests that unions are more
effective in delivering “monopoly” gains to members in the US. Whereas the US union wage
differential remains one of the highest in the world, WERS data suggests that UK unions’ efficacy
has declined over the past two decades or so. Even where unions are recognised by employers for
negotiation purposes, collective bargaining coverage has declined (Millward et al., 2000: 159-167),
leading some commentators to the ‘inescapable conclusion that workplace trade unions no longer

15

In 2005 19% of managers and senior officials were unionised (Grainger, 2005).

14

negotiate to any significant extent on behalf of their members’ (Terry, 2004: 205).16 Neither the
WRPS nor the BWRPS ask workers in non-union workplaces about their assessment of the
effectiveness of unions (on the assumption that workers in non-unionized workplaces would have
limited or no knowledge of union effectiveness in unionized sites). Both do ask workers in
unionised workplaces about the perceived effectiveness of unions and preferences for union
representation.
In the WRPS data, 31% of US union members report that they are very satisfied with union
bargaining over wages and benefits, while in the BWRPS, just 11% of union members give their
union a high grade for ‘winning fair pay increases and bonuses’.17 But delivering on wages and
benefits is not the sole purpose of unions. The WRPS shows that 30% of members thought unions
were ‘very effective’ in resolving group problems or concerns, while a further 53% thought they
were ‘somewhat effective’. Thirty-five percent of union members rated their union high in
choosing local leaders democratically compared to 17% who rated their union low. The figures
from analogous questions for the UK show lower assessments of effectiveness. In the BWRPS UK
workers gave unions a mixed rating, giving them lower grades than management in making
workplaces better in some areas (Diamond and Freeman, 2002). Only 17% rated their union high in
being open and accountable to its members and only 15% rated their union high in sharing
information. The structural features of unions (high density, on-site union representatives etc.) that
are associated with perceptions of high union effectiveness are not widespread throughout the union
sector (Bryson, 2005).18 In short, the evidence and responses of workers to questions about union

On the other hand, time-series data show that a fairly constant two-thirds of unionised employees
believe that ‘unions do their job well’ over the period 1983-2001 (Bryson and Gomez, 2002).
17
The BWRPS asked British workers to grade their union on various dimensions; we coded A as
high and D/F as low. The US survey asked if workers were very satisfied, satisfied, not too satisfied
or not at all satisfied in an area; we coded very satisfied as high and not too or not satisfied as low.
18
Supporting the notion that some of the problems faced by UK unions are associated with their
lack of efficacy, Bryson and Freeman (2006) find that perceived union effectiveness is associated
with fewer expressed needs and that workers are more likely to choose unions when they believe
unions “make a difference to what it is like to work here” and “take notice of members’ problems
and complaints”.
16

15

effectiveness suggest that US unions are more effective than UK unions in delivering benefits to
members and in accountability to them.19
Where US unions have been ineffective is in organizing the millions of workers who seek
union representation in the face of company opposition. Organizing in the US has become
extremely expensive, as unions and management pour resources into NLRB election campaigns.
Farber and Western (2001) and Freeman and Rogers (1999) estimate that unions would have to
devote the bulk of their budgets just to organize enough workers to maintain their present density
with current organizing techniques and effectiveness. It is only outside the standard collective
bargaining framework that unions have managed to enlist members at low cost, either through card
checks20 or through organizing workers into non-collective bargaining groups. In arguably the most
successful such activity in 2005 the AFL-CIO sent organizers into ten cities to ask people to join a
non-collective bargaining AFL-CIO affiliate, Working America (www.workingamerica.org). The
organizers signed up 1,200,000 members by early 2006. This is the strongest evidence we have that
the survey findings that millions of non-union workers want to join a union reflects genuine
attitudes, not simply casual responses to a survey.
But UK unions do not seem to be any more effective in organizing workers than US unions.
Unions in the UK face serious financial difficulties, partly due to declining density, but also to other
factors (Willman and Bryson, 2005). The weakness in organizing is illustrated by BWRPS
evidence that over half (56%) of non-members eligible to join the union at their workplace say they
have never been asked to join by the union. Since 10% of non-members in unionised workplaces
say they would be ‘very likely’ to join if asked, and a further 26% say they would be ‘quite likely’
Consistent with this, the positive coefficient of unionism on number of needs reported in columns
1 and 2 of table 2 is larger in the UK than in the US.
19

AFL-CIO national organizing director Stewart Acuff told the Wall Street Journal in August 2005
that three times as many workers were added through "card checks" than through traditional secret
ballot elections. And the Bureau of National Affairs reported in January 2006 that UNITE HERE
president Bruce Raynor estimates that 90 percent of his new members had been organized through
"alternative means" that avoided elections.
20

16

to join, this is a significant missed opportunity which means demand for unionisation goes unmet.
The removal of closed shop legislation in the early 1990s heightened the problem for unions, for it
allowed employees in unionised workplaces to free-ride on union-provided services, making it
critical that unions offer private excludable goods to workers to induce them to join (Bryson, 2006).
Workers’ Choice of Workplace Institution
The WRPS and BWRPS surveys asked several questions about workers’ preferences for
unions and other modes of representation and institutions of voice.
The WRPS asked US workers three questions relating to desire for unions. It asked whether
they would vote for a union in a representation election. It also asked them to choose among three
institutions to increase their say in workplace matters: unions (half of the sample) or an elected
body of workers to bargain with management (the other half of the sample), joint employee
management committees, or labor laws. Finally, it asked them separately about the characteristics
of any joint committee that they might prefer, including whether there should be recourse to an
outside arbitrator, whether the organization should be employee-run or run jointly with
management, and whether employees should elect representatives.
The BWRPS asked UK workers three questions on the desire for unions. It asked whether
they would support unions at their workplace or if their union was worth the dues they paid it;
whether they thought unions would make the workplace better; and whether they would prefer to
have only unions, only works councils, unions and works councils, or none of these forms at their
workplace. By asking several questions about desired workplace representation appropriate to the
country setting, the surveys give a much richer picture of preferences for collective representation
than simple “union – yes or no” questions. But this design also complicates measurement of desire
for unionism or other forms of representation and comparisons across the two countries, since the
institutional options differ. We combined the responses to the different questions to obtain an
ordering of the desire for unionism that had values from 0 to 6 for the US and UK, where 0
represents the least desire for unions and 6 represents the greatest desire for unions.

17

In both surveys we coded each of the three questions from 0 to 2 and formed summated
ratings for the desire for collective representation. For the US, on the voting question, we scored a 2
if workers said they would vote for a union in an NLRB election, scored 1 if they said they would
switch their vote depending on employer attitudes and 0 if they would vote no.21 Fifty-nine per cent
of all employees in WRPS scored zero, 4% scored 1 and 37% scored 2 on this item. On the desired
organization question, we gave a 2 if they chose a union/employee organization that collectively
bargained; a 1 if they chose a joint committee; and a 0 otherwise. Twenty-six per cent favored
collective bargaining and 58% chose a joint committee. On the attributes of a workplace committee
question, we gave a 2 if they preferred workers to vote for committee members, that the
organization be employee run, and if they wanted an outside arbitrator to resolve disagreements; a 1
if they chose 2 of these 3, and 0 otherwise. Six per cent favored all three options, 39% favored two
of the options. For the UK, we gave a score of 2 to workers who thought unions made the
workplace a lot better, a score of 1 if they thought unions make the workplace a little better, and 0
otherwise. On the likelihood of joining a union question, for non-union members we gave a score
of 2 if they said very likely, a score of 1 if they said quite likely, and 0 otherwise; for union
members we gave a score of 2 if they said membership was ‘good value for money’, a score of 1 if
they said ‘reasonable value’ and 0 otherwise. Twenty-nine per cent said it represented ‘good value
for money’. On the question regarding unions and works councils, we gave a score of 2 if they said
they wanted a union (either on its own or with a works council), a score of 1 if they wanted a works
council but no union, and zero otherwise. Sixteen percent of non-union workers in non-union
workplaces said they would be very likely to join a union at their workplace if one was formed, and
an additional 29% said they were quite likely to join. But just 19% of non union workers said the
workplace would be a lot or a little better with a union.
Panel A of Table 4 shows the distribution of responses of non-union workers in the US and
the UK on this 0-6 scale. In the US, the mean value is 2.15, with one-fifth of non-members scoring
21
That is, when a worker said they would vote union only in the absence of employer opposition to a union, or said they
would change a ‘no’ vote to a ‘yes’ if they thought management would not oppose the union, we coded this item ‘1’.

18

4+ and 8% scoring zero. In the UK, the mean score is 1.84, with one-sixth of non-union workers
scoring 4+ and 26% scoring zero – over three times the percent for the US.
Panel B displays the scores for union members in the US and the UK. The scores for the
UK are more polarized than those for the US: UK members are more likely to score the maximum 6
(15% against 6% in the US) and more likely to score below 3 (9% compared with 16% in the US).
But the mean scores are similar for members in the two countries. Very few members score zero.
Panel C gives estimates of the proportion of workers in unionized settings in the US and UK
who prefer non-union status. For the UK this is the proportion of workers who report a union at
their workplace that they could join but have not joined – free riders—35%. For the US the
estimate is the proportion of union members who said they would vote to remove the union in an
NLRB decertification election. As a percentage of union members this is 9%; as a percentage of all
non-managerial employees in a unionised environment it is 18%.
In short, proportionately more non-union workers in the US than in the UK are favorably
inclined to unions; whereas UK workers are more inclined than US workers to favor works
councils. And the proportion of workers in unionized workplaces that free ride in the UK exceeds
the proportion of unionized workers who would get rid of their local union in the US if they could.
Determinants of Desire for Unions in Non union Workplaces
We seek to explain these patterns in terms of worker needs and the options that
management, unions, and the legal system offer workers to meet these needs. We consider first the
effect of needs, management attitudes toward unionism, and HR practices on the preferences toward
unionism of workers in non-union workplaces. For simplicity, in this analysis we measure HR
practices by the number of policies at the workplace: this variable ranges from 0 to 6.22
Table 5 gives the regression coefficients and t-statistics on the estimated effects of specified
factors from a linear probability model of the desire for union representation among workers in nonunion workplaces in the WRPS and BWRPS data sets. We give estimates for models for the UK
22
Estimating the model with dummy variables for each policy, we found that they affected the desire for unionism with
similar coefficients, which contrasts with the table 2 finding that open door policies reduced needs the most.

19

and US separately and then for a pooled sample for the two countries. The models for the US and
UK give similar results. The desire for unions rises with needs, with a larger estimated coefficient
for the US than for the UK. The U-shaped effect of perceived management attitudes to unions is
evident in both countries. The substitution effect of the HRM count is only significant in the US,
though the coefficient is also negatively signed in the UK. In the UK members in non-union
workplaces express a strong desire for unionisation; the absence of union members in non-union
workplaces in the US means this term falls out of the US equation. The pooled regression shows
desire for unions in the non-union sector is stronger in the US than the UK.
Why is the relation between preference for a union and management opposition U-shaped in
both countries? It is reasonable that when an employer favors unions, workers would also be more
favorable to them. The surprise is that workers also favor unions when management opposition is
severe. The most plausible interpretation of this result is that strong management opposition to
unionism reflects a tough policy towards workers. If this interpretation were correct, we would
expect to find that workers with many needs and facing management opposition ought to be driving
the relation between strong opposition and desire for unionism. To test this, we divided the sample
between workers in the upper third of the distribution of needs and the rest of the workers. In the
UK, management opposition increased the desire for collective representation only among nonmembers in the top third of the needs distribution but in the USA, management opposition
increased the desire for collective representation regardless of needs (see Appendix C).
We also estimated a model for non-members in non-union workplaces on the WERS data
file (Appendix D). The WERS asked whether workers wanted unions to represent them for pay,
grievance procedures, and making a complaint. We measured the desire for union representation
on a 0 to 3 scale depending on how many times a worker said they wanted representation.23 As in
table 5, we found that the needs variable had a great impact on workers wanting union
representation, even in a fixed effects analysis that controlled for the workplace. The WERS
23
WERS asks workers to identify who best represented them in relation to getting pay increases, making a complaint
about working, and if management wanted to discipline the worker, with ‘trade union’ being one of four options.

20

regressions show a positive relation between management communication policies and the desire
for unions. Confirming the result in table 5, management support or opposition to unions gives the
same U shaped relation that we found in the WRPS and BWRPS.
The regressions in table 5 explain the differing attitudes of workers within the US and UK
toward unions but the pooled regression shows that there is a substantial cross-country difference
that remains: workers in non-union workplaces are more favourably inclined toward unions in the
US than in the UK. The estimated coefficient on the US dummy in the regression is a highly
significant 0.339. The mean value of the union desire variable for non-union workers in the US is
2.15 while the mean value for the union desire variable for non-union workers in the UK is 1.84,
which gives a slightly lower difference of 0.31. The implication is that while the regressions
explain the differences in desire for unionism within country, they do not explain the cross-country
differential at all; rather they widen the estimated US-UK difference.
How can we explain the cross-country difference in the desire for unionism? Our analysis
directs attention at the differing institutions on offer in the two countries and the resultant difference
in union density. US workers lack the intermediate institutions for voice that exist in the UK and
face large difficulties in organizing so that many more non-union workers favor unions in the US
than in the UK. To test this explanation, we conducted a simulation analysis in which we estimated
what the desire for unionism among non-union workers in the two countries would be if each
country had the unionization rate of the other country. The basic idea is that if more US (fewer UK)
workers had union status, the difference in desire for unionism among non-union workers between
the countries should be less. We did this in a three step analysis. First, we estimated equations that
predict worker desire for unionism on our 0 to 6 scale, using the regression structure in table 5, but
applying the model to all workers. Second we ranked workers by their predicted desire for
unionism. Third, we estimated what the mean desire on non-union workers would be if more
workers were organized in the US or if fewer workers were unionized in the UK. The key
assumption in this calculation is that additional unionization would come from non-union workers

21

with the highest desires for unionism or conversely, that reduced unionization would come from
unionized workers with the least desire for unions.
Table 6 gives the results of this analysis. We estimate that if the US had the proportion of
workers unionized in the UK sample (34%), the desire for unionism among non-union US workers
would fall from 2.15 to 1.95 – a 0.20 drop that accounts for 65% of the 0.31 point gap between US
and UK non-union workers. Similarly, we estimate that if the UK had the proportion of workers
unionized in the US sample (14%), the desire for unionism among UK workers would rise to 2.23 –
a 0.39 increase that actually exceeds the US-UK gap. One possible reason for the larger change in
the difference in the desire for unionism is that the unionized workers in the UK who by our
analysis would lose their union status have developed greater desire for unionism as a result of their
experience with it (Bryson and Gomez, 2003).24
Determinants of Attitudes Toward Unions in Union Workplaces
What about the workers in organized workplaces choosing to free ride or otherwise reject
unions? Table 7 examines the attitudes of workers in union workplaces toward unions. Column 1
gives the estimated coefficients and t-statistics for the factors that lead a worker in the UK to freeride in a workplace where there is a union the worker could join. Free-riding is lower when needs
are higher, when workers think management favors the union and when they perceive unions as
more effective. HR policies do not affect the likelihood of free riding. Column 2 examines the
factors that lead a worker in a unionized workplace in the USA to favor decertifying the union.
This is not the same as being a ‘free-rider’ but it is the best measure in the US of the desire of
workers in an organized work place to reject unions. The estimated coefficients on the variables
have the same sign as in column 1 but are weaker in magnitude and significance. Assessment of
union effectiveness is the statistically strongest variable.
The remaining columns examine the determinants of the desire for unionism using our 0-6
measure of the desire. The coefficients on the variables have opposite signs to those in columns 1
24

We also estimated the model using the equations for non-union workers in table 5 and obtained comparable results.

22

and 2, since they measure favourableness toward unions. The coefficients on need and union
effectiveness are larger and more significant in the UK than in the US. This reflects the fact that the
UK sample includes the free riders, so the UK regression differentiates the desire for unions among
members, who have greater needs and who see the union as more effective, from the desire of
workers who have chosen to be non-members. In the pooled regression, all of the variables except
for the count of HR policies are statistically significant and parallel the results for workers in the
non-union sector in table 5. The dummy coefficient for the US is positive significant, as is the
dummy coefficient for union members in the UK. The group with the least desire for unionisation
are non-members in the UK, who in fact are able to express their lack of desire through free-riding.
Conclusions
This paper has compared the preferences of workers in the US and UK for unions and other
forms of employee voice in a period of declining union density. It shows that US workers have a
high and seemingly increasing unfilled demand for unionism while a growing proportion of UK
workers have chosen to free ride at unionized work places. The key factor determining worker
desire for unions or other forms of collective voice in both countries is the number of needs or
problems that workers report. Using the responses of multiple workers at the same workplace, we
show that needs have a significant workplace component, but that even within the same workplace,
workers who report greater needs/problems are more likely to favor unions. The different choices
on offer in the two countries appear to affect the different responses of UK and US workers to fairly
similar workplace needs/problems. The dichotomous choice between collective bargaining and no
representation in the US produces a smaller rate of unionization in the US that manifests itself in
greater unfilled demand for unions among non-union workers than in the UK; whereas the wider
choice of voice institutions in the UK attracts many to take the free rider option.

23

References
Airey, Colin, Jon Hales, Rosemary Hamilton, Christos Korvovessis, Anthony McKernan and Susan
Purdon (1999). The Workplace Employee Relations Survey (WERS) 1997-8: Technical Report.
National Centre for Social Research.
Blanchflower, D. (2006) ‘A Cross-Country Study of Union Membership’, IZA Discussion Paper
#2016
Blanchflower, D. and Bryson, A. (2004) ‘Union Relative Wage Effects in the United States and the
United Kingdom’, Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Industrial Relations Research
Association, 133-140
Blanchflower, D. and Bryson, A. (2003) ‘Changes over time in union relative wage effects in the
UK and the US Revisited’, chapter 7 in International Handbook of Trade Unions, John T. Addison
and Claus Schnabel (eds.), Edward Elgar, Cheltenham England and Northampton Mass., USA
Boxall, Peter, Richard Freeman and Peter Haynes (eds). What Workers Say: Employee Voice in the
Anglo-American World. (forthcoming, Cornell University Press, 2006).
Bryson, Alex (2006) ‘Union Free-riding in the UK and New Zealand’, CEP Discussion Paper
Number 713, LSE
Bryson, Alex (2005) ‘Working With Dinosaurs? Union Effectiveness in Britain’, in G.Gall (ed.)
Union Recognition: Organising and Bargaining Outcomes, pp. 25-43, Routledge, London
Bryson, Alex (2004) ‘Managerial responsiveness to union and non-union worker voice in Britain’,
Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, Vol. 43, No. 1, 213-241
Bryson, Alex and Richard Freeman. (2006) ‘Can Unions Deliver What Workers Want in Great
Britain?’, CEP Discussion Paper forthcoming
Bryson, Alex and Rafael Gomez (2005) ‘Why Have Workers Stopped Joining Unions? Accounting
for the Rise of Never-Membership in Britain’, British Journal of Industrial Relations, 43, 1: 67-92
Bryson, Alex and Rafael Gomez. (2003) ‘Buying Into Union Membership’, in Gospel, H. and
Wood, S. (eds.), Representing Workers: Union Recognition and membership in Britain, Routledge,
London
Bryson, Alex and Rafael Gomez. (2002) '
Marching on together? Recent trends in union
membership'in Park, A., Curtice, J., Thomson, K., Jarvis, L. and Bromley, C. (eds) British Social
Attitudes: the 19th Report, London: Sage.
Bryson, Alex, Rafael Gomez and Paul Willman. (2004) ‘The End of the Affair? The Decline in
Employers’ Propensity to Unionize’, Chapter 8 in J. Kelly and P. Willman (eds.), Union
Organization and Activity, Routledge, London, pp.129-149
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2006) ‘Union Members in 2005’, news release January 20th
Cully, M., Woodland, S., O’Reilly, A. and Dix, G. (1999) Britain at Work: as depicted by the 1998
Workplace Employee Relations Survey, Routledge: London

24

Diamond Wayne and Richard Freeman (2001) What Workers Want from Workplace Organisations,
Trade Unions Congress Publications, London
Farber, Henry S. (1989) ‘Trends in Worker Demand for Union Representation’, AER, Vol. 79, Issue
2, Papers and Proceedings of the Hundred and First Meeting, 166-171
Farber, Henry S. and Alan B. Krueger (1992) Union Membership in the United States: The Decline
Continues, NBER Working Paper No. 4216
Farber, H. S. and Western, B. (2000) “Round Up the Usual Suspects: The Decline of Unions in the
Private Sector, 1973-1998”, Princeton University Working Paper No. 437, Industrial Relations
Section
Farber, H. S. and Western, B. (2001) “Ronald Regan and the Politics of Declining Union
Organization”, Princeton University Working Paper No. 460, Industrial Relations Section
Flanagan, Robert J., “Has Management Strangled U.S. Unions?” Journal of Labor Research 26:1
(Winter) 2005.
Freeman, Richard (2006) ‘What Do Unions Do?: the 2004 M-Brane Stringtwister edition’ in James
T. Bennett and Bruce E. Kaufman, eds. What Do Unions Do? The Evidence Twenty Years Later,
Freeman, Richard and James Medoff (1984) What Do Unions Do, Basic books 1984
Freeman, Richard and Joel Rogers (1999) What Workers Want , Cornell
Grainger, H. (2006) Trade Union Membership 2005, London: Department of Trade and Industry.
Lerner, Stephen, Three Steps To Reorganizing And Rebuilding The Labor Movement December
2002, http://www.labornotes.org/archives/2002/12/e.html
LeRoy, M. (2006) ‘The Power to Create or Obstruct Employee Voice: Does U.S. Public Policy
Skew Employer Preference for “No Voice” Workplaces?’, Socio-economic Review, 4, 311-319
Lipset, S.M. and N. Meltz, (2004). The Paradox of American Unionism. Cornell University Press.
Logan, John (2002) ‘Consultants, lawyers and the ‘union free’ movement in the USA since the
1970s’, Industrial Relations Journal, 33:3: 197-214
McLennan, Kenneth. (2005) “A Management Perspective on What Do Unions Do?” In James T.
Bennett and Bruce E. Kaufman, eds. What Do Unions Do? The Evidence Twenty Years Later.
Millward, Neil, Alex Bryson, and John Forth. (2000) All Change at Work?, Routledge, London.
Terry, Mike (2004) in Verma, Anil and Tom Kochan (eds.) Unions in the 21st Century: An
International Perspective, Palgrave
Willman, Paul and Alex Bryson (2005) ‘Things Can Only Get Better: A Picture of Union Finances
at the End of the 20th Century’, SASE Conference Paper

25

Table 1: Tests of the impact of workplace on worker needs

Workplace
dummies +
constant

Demographic and
job
Demographic
characteristics +
and job
workplace
characteristics + dummies +
constant
constant

r-sq, weighted
model

.203

.107

.256

r-sq unweighted
model

.194

.089

.241

F-test for
workplace
dummies in
unweighted model

f(1758,23692)=3.24
P>f=0.0000

NA

f(1758,23647)=2.6
8 p>f=0.0000

Notes:
N=25,451, 1,759 workplaces.
Regressors in columns 2 and 3: female, union member, age (6 dummies), ethnicity, health problem,
married or living as married, academic qualifications (6 dummies), vocational qualifications,
occupation (9 dummies), tenure (4 dummies), hours (5 dummies), gender segregation on the job (5
dummies), banded gross weekly wages (11 dummies), permanent contract.

26

Table 2: Regression estimates of determinants of needs (measured as scalar
variable from 0 to 1) in the USA and UK, by membership status

Member

All workers
USA
UK
0.025
0.061
(2.33)*
(5.49)**

Management
attitudes to
union (ref.:
neutral)
Opposed
0.045
(6.63)**
In favour
-0.014
(0.92)
Substitutes:
Open door
-0.103
(12.34)**
Committee
-0.038
(5.81)**
Profit-related -0.010
pay
(1.33)
ESOP
-0.018
(2.22)*
Performance -0.016
pay
(2.18)*
HR
0.006
department
(0.81)
Grievance
-0.011
Procedure
(1.50)
Constant
0.220
(9.47)**
Observations 2049
R-squared
0.20

Non-members
USA
UK
-

Members
USA
UK
-

0.094
(7.66)**
-0.040
(3.49)**

0.043
(6.10)**
-0.009
(0.50)

0.088
(6.60)**
0.018
(1.13)

0.050
(2.00)*
-0.012
(0.31)

0.122
(4.37)**
-0.079
(4.52)**

-0.059
(6.45)**
-0.033
(3.51)**
-0.017

-0.102
(11.35)**
-0.041
(5.89)**
-0.017

-0.060
(5.47)**
-0.019
(1.77)
-0.021

-0.119
(4.67)**
-0.023
(1.09)
0.029

-0.048
(2.76)**
-0.058
(3.16)**
0.002

(1.56)
-0.008
(0.52)
-0.018

(2.23)*
-0.016
(1.82)
-0.013

(1.67)
-0.019
(0.94)
-0.023

(1.03)
-0.033
(1.29)
-0.047

(0.09)
-0.024
(0.82)
-0.010

(1.64)
-0.000

(1.64)
0.003

(1.86)
-0.004

(1.74)
0.018

(0.45)
-0.001

(0.01)
0.021

(0.37)
-0.016

(0.29)
0.019

(0.67)
0.024

(0.06)
0.020

(2.17)*
0.218
(6.26)**
1355
0.24

(2.00)*
0.227
(9.08)**
1767
0.20

(1.52)
0.204
(4.92)**
889
0.18

(0.89)
0.121
(1.41)
282
0.31

(1.12)
0.260
(3.89)**
466
0.36

Notes: all models contain the following controls – male, age (5 dummies), ethnicity, marital status, any children,
education (4 dummies), hours worked (3 dummies), tenure with employer (4 dummies), occupation (8 dummies),
if supervisor, banded earnings (12 dummies), organization with 1000+ employees, workplace size (5 dummies),
industry (9 dummies)

27

Table 3: Worker Preferences for Dealing With Workplace Problems

Panel A: Percent who prefer to solve problems:
with help of fellow employees

by self

66
53

33

UK: Negotiating salary

57

43

Negotiating conditions

60

40

US: Training

44

54

UK: Training/skill development

47
35

53

US: Unfair treatment
Harassment

39
34

59
65

UK: Sex/racial discrimination
Bullying

67
62

33
38

Terms and conditions
US: Benefits
Health and safety

36

Career progression & development

Promotion issues

65

Protection

Panel B: % who:
US:
Want organization with no power but management cooperation
Want more power but management opposes
Do not prefer either/don’t know

63
22
15

US:
Believes organization effective only if management cooperates
Can be effective without management cooperation
Don’t know

73
17
9

UK:
Want organization to work with management to improve the
workplace and working conditions
Want organization to defend workers against unfair treatment by
management
Don’t know
Sources: US - WRPS; UK - BWRPS

74
23
3

28

Table 4: Percent of Non-members Favouring Different Voice Options in the US and the UK
USA
UK
Panel A: Distribution of Desire of Non-union Workers
for Unions, on 0 to 6 Scale
6 (Highest pro-union answer on all questions)
2
5
5
8
5
4
11
8
3
13
12
2
21
18
1
27
26
0
8
26
Mean
2.15
1.84
Panel B: Distribution of Desire of Union Members for
Unions, on 0 to 6 Scale
6 (Highest pro-union answer on all questions)
6
15
5
29
24
4
37
24
3
20
20
2
7
10
1
1
4
0
<1
2
Mean
4.00
3.94
Panel C: Preferences of Workers in Unionized Workplaces
For Free Riding Status
% workers in organized workplaces who do not join union even 35
when one is there for workers like them
% of union members who would vote against union
9
% of all non-managerial employees in union workplaces who
18
would vote against union
Notes: column percentages. Sources: WRPS and BWRPS. See text for construction of variables.
Unweighted Ns for non-union workers: USA=1,767; UK=889. Panel B base for USA members in
unionized workplaces, unweighted N=282. Panel B base for UK is all union members, unweighted
N=466. Last row is % of all workers in a union workplace (n=428) who were non-managerial nonmembers who would vote against the union.

29

Table 5: Union desire among workers in non-union workplaces
Needs
Management
attitudes (ref.:
neutral)
Opposed
In favour
Count of human
resource policies

(1) UK
3.772
(9.42)**

(2) US
2.445
(9.31)**

(3) Pooled
3.041
(14.01)**

0.628
(4.00)**
0.779
(2.97)**
-0.061

0.388
(4.87)**
0.748
(3.10)**
-0.097

0.458
(6.46)**
0.757
(4.38)**
-0.070

(1.06)
1.164
(4.38)**

(3.07)**
0.000
(.)

(2.56)*
1.325
(5.54)**
0.339
USA dummy
(3.97)**
0.651
1.642
1.061
Constant
(1.32)
(5.93)**
(4.36)**
692
1604
2296
Observations
0.33
0.17
0.21
R-squared
Note : Linear regression models for union desire. T-statistics in parentheses. See text for
description of the (0,6) desire for unions scales for the US and the UK. Needs measured as
described in text. Human resource policies count gives a score of ‘1’ given every time the
employee says one of the policies is present at the workplace. Performance-related pay is not added
to the count but is contained in the controls. The union effectiveness variable for the UK is an
additive scale running from zero to eight with a point scored every time the worker rates the union
A or B on eight dimensions, namely: winning fair pay increases, understanding and knowledge of
the employers’ business, being open and accountable to members, sharing information they have
about the employer, promoting equal opportunities, working with management to increase quality
or productivity, making work interesting and enjoyable, protecting workers against unfair treatment.
In the USA, the union effectiveness scale runs from 1 to 4 where 1 is ‘not effective at all’ and 4 is
‘very effective’. See notes to Table 2 for controls.
Member

30

Table 6: Estimated Impact of Institutions on Offer on Desire to Unionize and Free Riding

Actual mean desire for union, nonmembers
USA-UK gap
Predicted US mean desire with UK union
density
Predicted UK mean desire with US union
density
Difference in gap explained by model

USA
2.15
1.95

UK
1.84
0.31

-

-

2.23

0.20

0.39

Notes
(1) In our sample 34% of UK workers are members compared to 14% in the US. Above simulation uses predicted desire
for unionisation to ‘simulate’ density in other country.
(2) Predictions use all worker separate models for the USA and UK.
(3) The predicted US mean desire with UK density is a prediction for ‘simulated non-members’ in the US having
eliminated all workers who are in the top 34% of the predicted distribution. The reasoning is that these top 34% would
have been union members in the UK.
(4) The predicted UK mean desire with US union density for ‘simulated non-members’ in the UK having eliminated all
workers who are in the top 14% of the predicted desire distribution in the UK. The reasoning is that only these top 14%
of workers would have been union members in USA.

31

TABLE 7: Union Attitudes Of Workers in the Union Sector
UK
Probability
of
Workers
Freeriding
Needs

-0.533
(4.87)**

Management
Attitudes
(ref: neutral)
Opposed
0.008
(0.13)
In favor
-0.104
(2.77)**
-0.014
Count of
human
resource
policies
(0.97)
-0.040
Count for
union
effectiveness
(5.99)**
UK union
member
USA dummy
Constant

0.861
(5.86)**
Observations 663
0.30
R-squared

US
UK
US
Pooled
Probability
members
would vote
to
decertify
Union desire (0-6)
union
-0.044
1.963
0.134
0.988
(0.03)
(5.19)** (0.29)
(3.50)**

-0.071
(1.43)
-0.051
(0.68)
-0.015

0.349
(1.65)
0.455
(3.51)**
0.033

0.452
(2.54)*
0.247
(0.93)
0.036

0.403
(3.10)**
0.315
(2.97)**
0.028

(0.89)
-0.081

(0.65)
0.243

(0.60)
0.110

(0.77)
0.184

(2.98)**

(10.42)** (1.13)

0.507
(2.67)**
277
0.25

0.250
(0.49)
663
0.33

(9.09)**
1.365

(11.45)**
1.530
(9.92)**
3.572
0.325
(5.28)** (0.91)
277
940
0.24
0.38

Note : See notes to Tables 2 and 5 for controls. Dependent variables are as follows. Column 1: union non-membership.
Column 2: responding ‘get rid of the union’ in response to the question: “If a new election were held TODAY to decide
whether to keep the union at your (company/organization), would you vote to keep the union or get rid of it?” Columns
3-5: desire for union on the (0,6) scale described in the text. Populations are as follows. Columns 1 and 3: all UK
workers in unionised workplaces. Columns 2 and 4: US members in unionized workplaces. Column3: all US workers
in unionised workplaces. Column 5: all UK workers in union workplaces and US members in union workplaces.

32
Figure 1: Percentage of Non-union Worker Likely to Vote For/Against Unions in NLRB Election,
Peter Hart Surveys, 1984-2005
70

If an election were held tomorrow to decide whether your workplace would have a union or not, do you think you would
definitely vote for forming a union, probably vote for forming a union, probably vote against forming a union, or definitely
vote against forming a union?

65

60

55
Definitely or probably vote
against forming a union
50
%
45

40
Definitely or probably vote
for forming a union
35

30

25
1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Year

Source: Hart Research Associates, various polls, except 1984, when data are from Harris, for question: “If an election
were held tomorrow to decide whether your workplace would be unionized or not, do you think you would definitely
vote for a union, probably vote for a union, probably vote against a union, or definitely vote against a union?”
Figure 2: Percentage of Free-riders in Britain and the USA, 1980-2005

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
198

0

198

3-5

198

WERS

6-9

0

199

BSAS

0-9
4

199

5-9

8

199

9-0
1

200

2-2
00

5

CPS MORG

Notes: For Britain, figures are % non-members in workplaces recognizing unions for pay bargaining. WERS data
adapted from Millward et al. (2000: 142). Establishments with 25+ employees where one or more unions recognized
for pay bargaining and where number of members reported. Figures based on surveys in 1980 (full-time employees
only), 1984, 1990 and 1998. BSAS adapted from Bryson and Gomez (2005, Table 8). Employees working 10+ hours
per week. Figures based on surveys in all years between 1983 and 2001 except 1988 and 1992. For the USA, figures
are % of covered workers who are non-members. Figures based on annual MORG Outgoing Rotation Files, 1983-2005

33
Figure 3: Distribution of Workplace Needs

0

5

Percent
10

15

20

Panel A: BWRPS needs scalar (mean = 0.156; variance = 0.030)

0

5
10
15
Number of workplace needs, BWRPS

20

0

10

Percent

20

30

Panel B: WERS needs scalar (mean =0.211; variance = 0.057)

0

5
10
Number of workplace needs, WERS

15

0

10

Percent

20

30

Panel C: WRPS needs scalar (mean = 0.34; variance = 0.022)

0

5
10
Number of workplace needs in US

15

34
Appendix A: The Data sets

UK: The Workplace Employee Relations Survey 1998
The Workplace Employee Relations Survey 1998 (WERS98) is a nationally representative survey
of workplaces with 10 or more employees covering all sectors of the economy except agriculture,
fishing, mining and quarrying, private households, and extra-territorial organizations. The analyses
use two elements of the survey. The first is the management interview, conducted face-to-face with
the most senior workplace manager responsible for employee relations. Interviews were conducted
in 2191 workplaces with a response rate of 80 per cent. The second element is the survey of
employees within workplaces where a management interview was obtained. Self-completion
questionnaires were distributed to a simple random sample of 25 employees (or all employees in
workplaces with 10-24) in the 1880 cases where management permitted it.25 Of the 44,283
questionnaires distributed, 28,237 (64 per cent) usable ones were returned.26
UK: British Worker Representation and Participation Survey (BWRPS) 2001
The BWRPS was conducted as part of the monthly BMRB Access Omnibus survey. Interviews
were conducted using face-to-face computer assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) techniques. In
total, some 3614 interviews were conducted as part of the Omnibus survey. Of these 1,355 people
were eligible to take part in the BWRPS. The weighting schema used in this analysis ensures that
demographic profiles match those for all employees in Great Britain aged 15 or over.
US: Worker Representation and Participation Survey (WRPS) 1994-1995
The WRPS was based on telephone interviews with a nationally representative sample of 2,408
adults, 18 and over, who were employed in private companies or nonprofit organizations in the
continental US with 25 or more employees.
US: Peter Hart Opinion Poll Data
Peter D. Hart Research Associates has conducted random telephone calls for the AFL-CIO on
worker attitudes toward unions and economic issues. It has used the same question about voting for
a union in all of its surveys, which gives it the best time series of worker preferences available.

25

The probability of worker selection is the product of the probability of the workplace being selected and the
probability of an employee being selected from within that workplace.
26
The weighting scheme compensates for sample non-response bias detected in the employee survey (Airey et al.,
1999: 91-92).

35

Appendix B: Needs Scales
There are a variety of ways in which one might wish to construct an index of the ‘needs’ or
‘problems’ workers face at the workplace. Traditionally, analysts have contented themselves with a
single measure, such as an overall job satisfaction measure or perception of the climate of
employment relations. However, single measures suffer from a number of drawbacks. First, any
single item will only capture a part of an underlying multi-dimensional concept such as ‘needs’ or
‘problems’ at work. Measuring such a concept across various dimensions helps reduce the degree
to which a proxy for needs suffers from this type of measurement error. Second, there is no reason,
a priori, why one should give precedence to one facet of workplace needs or problems. Third,
particular needs or problems fall or rise in salience depending on external factors, such as the point
in the business cycle. For instance, workers may be less likely to cite problems with pay
satisfaction when the labor market is tight and employers are having to meet fairly large wage
demands to attract and retain workers. A multi-item index can ‘smooth’ such problems so giving a
potentially more accurate measure of changes in needs over time. Another big advantage of a
multi-item scale scored as a fraction of the total possible number of problems or needs recorded is
that it offers a possibility of making comparisons across surveys where the specific survey questions
are not identical.
Having chosen a multi-item scale, one needs to consider what enters the scale and how items should
be added together. We were constrained in the items available to us since the surveys had already
been undertaken. Fortunately those for both the USA and the UK contained items relating to key
domains, notably the climate at the workplace, ‘gaps’ in influence between what workers had and
what they wanted, satisfaction with various aspects of their jobs, ratings of management, and so on.
We chose to record a need or problem each time a respondent expressed one. As indicated in the
text, results were not sensitive to whether we used the full distribution of answers to a particular
item, or simply entered it as a dummy (0,1) variable where 1=a problem or need. One might
consider giving greater weight to some items than others in an additive scale, but there were no a
priori reasons for doing so. Inter-item correlations were generally positive suggesting adding items
together was not an unreasonable strategy. The Cronbach alpha for all items in the BWRPS was
.80, while the alpha for those in WRPS was .64.
There are difficulties running principal components analyses on the items entering the scales
because, as explained in the text, some questions were randomly assigned to sub-samples.
Consequently, whereas one can readily add up scores to similar questions to form a scale, principal
components analyses would have to be run on the sub-samples asked the same set of questions.
To test the effect of a single item measure relative to the needs scale we took measures of
employment relations climate in the UK and the US. We reran Table 5 columns 1 and 2 replacing
the needs fraction with measures of climate. In the case of the UK, we used responses to the
question: ‘how would you rate relations between employees and management at your workplace?’
with highest score being ‘excellent’ then ‘good’, ‘only fair’ then ‘poor’. Scoring ‘poor’ as the
highest and ‘good’ as the lowest, the coefficient was 0.52 with a t-stat of 6.38. Whilst strong this
coefficient compares to 3.77 (t=9.42) for needs. For US non-union workers we used responses to
the question ‘do you think relations between employees and management at your organization are
better than average, worse than average or about the same as in other places?’, coding ‘worse’ as 1
otherwise zero. Again, while strong (0.67, t=5.04) it compares to a coefficient of 2.45 at t=9.31 for
needs. On the basis of this test, the needs effects are much larger than those of single items.

36

The needs scales were constructed using the following items:
BWRPS, 2001 needs scale, 0 to 23
-

WRPS, 1995 needs scale, 0 to 13

WERS, 1998 needs scale, 0
to 13
job insecure
- don’t trust management ‘at all’ to
Workers paid unfair wages
- dissatisfied with
keep promises
Workers dismissed/disciplined
influence over job
- relations between employees and
unfairly
- dissatisfied with pay
management poor
Bullying by management/fellow
- dissatisfied with sense
- relations between employees and
workers
of achievement
management worse than average
Sexual or racial discrimination
Preferential treatment by management - not at all satisfied with influence in - dissatisfied with respect
from supervisors
Have witnessed or experienced unfair company decisions affecting job or
- disagree ‘managers
treatment at current workplace
work life
understanding about
- not at all likely to get influence you
Disagree managers understanding
having to meet family
want if you tried
about having to meet family
responsibilities
- management never take
responsibilities
- disagree people
suggestions seriously
Disagree people encouraged to
encouraged to develop
- have held back from making
develop skills
skills
suggestions about how to work more
Management poor at giving fair pay
- management poor at
efficiently through fear of own or
increases
keeping everyone up to
someone else’s job
Management poor at making work
date about proposed
- company system for resolving
enjoyable
changes
problems of individual employees is
Management poor at willingness to
- management poor on
‘not effective at all’
share power
providing everyone with
- ‘town’ meetings not effective at all
Management poor at concern for
the chance to comment
in resolving group problems
employees
on proposed changes’
- open door policy not effective at
Management poor at keeping
- management poor in
all in resolving group problems
everyone up to date with proposed
responding to
- employee committee not effective
changes
suggestions
at all in resolving group problems
Management poor at understanding
- management poor
- 1 point every time a person views
and knowledge of the business
dealing with work
Management poor at promoting equal having a lot of influence as ‘very
problems
important’ but does not have a lot of
ops
influence up to a maximum of 4 or
- management poor at
do not trust employer to keep
(depending on random routing) 1
‘treating employees
promises at all
fairly’
point every time a person is not
disagree that ‘my job is secure’
- relations between
disagree that ‘my job is interesting and satisfied with influence on these
management and
enjoyable’
items
employees poor or very
‘relations between employees and
poor
management’ are ‘poor’
not satisfied with influence in
company decisions affecting you
1 point every time a person views
having a lot of influence as ‘very
important’ but does not have a lot of
influence up to a maximum of 3

37

Appendix C: desire for union representation (0,6) among non-members by needs

!!
"

!!

!!

!!

!!

!!

!!

!!

#
!!

!!

$

%
!!

!!

!!

!!

& #
'% (
Controls are as per notes in Table 2 plus the count of HRM practices and the USA dummy in the pooled
regression

Appendix D: desire for union representation (0,3) among non-members in non-unionised
workplaces, WERS, linear estimation
) *

+

,
!!
$

-'

$

#

!

+
!!
&

.

%

+/

"

0

#

12

3

!!

!

!!

!!

%

$
& #
'% (
Notes: (1) controls common to both models: female, age (6 dummies), ethnicity, health problems, marital status,
qualifications (7 dummies), occupation (9 dummies), workplace tenure (4 dummies), hours (5 dummies), gender
segregation in the job at the workplace (5 dummies), banded wages (11 dummies), permanent contract. Additional
controls in model (1) which excludes fixed effects: region (11 dummies), local area unemployment, establishment size,
independent single establishment, industry (12 dummies), workplace age, foreign owned, % female no part-timers, no
ethnic minorities. (2) The count of HR policies runs from 0 to 6 with a point scored every time the following are
present: regular meetings between senior management and the whole workforce; team briefings involving two-way
communication; quality circles; grievance procedure; joint consultative committee; HR specialist. The count of variable
pay schemes runs from 0 to 4 with a point scored every time the following are present: profit-related pay, ESOPs,
performance-related pay, cash bonuses.

