                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               PEOPLE FLOWS IN GLOBALIZATION

                                           Richard B. Freeman

                                          Working Paper 12315
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12315


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
People Flows in Globalization
Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 12315
June 2006
JEL No.

                                            ABSTRACT


People flows refers to the movement of people across international borders in the form of
immigration, international student flows, business travel, and tourism. Despite its peripheral status
in debates over globalization, the movement of people from low income to high income countries
is fundamental in global economic development, with consequences for factor endowments, trade
patterns, and transfer of technology. In part because people flows are smaller than trade and capital
flows, the dispersion of pay for similarly skilled workers around the world exceeds the dispersion
of the prices of goods and cost of capital. This suggests that policies that give workers in developing
countries greater access to advanced country labor markets could raise global economic well-being
considerably. The economic problem is that immigrants rather than citizens of immigrant-receiving
countries benefit most from immigration. The paper considers "radically economic policies" such
as auctioning immigration visas or charging sizeable fees and spending the funds on current residents
to increase the economic incentive for advanced countries to accept greater immigration.


Richard B. Freeman
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
freeman@nber.org
                                                                                                  2




       The policy debate over globalization in the past decade has largely bypassed the

international mobility of labor. Restrict trade and cries of protectionism resound. Suggest

linking labor standards to trade and it’s protectionism in disguise. Limit capital flows and the

International Monetary Fund is on your back. But restrict people flows? That’s just an

accepted exercise of national sovereignty! During the last few decades, when most countries

reduced barriers to trade of goods and services and liberalized financial capital markets, most

also sought to limit immigration. In this essay, I examine what we know about the causes and

consequences of immigration. I argue that people flows are fundamental to creating a global

economy and that the interplay among immigration, capital, and trade is essential to

understanding the way globalization affects economies. I consider ways to reduce barriers to

immigration that could improve the well being of workers around the world.



The New Global Immigration



       The United Nations has estimated that in 2000 around 175 million people or 2.9

percent of the world lived outside their country of birth. Furthermore, the United Nations has

projected an increase in immigrants to about 190 million by 2005, more than twice as many as

the 82.5 million immigrants in 1970 (International Organization for Migration, 2005a; United

Nations, 2004, Table 2, p. viii). Two-thirds of immigrants are in advanced countries, where

8.7 percent of the population are foreign-born, compared to developing countries, where 1.5


                                               2
                                                                                                 3
percent of the population are foreign-born (United Nations, 2004, Table II.7, p. 43). About 10

percent of immigrants are refugees.1

       Table 1 shows that the single biggest recipient of immigrants was the United States.

Since Congress enacted the 1965 Immigration Act, which ended quotas based on national

origin, immigration to the United States has increased greatly. In 1964-69, Canada, Australia,

and New Zealand admitted more immigrants than the United States, but by 2000-2002, the

United States admitted more than twice as many immigrants as these countries. In 2000, the

35 million immigrants to the United States constituted 12.4 percent of the population, up from

4.7 percent in 1970. Because most immigrants are of working age, the immigrant proportion

of persons aged 25-39 was higher at 19.4 percent. Immigrants made up approximately half of

the 1990s job growth in the United States and added 2.3 million new workers during the

slower job growth of from March 2000 to March 2004, when native-born employment was

roughly constant (Camarota, 2004, Table 1).

       The second biggest recipient of immigration was Russia – the result of the collapse of

the Soviet Empire, which induced many persons of Russian ancestry to move to Russia and

which turned internal migration within the Soviet Union into international migration.

Germany is third with 7.3 million immigrants, followed by a diverse set of countries with 4-7

million immigrants, such as Ukraine, Saudi Arabia, France, Australia, Canada, and India and

Pakistan.

       Measured by the proportion of foreign born, the listing of countries changes. Middle


1 Estimates of the number of immigrants in a country usually come from Censuses of
Population, and in principle include illegal immigrants. But many illegal immigrants try to

                                               3
                                                                                                 4
Eastern countries were the largest recipients of immigrants: in the United Arab Emirates, 68

percent of the population are guest workers, Kuwait has 49 percent foreign-born; Jordan has

39 percent foreign-born, largely from Palestine; and Israel has 37 percent foreign-born, largely

from Russia (United Nations, 2002, Figure 2). The percentage of immigrants in Canada (18

percent) and Australia (23 percent) exceeds the percentage in the United States

       Even in advanced countries with smaller immigrant proportions, major cities attract

people from all parts of the globe. In 2000, 23 percent of Parisians were born outside France;

28 percent of London residents were born outside the United Kingdom. Immigrant proportions

are also high in major cities in some developing countries – 30 percent of the population in

Abidjan, Nigeria, for instance, were born outside Nigeria. In many countries, agricultural and

mining workers are immigrants, often undocumented, from lower income economies:

Dominicans work in Puerto Rico; Haitians work in the Dominican Republic; Africans from

nearby countries work in South Africa, and so on.

       Table 1 shows that the top migrant-sending countries are China, with 35 million

natives moving to other countries, India (20 million) and the Philippines (7 million)

(International Organization for Migration, 2005a) – all low income countries.

       The years of schooling and occupational attainment of immigrants relative to natives

varies greatly among receiving countries and source countries. Many U.S. immigrants,

(particularly those from Mexico) have less than high school education, while at the same time

many have advanced degrees. For instance, in 2000 45 percent of U.S.-based Ph.D.

economists and 55 percent of U.S.-based PhD natural scientists aged 45 years old or younger


avoid government enumerations, so estimates probably understate immigrant numbers.
                                            4
                                                                                               5
were born outside the United States (tabulated from Ruggles et al., <http://www.ipums.org>).

In some other countries immigrants are disproportionately highly skilled. Immigrants to

Australia are twice as likely to have university degrees as natives and 60 percent of

immigrants to the United Kingdom are professionals. The substantial flow of educated

persons from developing countries to advanced countries has brought the issue of “brain

drain” from the predominantly low-income migrant-sending countries to the fore in discussion

of international migration.



       Shifting Patterns of Migration

       Current international migration differs from the mass immigration of the nineteenth

and early twentieth century in several ways. First, the numbers involved currently are smaller

relative to world population. For instance, the 8.8 million immigrants who came to the United

States in 1901-1910 period is of similar magnitude to the 9.1 million immigrants who came in

the 1991-2000 period, but both the U.S. and world populations were much larger than in

1901-1910. Second, nearly half of current immigrants are women, whereas in the past

immigrants were disproportionately men. Third, the primary destinations of inflow and

outflow are different. In the nineteenth century, the primary flow of immigration was “poor

and huddled” Europeans seeking a better life in the Americas (Hatton and Williamson, 1998).

From the 1830s through the 1920s, 13 percent of Europe’s labor force migrated; in Ireland

and Italy some 30 percent of the labor force migrated. In contrast, immigrants today consist

largely of persons of non-European ancestry moving from poor countries to wealthy countries.



                                               5
                                                                                                6
Traditional European immigrant source countries such as Ireland, Italy, and Spain have

become immigrant-receiving countries, while formerly immigrant-receiving Latin America

has become a source of emigrants. With low birth rates in wealthier countries, and a growing

share of the world’s population in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, migration from low

income countries to the advanced countries is likely to continue.



       An Aside on Temporary Migration

       Permanent immigration, on which this essay focuses, is not the only form of people

flows in the global economy. Low-cost travel coupled with employment and educational

opportunities in other countries has led many persons to cross national borders for temporary

periods.2


       Temporary or guest workers are recruited for specific jobs for fixed periods, often in

such industries as construction or seasonal agriculture or manufacturing. In the 1960s through

the early 1970s, Germany recruited upwards of 2.6 million guest workers, mostly from

Turkey. Between 1942 and 1964, the United States recruited some 4.6 million Mexican

braceros to work on farms – roughly nine times as many Mexicans as came as immigrants

(Martin, 2001). South Africa recruits more than 100,000 foreign workers annually for its gold



2 Economic transformations of developing countries have also created massive rural-urban
migration within countries. Migration within some developing countries is comparable to
international migration, both in the distance involved in the migrant move and in the impact of
the move on lifestyles. Since 1950, the urban share of the world’s population grew from 30
percent to about half, largely through within-country migration. China severely restricted
rural-urban flows through the early 1980s, but then economic reforms that weakened
government control over the economy and relaxation of residence rules produced the largest
people flow in history, as approximately 150 million rural Chinese moved to urban areas
during China’s 1990s-2000s export-oriented growth spurt.
                                                6
                                                                                                    7

and coal mines. The oil-producing countries recruit temporary migrants to do everything from

housekeeping to construction to professional work.


         There is little international regulation of temporary migrant work. The International

Labor Organization has two conventions on migrant labor, but relatively few country

signatories.3 The General Agreement on Trade in Services, incorporated into the World Trade

Organization, was designed to ease temporary migration of service workers but has not yet

produced any agreements. Many temporary migrant source countries negotiate bilateral

treaties with migrant using countries to protect their citizens from exploitation of various

forms.


         In addition to temporary workers, there are international students, who travel overseas

on student visas for their schooling and who in principle intend to return to their home country

upon completing their schooling. In 2004, there were approximately two million international

students. The United States is the largest single student destination, with 573,000 overseas

students, one-fourth from China and India. But other countries compete in the market for

international students. Some Australian universities give foreign students, largely from Asia,
a bachelor’s degree for studying three years in their native country and one year in Australia,

and the students get points that make it easier for them to migrate to the country permanently.

         International tourism, defined as the temporary movement of people across national

borders for vacations, holidays, visiting family or friends, and business trips, is another major


3 Specifically, 44 countries signed Convention No. 97 of 1949 concerning Migration for
Employment and 18 countries signed Convention No. 143 of 1975 concerning Migrations in
Abusive Conditions and the Promotion of Equality of Opportunity and Treatment of Migrant
Workers (Ruhs and Chang, 2004, Table 2, p. 93; see also
<http://www.ilo.org/ilolex/english/newratframeE.htm>). The United States has not signed
either of these Conventions.
                                              7
                                                                                                  8

people flow. The World Tourism Organization estimates that there were 760 million

international tourist arrivals in 2004: 19 percent for business, 54 percent for vacation/holidays,

and the remainder for personal reasons. Since 1970 international tourist arrivals have more

than tripled.




What’s Bigger: People Flows, Trade, or Capital Flows?



        There is no single metric on which to compare the economic importance of people

flows, trade, and capital flows. Therefore, I compare the relative sizes of the three

components of globalization with a few different measures.

        First, I calculate immigration, trade, and foreign capital flows relative to the global

workforce, global production, and global investment activity, respectively. As shown earlier,

the stock of immigrants is nearly 3 percent of the global workforce and 9 percent of the

workforce in advanced economies. By contrast, the ratio of world exports to world GDP was

27 percent in 2004. But exports are measured as sales, while GDP is a value-added measure,

which excludes the purchases of materials and products from other sectors. Taking total sales

as roughly twice GDP, a more valid measure of international trade’s share of world output
would be around 13 percent. Foreign direct investment averaged between 2 and 3 percent of

global gross capital formation per year from the 1970s through the late 1980s. Since then,

foreign direct investment has been volatile, rising to 20 percent of global gross capital

formation in 2000 but it then falling to 7.5 percent of gross capital formation in 2004

(UNCTAD, 2004). An alternative measure of the globalization of capital markets is the share

of foreign equities in investors’ equity portfolio, which rose from negligible numbers in the

1970s to about 15 percent in the early 2000s (Stultz, 2005, Figure 3). Each of these

                                                 8
                                                                                                   9

    comparisons suggests that trade and international capital flows are a larger proportion of

    activity in goods and capital markets than immigration is in labor markets, presumably

    because governments have reduced trade barriers and liberalized capital markets but have not

    lowered barriers to immigration.4

           Another way to gauge the extent of globalization in labor markets versus other markets

    is to contrast the dispersion of wages with the dispersion of the prices of goods and dispersion


4
  Factor content analysis is another way to put the three components of globalization in context.
This uses labor input coefficients by industry to transform the imports and exports of goods into
the number of workers of different types and capital that might have produced (or not produced)
the goods absent trade. Borjas, Katz, and I (1997) estimated that immigration affected the U.S.
skill distribution more than trade. The huge immigration of less skilled workers from Mexico
dominated the differences in the skill mix between workers in import-intensive and export-
intensive industries. These calculations generated debate about the appropriate counterfactual for
factor content analysis (Krugman, 2000; Deardorff, 2000; Leamer, 2000) and the appropriate
input ratios (Wood,1994; Borjas, Freeman and Katz, 1997). In countries with less immigration
than the United States, trade should have a greater impact on implicit factor supplies.




                                                   9
                                                                                               10

of the cost of capital. Trade and factor flows are supposed to equalize prices across countries.

Reductions in barriers to trade and liberalization of capital markets notwithstanding, wages in

similar occupations vary more around the world than do prices of nominally similar bundles of

goods and the cost of capital. This suggests that the labor market is the least developed part of

globalization.

       Table 2 documents the huge variation in wages for roughly comparable workers in the

1998-2002 period, using the Occupational Wages Around the World dataset. The table shows

the range of pay across five occupations, transformed from national currencies to U.S. dollars

using market exchange rates in three of the columns and using purchasing power parity

exchange rates in three other columns. It gives the wages for the country at the top 20% point

of the earnings distribution and for the country at the bottom 20% point of earnings

distribution for each occupation. The ratios of wages measured in exchange rates between

countries in these two positions are on the order of twelve to one. The ratios of wages

measured in purchasing power parity units between countries in these two positions are on the

order of four to five to one. The pattern of huge country differences is found for other

occupations in the data file as well.

       The dispersion of prices for nominally similar goods is much less than the dispersion

shown in Table 2. Consider, for example, the price of a well-known commodity, McDonald’s
Big Mac sandwich (data are for 65 countries from

http://www.economist.com/markets/bigmac/displayStory.cfm?story_id=2708584http://www.s

kfriends.com/big-mac-index.htm). In 2004 the price of a Big Mac at the 80th percentile of Big

Mac prices based on exchange rates was $2.65 while the price of a Big Mac in the countries at

the 20th percentile of Big Mac prices was $1.40 – a 1.9:1 spread. The comparison using

purchasing power parity exchange rates is even closer.

       Finally, variation in the cost of capital is also much lower than variation in wages. Hail

                                               10
                                                                                                  11

and Leuz’s (2004, Table 1) estimates of the international differences in the cost of capital

show a variation between the return at the top 25th percentile to the return at the bottom 25th

percentile that averages 1.43 across estimates from five different sources.

        These differences in the dispersion of wages and prices suggest that globalization has

not reduced wage differences among similarly skilled workers as much as it has reduced price

differences and differences in cost of capital. Indeed, geographic variation in wages and living

standards around the world gives the global economy the appearance of a gated wealthy

community consisting of the advanced countries, surrounded by impoverished ghettos, with

immigration restrictions preventing the ghetto residents from moving to where their

productivity and well-being would be higher.




The Economics of People Flows




       Why do immigrants come? How do they do? How do immigrants affect their

destination countries? How does emigration affect source countries? Analyses provide clear

answers to why people immigrate and how they do in their new country. There is considerable

and often heated controversy over the impacts of immigration on destination and source

countries.


       Why Do Immigrants Come?

       For economic gain, says the economist. Through social networks, says the sociologist.

Over short distances, says the geographer. For family reasons, say the rules for visas in many

countries. All are right. The flow is from countries with low GDP per capita to countries with


                                               11
                                                                                               12

high GDP per capita and is greater the smaller the distance between countries (Borjas, 1987;

Kamemera, Oguledo and Davis, 2000; Clark, Hatton and Williamson, 2002). In the late

1990s, the ratios of source country GDP per capita to receiving GDP per capita among 15

OECD immigrant receiving countries were all below one. The average of the ratios was 0.57,

which implies that receiving countries had incomes that were 57 percent of those in source

countries. Weighting the ratios by numbers of immigrants, to count countries with more

immigrants more heavily, gave a lower average ratio of 0.44 (based on data in Coppel,

Dumont, and Visco, 2001, table 5).5 Mayda (2005) reports that economic conditions in

recipient countries were stronger determinants of immigration flows in the 1980s and 1990s

than conditions in source countries, in the sense that a strong economy in the former was more

likely to attract immigrants than a weak economy in source countries. Economic factors

motivate the huge levels of illegal immigration, as well, producing a multi-billion dollar

illegal industry that transports some four million people across borders annually worldwide.

Passel (2005) estimates that on the order of seven million illegal immigrants worked in the

United States in 2005. Wickramasekera (2002, p. 19) estimates annual worldwide illegal

trafficking in people of about six million.

       Are international immigrants positively selected from their source countries? The ideal

data to answer this and related questions about relative skills would record a person’s
economic performance in their home country before they immigrated and their performance in

the receiving country (along with similar data for non-immigrants in both countries), but


        5 Mean differences in incomes across countries are the main driver of international
migration. However, the shape of the income distribution in source and receiving countries
can also affect the rate and composition of immigration (Borjas, 1987). Consider two
countries with similar mean incomes but with different dispersions of income. A low-wage
worker could earn more in the country with the smaller dispersion of income, while the high
wage worker could earn more in the country with the greater dispersion. Indeed, high paid
workers move from Europe, where institutional wage setting and income tax rates reduce
wage dispersion, to the United States, where earnings are highly unequal and taxes are lower.
                                              12
                                                                                                13

standard longitudinal surveys do not follow persons across country lines. Hendricks’ (2002)

tabulations of the years of schooling of immigrants to the United States by country of origin,

and of the average years of schooling in country of origin, provides the strongest available

evidence for positive selection (United Nations, 2004, Box IV.1, p 98). These data show that

immigrants average 12.9 years of years of schooling compared to an average of 5.7 years of

schooling in the countries from which they come. But the educational composition of

particular immigrant flows can diverge from the general pattern. Ramos (1992) and Castillo-

Freeman and Freeman (1992) found that migrants from Puerto Rico to the United States

consisted disproportionately of less-educated workers, who had greater chances of

employment at higher earnings on the mainland than on the island. Ibarraran and Lubotsky’s

(2005) analysis of the 2000 Mexican Census shows that recent migrants from Mexico tend to

be less educated than non-migrants. Shorter distances makes it easier for these less educated

immigrants to come to the United States. Many immigrants with less than high school

education are from Mexico and El Salvador, who often enter the United States illegally. In

2000, about 8 percent of the Mexican-born population was living in the United States and 30

percent of Mexicans with formal sector jobs worked in the United States (International

Organization for Migration, 2005a, p. 196).

       The source countries for immigration differ among advanced countries for historical
reasons that reflect the influence of social networks. Former territories and colonies are an

important source of arrivals for England and France. Vietnamese migrate to Australia and the

United States due to ties built up from the Vietnam War. Turks are a prime immigrant group

in Germany. Specific locales in developing countries are major sources of immigration – for

instance, some districts in Guangdong, Fugian, and Zhejiang in China, or Sylhet and Mirpur in

Bangladesh and Pakistan have many emigrants, while few persons leave from other areas in

these countries. The most plausible explanation is that persons follow the lead of others from

                                               13
                                                                                                14

their area. Once a group enters a country, moreover, relatives immigrate to reunify families.

About 70 percent of U.S. immigrants enter as immediate relatives of citizens or are family-

sponsored. The proportion of immigrants for family reunification is equally high in France,

and significant in other countries as well (OECD, SOPEMI 2001, Trends in International

Migration, chart 1.2; International Migration Organization, 2005a, p. 388).


       How Do Immigrants Do?

       U.S. data show that immigrants earn less than the native-born overall and less than the

native-born with the same years of schooling, but that these differences decline over time. In

addition, immigrant/native earnings differentials vary across cohorts, as the human capital

“quality” of immigrants changes largely due to changes in the proportion of immigrants

coming from countries with more/less schooling (Borjas, 1992). In other immigrant-receiving

countries, immigrants also earn less than otherwise comparable natives, but with considerable

variation in magnitudes (Adsera and Chiswick, 2004). In most advanced countries,

immigrants have higher unemployment rates and lower employment rates than native workers

(OECD, SOPEMI, 1998, Figure 1). The United Kingdom is a partial exception, where

immigrants have higher skills and earnings than the native-born, but also have higher

unemployment than natives (Glover et al., 2001; Kahn, 2004). As immigrants accrue

experience and assimilate, they close some of the gap in earnings or occupational attainment

in most countries, even when the number of immigrants is huge, as in Israel in the 1990s

(Eckstein and Weiss, 1998).

       But the more striking difference is between the earnings of immigrants their new


                                              14
                                                                                                    15
     country and what comparable persons earn in their home country, particularly among less

     skilled workers. For example, in 2000 a Mexican with 5-8 years of schooling earned $11.20

     per hour in the United States compared to around $1.82 per hour in areas of Mexico with high

     rates of migration to the United States -- a six-fold difference.6 The huge gains in income that

     immigrants from a low-income country obtain by moving to a high-income country virtually

     guarantees that most of the gains to immigrants occur not because of positive selectivity of

     immigrants but rather because high-income countries have more complementary inputs: higher

     capital-labor ratios, more modern technology, superior infrastructure, more efficient markets

     due to greater legal protections of property and persons, and lower levels of corruption and

     rent-seeking.

            The effect of differences in capital-labor ratios and in the organization of markets on

     the earnings gain to immigrants who move from a developing country to a developed country

     can be estimated crudely. To assess how much of the difference in earnings between similarly

     skilled persons in advanced and developing countries could reasonably be attributed to

     differences in capital-labor ratios, assume that production is governed by a Cobb-Douglas

     production function. Then if the wage is equal to the marginal product of labor, the wage

     depends on the capital/labor ratio raised to a power that equals capital’s share of output.

     Capital labor ratios in the advanced world are roughly eight times those in developing


 6
   U.S. figures for Mexican-born with 5-8 years of schooling from the 2000 Census, Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series, defined as annual wage and salary income divided by numbers of
weeks worked and usual hours worked. Mexican figures from Hanson (2005), table 7, for men
30-59 with 6-8 years of schooling. The $1.82 is an unweighted average for three age groups.
Adjusted for purchasing power parity exchange rates, this is a differential of four times.

                                                    15
                                                                                               16
countries. Assuming that capital’s share of output is 0.30, wages in high-income countries will

be 87 percent higher than low-income countries.7 However, as Table 2 demonstrated,

advanced country wages typically exceed those of developing countries by four to twelve

times. This calculation is supported by other findings. Hendricks (2002) approximates

earnings of workers by real GDP per capita and estimates that, after taking account of

differences in years of schooling and physical capital, there remain differences in earnings

between immigrants in the US and persons in the low wage countries from which they came

of a multiple of five to eight. Oostendorp and I (2001, 2003) use the Occupational Wages

Around the World data file, which contains estimates of wage rates in 161 detailed

occupations in over 150 countries, to estimate the relation between capital-output ratios,

average years of schooling, and indicators of the efficacy of competitive markets (from the

Fraser Institute Economic Freedom data file) and earnings in the same detailed occupations


7 Let the production function be: Y= K L1- , where output is Y, capital is K, labor is L, and
where capital’s share of output is , and labor’s share of output is 1- , Differentiate with
respect to labor to get the marginal product of labor, dy/dL = (K/L) , and assume that the wage
equals the marginal product Then if K/L is 8 times larger in high-income countries, the wage
will be 8 times larger. With an of .3, the wage is 1.87 times larger in high-income than in




                                               16
                                                                                                17
across countries. These factors explain part of the cross country variation of earnings, but the

huge initial variation in earnings among countries almost guarantees a substantial country

wage gap, which may reflect the differences in underlying technologies of production.

       As a result of the huge rise in productivity and earnings that an immigrant gains from

working in an advanced country, the earnings of small numbers of immigrants in an advanced

country can be large relative to the national incomes of their home countries. The 0.1 percent

of India'
        s population living in the United States earn roughly the equivalent of 10 percent of

India'
     s national income (Desai et al., 2001).



       How Do Immigrants Affect Their Countries of Arrival?

       Because immigrants are largely young working age persons, immigration reduces the

average age of the population in immigrant-receiving countries. Even so, immigration does

not provide a ready solution to the problems of retirement and pensions that face many

developed economies. Younger immigrants eventually become elderly, and many have

children who require social spending like education. Rates of immigration far above existing

rates for immigration would be necessary to make a major contribution to resolving problems

of aging populations. For example, the United Nations estimates that for immigration to

stabilize the ratio of the number of retired persons divided by the number of workers, from

1995 through 2050 1.7 million persons would have to immigrate to France annually, compared



low-income countries.



                                               17
                                                                                               18
to an actual total of 140,000 immigrants in 2001. Stabilizing the old-age dependency ratio in

the United States over the same period would require that 10.8 million persons immigrated

annually (UN, Replacement Migration, 2000, table IV.4, table IV.7), which compares to 1.1

million immigrants in 2001. For immigration to stabilize the dependency ratio by 2050, 32

percent of the French population and 27 percent of the U.S. population at that time would be

post-1995 immigrants.

        In the basic model of immigration, immigrants reduce earnings of substitute factors

and raise the earnings of complementary factors, where complements might include capital

and some types of native-born labor. Figure 1 uses the marginal product of labor schedule to

examine how an increase in the supply of labor due to immigration affects the earnings of

workers for whom the immigrants are assumed substitute. The line S is the initial supply of

labor. Immigration of I persons increases the supply to S’. This reduces the wage from Wo to

Wo’. Total output increases by the trapezoid DEGH, but much of this gain accrues to the

immigrants. The gain to residents is the welfare triangle DKE, which consists of the loss in

incomes to factors that substitute for immigrants of BADK and a gain to factors

complementary to immigrants. Using variants of this model, most empirical analyses of the

effect of immigration on receiving country economies seek to estimate the adverse effect of

immigrant supply shocks on the earnings of native substitutes. This approach does not mean

that economists are excessively focused on the costs of immigration. With constant returns to

scale production, the loss to substitute natives also identifies the gains in income to




                                                18
                                                                                                    19
     complements and the size of the welfare triangle.8 If immigration had no adverse effects on

     native substitutes in this model, immigration would also have no beneficial effects on other

     factor earnings.

            Because immigrants concentrate in particular gateway cities or areas, a natural way to

     examine how immigration affects natives is to compare native earnings and employment

     between high- and low-immigrant areas. Since studies of the minimum wage generally yield

     low estimated elasticities of demand for less-skilled workers (Brown, 1988; Card and Krueger,

     1997), we might expect area studies to find that immigration has huge wage effects in local

     markets. After all, when demand is inelastic to wages, wages must change substantially to

     accommodate changes in supply. In fact, studies find the opposite. For the United States,

     Freidberg and Hunt (1995) report that a 10 percent increase in the fraction of immigrants in

     the population reduces native wages by at most 1 percent. Card (1990) found virtually no

 8
   Let W = wage, S = supply of factors for whom immigrants are substitutes, be the change
operator and I be the increase in supply from immigration. Then with constant returns to scale,
the welfare gain is (½) I W,where W is the reduction in the pay of substitute factors due to
immigration. If is the elasticity of demand for substitutes, then W/W = -1/ I/S and the
welfare gain will be 1/2 (I)2 (W/S). Increasing or decreasing returns to scale would alter the
benefits or costs of immigration on natives.




                                                   19
                                                                                               20
labor market effect of the 1980 Mariel boatlift of low-skill immigrant Cubans into the Miami

area; Hunt (1992) found only slight effects from the return of the pied noir from Algeria to

France in 1962; Carrington and deLima (1996) found no effect of the return of Portuguese

colonists from Africa to Portugal.

       What explains the modest or negligible relation between immigration and native wages

or employment in local labor markets? One possible explanation is that immigration induces

offsetting internal migration of the native-born population. This hypothesis has some

plausibility. For example, low-skilled workers from the Midwest migrated to California in the

1980s-1990s at lower rates than they had before the large flow of Mexicans to California.

However, the fact that differences in earnings across local labor areas within a country persist

over decades makes it implausible that internal migration could entirely offset the effects of a

huge immigrant flow in a decade. Analysts have reached no consensus about the extent to

which internal migration explains the absence of any relation between immigration and wages

among local labor markets (see the conflicting views in Borjas, Freeman, Katz, 1997; Filer,

1992, Card, 2001).

       Another possibility is that the immigrant flows induce capital flows to an immigrant-

receiving area. If this investment leads to the growth of immigrant-employing industries that

sell output at fixed world prices, then wages would not respond to changes in labor supply

(Leamer and Levinsohn, 1995). This explanation also has some prima facie plausibility: for

example, in New York and Los Angeles apparel industry “sweatshops” have grown that use

immigrant labor extensively. But no study has estimated the extent to which the changing



                                               20
                                                                                              21
industry mix in immigrant-intensive areas explains the modest impact of immigration on the

wages of native workers in those areas.

         Finally, many immigrants may have sufficiently different human capital from natives

that they are complements for nominally similar native-born workers. Mexican immigrants

with less than high school education have an average of three years less schooling than

Americans with less than high school education – although in studies of the U.S. labor market

they are both counted as low-skilled. And less educated Mexicans work in a different set of

occupations and industries than most less educated Americans: for example, 6.5 percent of

Mexican immigrants work in farming, compared to 0.5 percent of the U.S. native work force.

Also, low educated Mexicans are disproportionately represented in low skill construction jobs,

and in hotel and food services in particular regions where immigrant shares are high (Grieco

and Ray, 2004). Immigrants make up 45 percent of tailors, 40 percent of farm workers, 38

percent of taxi and limo drivers, 34 percent of private household workers, 31 percent of

laundry and dry cleaning operatives. In sports, immigrants make up 27 percent of major

league baseball players and 47 percent of minor league baseball players (tabulated from

Ruggles et al., 2004). But no study has estimated the impact of differences in skill mix or

occupational composition as a way to explain the modest effect of immigrant flows on native

labor.

         Perhaps the most prominent evidence that immigrant flows affect native wages is from

Borjas (2003), who analyzes how time series variation in immigrant flows by education and

cohort affect native earnings nationally. This mode of analysis seems particularly well-suited



                                               21
                                                                                                     22
    for assessing the effect of highly skilled immigration on native substitutes since the markets

    for university graduates is national in scope, with high mobility across areas. Indeed, looking

    at the labor market for Ph.D.s, Borjas (2005) finds that an immigration-induced increase in the

    supply of doctorates in a particular field depresses native earnings in that field with an

    elasticity of about 0.30. But the same story does not seem to apply to the country with the

    greatest immigration of highly educated persons, Israel, where the huge flow from the former

    Soviet Union had no discernible impacts on native outcomes (Friedberg, 2001, Weiss, 2000).



           How Does Emigration Affect Source Countries?

            In principle, the impact of emigration on source countries can be illustrated by

    reversing the direction of the changes in Figure 1. A fall in supply of labor from S + I to S

    raises the wages of substitutes for immigrants and reduces the income of complementary

    factors, so that income in the source country falls.9 However, this analysis ignores remittances

    from emigrants. The IMF estimates that in 2003, immigrants remitted approximately $131

    billion worldwide, $79 billion of which went to developing economies (United Nations, 2004,

    Table IV.3, p. 107). If, as some believe, unrecorded remittances are twice recorded

    remittances, developing country immigrants may have sent back to their home country about

    $160 billion. In small countries, remittances can account for a large share of GDP and foreign

    exchange. Even in a large country, remittances can greatly boost an economy. In the


9
   Berry and Soligo (1969) analyze how the emigrant’s effect on the home country depends on
whether he or she owns capital, whether he or she takes that capital to the new country or leaves
it in the home country, and the savings rate of the emigrant.

                                                    22
                                                                                              23
Philippines, remittances were 10.2 percent of GDP in 2003, up from 2.7 percent in 1990

(International Organization for Migration, 2005a, p. 240).

       Looking at the effects on immigrant-sending communities, Unger (2005) reports that

income grew more rapidly in Mexican municipalities that had high emigration than in those

with low emigration and that per capita income growth was associated with the percentage of

households that receive remittances across communities. Hanson (2005) found that areas in

Mexico which have significant migration of less skilled workers to the United States had

sizeable wage increases. This finding is consistent with O’Rourke and Williamson’s (1999)

analysis that earlier immigration from Ireland and Sweden raised wages in those countries in

the 1800s and early 1900s. Still, taking both the loss of emigrant labor and the effects of

immigration on remittances, trade and capital flows, empirical analysis does not reach any

firm conclusion about whether emigration hurts or helps source economies.

       Debate over the effects of emigration on home countries has focused on the emigration

of highly skilled workers – “brain drain” – whose loss might be particularly harmful to the

source country. Lowell, Findlay and Stewart (2004) estimate that in 2001 nearly one in ten

tertiary-educated adults in the developing world resided in North America, Australia or

western Europe. The magnitude of this flow varies among countries. Some 40 percent of

university-educated adults from Turkey and Morocco reside in OECD countries. Over half of

university-educated adults from the Caribbean live in the United States. In some African

countries, more than 35 percent of citizens with college education reside abroad (Desai, Kapur

and McHale, 2004). Still, in about two-thirds of developing countries less than 10 percent of



                                               23
                                                                                               24
the tertiary-educated population emigrated (Carrington and Detragiache, 1998; Adams, 2003).

       The traditional view of brain drain was that it is particularly harmful to developing

countries, which invested in the schooling of the emigré but do not gain the social returns on

that investment. To recompense the source country, Bhagwati (1976) proposed a tax on such

immigrants. China has required prospective emigrants to pay a fee dependent on their

education and years of work in China. If they have worked for sufficient years in China, there

is no fee. But most countries do not exercise control over potential emigrants. And China

along with other developing countries has not tried to reduce the flow of international students

from their country, even though about 90 percent of Chinese Ph.D. graduates from U.S.

universities choose to remain and work overseas for many years (Finn, 2003).

       Emigration of doctors, nurses, and other highly educated medical and health specialists

from developing countries raises especially great concerns. In some countries, a large

proportion of health professionals are foreign-born, mostly from developing countries. In

2000, 23 percent of health professionals in the United Kingdom were born outside western

Europe, making this the occupation with the highest percentage foreign-born in the country

(Dobson et al., 2001, Table 13.12)

       But even in this case, source countries have not tried to restrict the freedom of

residents to migrate. The Philippines has adopted the opposite strategy: developing nursing

schools that train their students for working in the U.S. medical system, so that they can more

readily emigrate.

       The reverse reading of Figure 1 suggests that the emigration of highly educated



                                               24
                                                                                               25
workers should reduce national income for those remaining at home, particularly of the less

educated. But the brain drain could benefit the source country in ways beyond remittances.

The potential to migrate can raise the expected return to schooling and induce more persons to

invest in skills (Beine et al., 2003), although this outcome would require that many who invest

with the intention of going overseas do not in fact do so, and that there is a high social return

to higher education in the home country. Emigrant scientists, engineers, or entrepreneurs

working in an advanced country could create innovations that improve productivity in that

country and thus lower the prices of the goods sold to their home country. Emigrant social

networks could foster trade and capital flows between the home country and the receiving

country; for example, Rauch and Trinidade (2002) find that immigrants to Canada increase

imports from their home country by 3 percent and exports by 1 percent. A sizeable immigrant

population in advanced countries may also affect the foreign policy of advanced countries

toward the developing country. Increased immigrant Moslem populations in Europe have

influenced European views of Israeli-Arab disputes.

       Comparisons of the growth of countries with differing levels of emigration (Beine et

al., 2003) support the view that some level of emigration can benefit the home country, but the

evidence is limited (Commander, Kangasniemi and Winters, 2004). The economic effects of

the brain drain and other people flows need to be analyzed as part of the broader pattern of the

globalization of economic activity rather than as stand-alone phenomena.



People Flows, Mutatis Mutandis



                                               25
                                                                                              26



        In models of international trade based on differing factor endowments across

countries, either trade of final goods and services or movements of factors of production can

serve to equalize prices and earnings (Mundell, 1957). If country A has more labor relative to

capital than country B, it can send labor to country B directly through immigration or

indirectly through the export of labor-intensive goods. Restrict immigration, and trade should

increase. Restrict trade, and immigration should increase. In the debate in the early 1990s

over the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), treaty proponents argued that by

creating more jobs and higher wages in Mexico, the treaty would reduce migration to the

United States (International Organization for Migration, 2005a, pp. 194-5). If immigration and

trade are limited, capital flows will substitute for them and create pressures toward equalizing

marginal productivity around the world.

       But trade, people flows, and capital flows were not substitutes in the U.S. economy

during the 1980s-2000s, when imports of goods and services, and financial capital, and skilled

and unskilled immigrants increased. In the 1870-1940 earlier period of mass immigration,

trade and immigration do not appear to be substitutes, either (Collins, O’Rourke and

Williamson, 1997).



       Technology and Complementarities

       So why might people flows be complements rather than substitutes for trade and

capital flows? One plausible explanation is that countries differ in technology (Markusen,



                                               26
                                                                                               27
1983; Markusen and Svennson, 1985). If an advanced economy uses more productive

technology than a developing country, then returns to both labor and capital will be higher in

the advanced economy and both factors will migrate there (Gierking and Mutti, 1983). Davis

and Weinstein (2002) present a model in which this outcome harms U.S. well-being, because

with more workers and capital, the U.S. economy expands production of the high tech goods

in which it has comparative advantage, driving down the price of those goods and thus the

earnings of native workers and capital. At the same time, the flow of workers and capital

reduces the production of the goods the U.S. imports from overseas, driving up the prices of

imports. In one sense, the U.S. technological edge gives it a “monopoly rent” that gets spread

over immigrant labor and capital in the United States and that falls as increased production

lowers the terms of trade. On the other side, advocates for the immigration of skilled

immigrants argue that they help produce a technological edge for the county, which benefits

all U.S. citizens.

        People flows might complement trade flows in other ways, too. Investing overseas

often requires knowledge and monitoring of local conditions, ranging from local management

or corporate insiders to regulatory and other decision-making bodies (Stultz, 2005). Large

flows of foreign direct investment are thus accompanied by business trips and temporary

assignments of executives to countries. Trade requires knowledge of suppliers, as well.

        Off-shoring of work, in which a firm sends work overseas rather than recruiting the

qualified worker to come to the advanced economy, fits the trade-immigration substitution

story better. Both immigration and off-shoring should adversely affect the economic position



                                              27
                                                                                               28
of substitute native workers, but the effects are complex. Some work cannot be sent offshore,

because it requires capital and other complementary resources that are exclusive to the

advanced country. Thus, immigrants might put greater pressure on native workers, since they

could substitute for natives in all activities, whereas offshore employees would be limited in

their activities. In this sense, substitute native workers might prefer off-shoring to

immigration. On the other, immigrants are likely to be paid more in the destination country

than workers doing off shored work in a source country, which creates less competitive

pressure on native wages.




       Immigration and Comparative Advantage


       Analyses of trade among advanced economies, which have similar costs of labor and

factor endowments, posit that trade occurs because countries gain comparative advantage from

being the first-mover on new technologies and/or from increasing returns -- say through

learning as output increases or through positive spillovers from one firm to another or from

sector to sector. Comparative advantage in turn induces factor mobility, which can alter factor

endowments. The United States is a prime example of a country where immigration has

responded to the country’s technological edge and added to its comparative advantage. The

United States has a comparative advantage in exporting relatively high technology products. It

imports science and engineering specialists, who help the country maintain its position at the

technological frontier. During the 1990s, the United States greatly increased the proportion of

foreign-born workers among scientists and engineers, as shown in Table 3. Nearly 60 percent

of the growth in the number of U.S.-based Ph.D. scientists and engineers over this decade

came from the foreign born.


                                                28
                                                                                                 29

       Could the U.S. economy maintain its comparative advantage in high-tech sectors

absent the huge immigrant flow? This issue is critical in national science policy (Freeman,

2005). Presumably the country could expand support for research and development activity

and for technology education in a way that could attract more citizens to these fields. But it

would take some time for domestic supplies to replace immigrant supplies. In the interim,

many multinationals might accelerate the on-going shift in research and development activities

overseas, reducing the U.S. comparative advantage in high tech. At the same time, the greater

the flow of immigrant scientists and engineers, the smaller will be the incentive for the native-

born to choose these careers.

       Many other advanced countries also seek highly educated immigrants. While the

English-speaking countries have been leaders in seeking to attract educated immigrants, the

major European countries have stepped up their efforts to attract top talent from developing

countries and to retain their own scientists and engineers. Even Japan, which has traditionally

shunned immigrants, has come to recognize the potential value of these particular immigrants.

The response of the U.S. academic community to the more stringent visa policies for students

post-9/11 and the ensuing response of the U.S. State Department to ease restrictions shows the

extent to which countries compete in the global market for highly talented students (National

Academy of Science, 2005).




More People Flows?




       Governments of receiving countries have hardened their stances against less-skilled

immigrants and refugees in the past two to three decades, possibly in response to the increased


                                               29
                                                                                               30
immigrant flows. In 1976 the United Nations surveyed national governments about their

views toward immigration: 11 of 150 governments wanted more immigrants; 10 wanted fewer

immigrants; while the rest of the countries were satisfied with their level of immigration. In

2003, the United Nations conducted a similar survey that covered 194 countries: 10 wanted to

increase the number of immigrants, while 65 wanted to lower the rate of immigration (United

Nations, 2004, Table III.2). Surveys show that the majority of citizens in most countries

believe that their country should restrict immigration more than it does (ISSP, 1995; PEW

Global Attitudes, 2003). In European Union countries with large welfare states, the major

stated economic factor underlying opposition is the fear that immigrants will burden the

welfare state (Dustmann and Preston, 2004). Persons who might be adversely affected by

immigrants in the labor market show modestly more negative attitudes toward immigration

than others (Scheve and Slaughter, 2001, for the United States; Dustmann and Preston, 2004,

for the European Union).

       However, public opinion and national policies toward immigration seems to rest on

issues well beyond gains and losses in the labor market. Some natives worry that immigrants

will present a cultural threat to their way of life and reduce social cohesion. This view is

reflected in the attitudes of some Europeans toward immigrants from developing countries,

particularly those from Moslem countries. Another factor that determines attitudes toward

immigration is that immigrants eventually become citizens and affect politics. In the United

States, both political parties seek support from the growing Hispanic community and tailor

their policies on immigration to appeal to that community. In 2000 the AFL-CIO reversed its

long-standing support for the employer sanctions law that criminalized the hiring of

                                               30
                                                                                                  31
undocumented immigrant workers and endorsed amnesty for millions of undocumented

workers and repeal of the employer sanctions law. The underlying rationale was that the

growing immigrant community would provide good recruits and political allies for unions, and

that legalizing the workers would reduce the impact of such immigrants in reducing wages and

opportunities for other workers.



       Easing Immigration Restrictions

       The critical barrier to immigration is the restrictive policies of destination countries

like the United States, Canada, Australia, the European Union, and Japan. If more persons

immigrated to these countries, world GDP would rise and the inequality of wages among

countries would presumably decline. As Dani Rodrik (2001) said: “If international policy

makers were really interested in maximizing worldwide efficiency, … they would all be busy

at work liberalizing immigration restrictions.” How might the world increase immigration?

       The most widely discussed policy reform is to increase temporary migration. Mode 4

of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) is designed to enhance the temporary

movement of service workers. The 2005 World Migration Report suggested that the

international community develop a Temporary Foreign Workers Programme to stimulate and

protect temporary migration (International Organization for Migration, 2005a, chapter 10; see

also Brucker et al., 2002; Rodrik, 2001). Other proposals that could increase the number of

immigrants and their contribution to economic well-being include providing greater protection

to migrants through international law and developing better financial infrastructure for

immigrants to make remittances to their home countries. Increasing the flow of temporary

                                               31
                                                                                                 32
immigrants under greater legal protection could produce economic gains for receiving

countries without risking some of the social costs, but in the past temporary immigration has

often led to permanent immigration.

       While these temporary migration policies could increase the number of immigrants

somewhat, it would take “radically economic” policies to have a major impact on immigrant

flows and to move world output toward the levels that an unfettered movement of labor would

produce.



       Radically Economic Policies

       The most radically economic policy would be to remove the bulk of restrictions on

international migration, placing immigration on a par with free trade and with the now largely

free flow of capital. The idea of being able to move to a different country to work freely seems

radical in this era of substantial immigration controls, but it was common in earlier periods.

Many immigrants came freely to the New World in the days of colonization (the exception

being slaves and transported convicts). Although the United States restricted immigration of

some groups from the nineteenth century on, not until 1921 did the country seek to limit

numerically the numbers who came. The United Kingdom did not regulate entry of foreigners

who came to work until World War I; and introduced restrictions on immigration from the

Empire and Commonwealth only with the Commonwealth Immigration Act of 1962. The

United Kingdom and Ireland continue to have free immigration between them, and the

European Union has an increasingly open labor market across member states. One

interpretation of the U.S. acceptance of large members of illegal immigrants is that the country

                                               32
                                                                                                      33
does effectively have open immigration, at least for persons crossing the Mexican border.

        However, because most of the gains from immigration accrue to the immigrants rather

than to the residents of destination countries (as stressed earlier), there is little incentive for

destination countries to ease immigration restrictions. The only way I can think of to increase

the receptivity of destination countries to accept more immigrants would be redistribute the

benefits of immigration so that a greater share of the benefits flow to natives and a lower share

of the benefits to immigrants. The “radically economic” policy here would be to use the price

system to equilibrate the market for immigrants rather than to ration entry. An immigrant

receiving country could charge admission fees or auction immigration visas or place special

taxes on immigrants, and use those funds to redistribute the gains from immigration to

existing citizens.

        Pricing entry into a country would simultaneously reduce the number of immigrants

who want to come (many of who also cannot come under the rationing policies that receiving

countries use) and would increase the number that receiving countries would admit.

Auctioning immigrant visas would assure that those who expect to gain the most from

immigration and would be willing to pay the highest amount would be admitted. Natives who

wanted to bring relatives in the United States or firms who wanted to bring particular workers

to the country could sponsor immigrants. On the other hand, since young persons with limited

capital who could gain greatly from immigration might be unable to fund themselves, they

would be better served by paying an extra amount from future income taxes, in the same

manner that Australia allows young persons to borrow for higher education and then repay

with additions to future income taxes.

                                                  33
                                                                                                      34

             Charging admission may strike some readers as crass and offensive, inconsistent with

     Emma Lazarus’s poem on the Statue of Liberty, but the proposal is not as radical as it might

     first seem.10 American firms that use H-1B visas to bring skilled workers already pay the

     Immigration and Naturalization Service $610, $500 of which goes to a special fund for

     training U.S. citizens. An auction of the H-1Bs would almost certainly raise more revenue

     and redistribute more of the gains from this form of immigration from the companies or visa

     entrants to the country as whole. Canada has a successful special immigration track for

     Investor Immigrants, which is limited to persons with business experience and a net worth of

     at least $800,000 (Canadian) who invest $400,000 for five years in Canada. Insisting that the

     wealthy businessperson invest in the country is an indirect way of charging entry. The United

     States makes it easier for non-citizens who enlist in the military to gain citizenship. In the

     early part of the twentieth century, the United States had a head tax on immigrants.

            How much might immigrants be willing to pay for citizenship in an advanced country?

     Since increases in income from immigrating from a low-income country to a high-income

     country can be quite large, the amount of money that could be raised by putting a price

     immigration could be substantial, at the minimum on the order of the magnitude of the

     remittances that immigrants send home. For a worker who comes to the US from a low

     income country, where wages may be 20 percent of U.S. wages in purchasing power parity
     terms, the gains would conservatively be on the order of $5,000 to $10,000 per year for

     workers who earned around the U.S. median income. This annual difference would cumulate

     over a working lifetime to $100,000, depending on the discount rate for future income. A

     fifty-fifty division of this gain would be substantial – if immigrants were charged $50,000

     apiece, one million additional immigrants would produce $50 billion dollars in tax receipts.

10
   This fits with the Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1983) analysis of the optimal policy for the United
States to adopt with respect to immigration from Mexico and with Wong’s (1983) analysis of the
ordering of trade in goods and capital and labor mobility for welfare maximization.

                                                     34
                                                                                                  35
          This type of scheme does have potential deleterious non-pecuniary effects. Perhaps

  selling or auctioning immigrant visas would reduce the loyalty that new citizens feel to a

  country, or lead to greater illegal immigration, or antagonize groups in the country or outside

  in ways that would be harmful. Taxing immigrant A at higher rates than native B may strike

  many as unfair, particularly for immigrants in the lower parts of the income distribution. In

  addition, shifting some of the gains to immigrants to the natives of wealthy recipient countries

  could reduce the flow of remittances to the poor sending countries, which would lower well-

  being in those countries. Wealthier persons are likely to be complements to low-skilled

  immigrants and would thus benefit doubly from the immigration. But for countries with

  extensive welfare states, where natives may pay high taxes for systems in which low paid

  immigrants gain, some form of redistribution of the benefits of immigration may be necessary

  to win support for greater immigration.



  Conclusion



People flows are large and growing but remain smaller than trade and capital flows, and thus

represent a promising way to attain global economic benefits. Greater mobility of labor across

borders could raise the output and economic well-being of workers in developing countries more

than many other policies associated with globalization. Recipient countries would experience

modest gains as well, but because immigration can be economically and culturally disruptive,

countries are unlikely to favor free immigration even to the moderate extent that they favor free

trade. Because the gains of immigration accrue largely to immigrants from low-income countries,

                                                 35
                                                                                                36
the key issue in getting citizens of advanced countries to look more favorably on immigration is

to design policies that give a larger share of the benefits to receiving countries. Even with

current immigration policies, aging populations and low birth rates in advanced countries

coupled with huge disparities in pay around the world and increased education in developing

countries are likely to lead to increased immigration in the decades ahead. People flows will

become more important in globalization and should help reduce global inequality among workers

around the world.




                                                 36
                                                                                          37

References

Adams, Richard H. 2003. “International Migration, Remittances and the Brain Drain: A Study of
24 Labor-Exporting Countries.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3069. Washington,
D.C.

Adsera, Alicia and Barry R. Chiswick. 2004. “Are There Gender and Country of Origin
Differences in Immigrant Labor Market Outcomes across European Destinations?” Discussion
Paper Series IZA DP No. 1432 December.

Baldwin, R.E. and L.A. Winters, eds. Chicago: Chicago University Press for NBER, pp. 235-72.

Beine, Michel, Frederic Docquier, and Hillel Rapoport. 2003. “Brain Drain and LDCs'Growth:
Winners and Losers.” July 2003 IZA Discussion Paper No. 819.

Berry, Albert & Ronald Soligo. 1969. "Some Welfare Aspects of International Migration,"
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 77, No. 5, September/October .

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. 1976. Taxing the Brain Drain. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. and T. N. Srinivasan. 1983. “On the Choice between Capital and Labor
Mobility," Journal of International Economics. May, 14: 3/4, pp. 209- 221.

Borjas, George. 1987. “Self-selection and the Earnings of Immigrants.” American Economic
Review. September, 77:4, pp. 531-553.

Borjas, George. 1992. “National Origin and the Skills of Immigrants in the Postwar Period” in
Immigration and the Workforce: Economic consequences for the United States and Source areas
(edited by George Borjas and Richard Freeman University of Chicago Press, pp17-47

Borjas, George. 2003. “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the
Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
118:4, pp.1335-1374.

Borjas, George. 2005. “The Labor-Market Impact of High-Skill Immigration “ American
Economic Review Vol. 95, No. 2, May 2005

Borjas, George, Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1996. “Searching for the Effect of
Immigration on the Labor Market.” AEA Papers and Proceedings , Session: Globalization and
the U.S. Labor Market. May, 86:2..

Borjas, George, Richard B. Freeman, Lawrence F. Katz. 1997. “How Much Do Immigration and
                                              37
                                                                                         38
Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 1, pp: 1-90.

Brown, Charles. 1988. “Minimum Wage Laws: Are They Overrated?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives. 2:3, pp.133-45.

Brucker, Herbert, et al. 2002. “Contracted Temporary Migration,” chapter 6 in Immigration
Policy and the Welfare System. Tito Boeri, Gordon Hanson, Barry McCormick, eds. NY: Oxford
University Press.

Camarota, Steve A. 2004. “A Jobless Recovery? Immigrant Gains and Native Losses,” CIS
(Center for Immigration Studies) Backgrounder article (October), table 1. At
<www.cis.org/articles/2004/back1104.html>

Card, David. 1990. “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.” Industrial
Labor Relations Review. January, 43:2. pp. 245-257

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 1997. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the
Minimum Wage. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Card, David. 2001. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outlfows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts
of Higher Immigration”Journal of Labor Economics. 19:1, pp. 22-64.

Carrington, William J. and Pedro J.F. de Lima. 1996. “The Impact of the 1970s Repatriates from
Africa on the Portuguese Labour Market.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 49, pp. 330-
346.

Carrington, William J. and Enrica Detragiache.1998. “How Big Is the Brain Drain?” IMF
Working Paper 98/102, Washington, DC.

Castillo-Freeman, Alida and Richard Freeman 1992 “When the Minimum Wage Really Bites:
The Effect of the U.S.-Level Minimum on Puerto Rico” in Borjas, George J. and Richard B.
Freeman, editors Immigration and the Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United
States and Source. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER.

Clark, Ximena, Timothy J. Hatton, Jeffrey Williamson. 2002. “Where Do U.S. Immigrants Come
From, and Why?” NBER Working Paper no.8998, June.

Collins, William J., Kevin H. O’Rourke, Jeffrey Williamson. 1997. “Were Trade and Factor
Mobility Substitutes in History?” NBER Working Paper no.6059, June.

Coppel, Jonathan, Jean-Christophe Dumont, and Ignazio Visco. 2001. “Trends in Immigration
and Economic Consequences, OECD Economic Department Working Paper no. 284, June
ECO/WKP(2001)10.
                                            38
                                                                                             39


Commander S, M. Kangasniemi and L. A. Winters. 2004. ‘The Brain Drain: Curse or Boon? A
Survey of the Literature’, Chapter 7 in Challenges to Globalization: Analyzing the Economics.

Deardorff, A., 2000. "Factor Prices and the Factor Content of Trade Revisited: What is the
Use?," Journal of International Economics 50(1), February.

Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein. 2002. “Technological Superiority and the Losses from
Migration.” NBER WP no. 8971, May.

Desai, Mihir A., Devesh Kapur and John McHale. 2001. “The Fiscal Impact of the Brain Drain:
Indian Emigration to the U.S.” Prepared for the Third Annual NBER-NCAER Conference,
December 17-18, 2001. Harvard University and National Bureau for Economic Research.

Dobson, Janet, Gail McLaughlan and John Salt. 2001. “International Migration and the United
Kingdom: Recent Patterns and Trends.” UK Home Office, RDS (Research Development
Statistics) Occasional Paper 75, December. at
<http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs/occ75.pdf>

Dustman, Christian and Ian Preston. 2004. “Is Immigration Good or Bad for the Economy?
Analysis of Attitudinal Responses.” Centre for Research and Analysis of Migration (CreAM),
University College London, CreAM Discussion Paper Series no 06/04, December. At
<http://www.econ.ucl.ac.uk/cream/>

Eckstein, Zvi and Yoram Weiss. 1998. “The Absorption of Highly-Skilled Immigrants, Israel,
1990-95.” CEPR Discussion paper no.1853, March.

Filer, Randall K. 1992. “The Effect of Immigrant Arrivals on Migratory Patterns of Native
Workers,” in Immigration and the Work Force. George Borjas and Richard Freeman, eds.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER), pp 245-269.

Finn, Michael. 2003. “Stay Rates of Foreign Doctorate Recipients from US Universities, 2001,
Oak Ridge, TN, Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education.

Fraser Institute. 2001. Economic Freedom of the World. At <http://www.freetheworld.com>

Freeman, Richard B. 2005. “Does Globalization of the Scientific/Engineering Workforce
Threaten US Economic Leadership?” NBER WP no. 11457, July.

Freeman, Richard B. and Remco Oostendorp. 2001. “The Occupational Wages Around the
World Data File.” International Labor Review. November, 120:4

Freeman, Richard B. and Remco Oostendorp. 2003. Occupational Wages Around the World,
                                           39
                                                                                          40
Data Files, 2003 Data at <http://www.nber.org/oww/>

Friedberg, Rachel M. 2001. “The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics. MIT Press, 116:4, pp. 1373-1408.

Friedberg, Rachel M. and Jennifer Hunt. 1995. “The Impact of Immigrants on Host Country
Wages, Employment and Growth.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. American Economic
Association, 9:2, pp. 23-44.

Glover, Stephen, Ceri Gott , Anaïs Loizillon, Jonathan Portes, Richard Price, Sarah Spencer,
Vasanthi Srinivasan and Carole Willis.. 2001. “Migration: An Economic and Social Analysis”
UK Home Office, RDS (Research Development Statistics) Occasional Paper 67. at
<http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs/occ67_migration.pdf>

Grieco, Elizabeth and Brian Ray. 2004. “Mexican Immigrants in the US Labor Force” March 1,
Migration Information Source. At
<http://www.migrationinformation.org/USFocus/display.cfm?ID=206>

Gierking, Shelby and John Mutti. 1983. “Factor Rewards and the International Migration of
Unskilled Labor : A Model with Capital Mobility.” Journal of International Economics, May,
14:3-4, pp. 367-380.

Hail, Luzi and Christian Leuz. 2004. “International Differences in the Cost of Equity Capital:
Do Legal Institutions and Securities Regulation Matter?” University of Pennsylvania, December.
At <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=641981>

Hanson, Gordon. 2005. “Emigration, Labor Supply, and Earnings in Mexico” NBER Working
Paper 11412




                                              40
                                                                                         41
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey Williamson. 1998. The Age of Mass Migration. Causes and
Economic Impact. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey Williamson. 2002. “What Fundamentals Drive World
Migration?”NBER Working Paper no.9159, September.

Hendricks, Lutz. 2002. ““How Important is Human Capital for Development? Evidence From
Immigrant Earnings.” American Economic Review. March, 92:1, pp. 198-219.

Hunt, Jennifer. 1992. "The Impact of the 1962 Repatriates from Algeria on the French Labor
Market". Industrial and Labor Relations Review. April, 45:3, pp. 556-72.

Ibarraran, Pablo and Darren Lubotsky, 2005. “Mexican Immigration and Self-Selection: New
evidence from the 2000 Mexican Census”, NBER Working Paper no. 11456, July.

International Organization for Migration (IOM). 2005a World Migration 2005: Costs and
Benefits of International Migration. No. 882 - 22 June. At
http://www.iom.int/iomwebsite/Publication/ServletSearchPublication?event=detail&id=4171#

International Organization of Migration, 2005b Facts and Figures,
http://www.iom.int/en/PDF_Files/wmr2005_presskit/wmr_facts_and_figures/WMR_Facts_an
d_Figures.pdf

International Social Science Programme (ISSP). 1995. National Identity I, ZA No. 2880.
University of Cologne, Central Archive for Empirical Social Research. Available at German
Social Science Infrastructure Services
<http://www.gesis.org/en/data_service/issp/data/1995_National_Identity.htm>

Kahn, Lawrence M. 2004. “Immigration, Skills, and the Labor Market: international evidence”
Journal of Population Economics 17, pp 501-534.

Kamemera, David., Victor I. Oguledo, and Bobby Davis. 2000. “A Gravity Model Analysis of
International Migration to North America.” Applied Economics. 32:13, pp. 1745––55.

Kapur, Devesh and John McHale. 2004. Sharing the Spoils: International Human Capital
Flows and Developing Countries. Mimeo, The Center for Global Development, Washington,
DC

Krugman, Paul, 2000. "Technology, Trade and factor Prices," Journal of International
Economics. February, 50:1, pp. 51-71.

Leamer, Edward E. and James A. Levinsohn. 1995. “International Trade Theory: The
Evidence” In The Handbook of International Economics, Vol III, G. Grossman and K. Rogoff,
eds. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Leamer, Edward. 2000. “What’s the Use of Factor Contents.” Journal of International

                                            41
                                                                                           42
Economics. 50:1, pp. 17-49.

Lowell, B. Lindsay, Allan Findlay and Emma Stewart. 2004. Working Paper Seminar, “Brain
Strain: Optimising Highly Skilled Migration from Developing Countries.” Institute for Public
Policy Working Paper no.3, London.

Markusen, James R. “Factor Movements and Commodity Trade as Complements”
Journal of International Economics, 14, 1983, 341-356

Markusen, James R. and Lars E.O. Svennson. 1985. "Trade in Goods and Factors with
International Differences in Technology," International Economic Review, Vol. 26, 1985, pp.
175-192.

Martin, Philip. 2001. “There Is Nothing More Permanent Than Temporary Foreign Workers,”
CIS (Center for Immigration Studies) Backgrounder article (April). At
<http://www.cis.org/articles/2001/back501.html>

Mayda, Anna Maria. 2005. “International Migration:A Panel Data Analysis of Economic and
Non-Economic Determinants.” IZA Discussion Papers no. 1590, May. At
<http://www.georgetown.edu/faculty/amm223/InternationalMigration.pdf>

Mundell, Robert . 1957. "International Trade and Factor Mobility", American Economic
Review, June, 47, pp. 321-335

National Academy of Science, COSEPUP. 2005. Policy Implications of International
Graduate Students and Postdoctoral Scholars in the United States. National Academies Press
Washington DC

National Science Board, Division of Science Resource Statistics. 2004. Science and
Engineering Indicators 2004. May. Arlington, VA: NSF, National Science Board.

OECD, SOPEMI. 1998. Trends in International Migration. (Paris: OECD).

OECD, SOPEMI. 2001. Trends in International Migration. (Paris: OECD).

O'Rourke Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1999. Globalization and History: The
Evolution of a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Passell, Jeffrey S. 2004. “Mexican Migration to the US: The Latest Estimates.” Migration
Policy Institute, March 1. At
<http://www.migrationinformation.org/Feature/display.cfm?ID=208>

Passell, Jeffrey S. 2005. “Estimates of the Size and Characteristics of the Undocumented
Population.” PEW Hispanic Center Report, March 21. At
                                               42
                                                                                         43
<http://pewhispanic.org/files/reports/44.pdf>

PEW Research Center for the People and the Press. 2003. Pew Global Attitudes Project. June
3. At
<http://people_press.org/presentations/PewGlobalAttitudesViewsofaChangingWorld.pdf>

Ramos, Fernando. 1992. “Out-Migration and Return Migration of Puerto Ricans”in
Immigration and the Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source.
George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman, eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for
NBER.

Rauch, James E. and Vitor Trinidade. 2002. “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International
Trade.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 84:1, pp.116 -130.

Rodrik, Dani. 2001. “Comments at the Conference on Immigration Policy and the Welfare
State.” Trieste, Italy, June 23, 2001. At
<http://ksghome.harvard.edu/~drodrik/Comments%20on%20Immigration%20Conference.doc>.

Ruhs, Martin and Ha-Joon Chang. 2004. “The Ethics of Labor Immigration Policy.”
International Organization 58:1, pp. 69-102.

Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken,
Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series: Version 3.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population
Center [producer and distributor], 2004. At <http://www.ipums.org>.

Scheve, Kenneth F. and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2001. “Labor Market Competition and
Individual Preferences Over Immigration Policy.” Review of Economics and Statistics.
February, 83:1, pp. 133-145.

Stultz, Rene, M.. 2005. “The Limits of Financial Globalization” NBER Working Paper no.
11070, January.

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 2004. World Investment
Report 2004: The Shift Toward Services. New York and Geneva: United Nations. At
<http://www.unctad.org/en/docs/wir2004annexes_en.pdf>

UN (United Nations), Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2000. “Replacement
Migration: Is It a Solution to Declining and Ageing Populations?” ESA/P/W.160. March 21.
Population Division, UN Secretariat, New York, NY.

United Nations Population Division International Migration Report, 2002. E/2002/50. United
Nations, NY.
http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/ittmig2002/2002ITTMIGTEXT22-11.pdf

United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2004. World Economic and
Social Survey 2004. Part 2, International Migration. E/2004/75/Rev.1/Add.1,
                                                43
                                                                                        44
ST/ESA/291/Add1. United Nations, NY. At
<www.un.org/esa/policy/wess/wess2004files/part2web/preface.pdf>

Unger, Kurt. 2005. “Regional Economic Development and Mexican Out-Migration” NBER
Working Paper no. 11432, June.

Weiss, Yoram “High Skill Immigration; some lessons from Israel” Swedish Economic Policy
Review 7 (2000), 127-155

Wickramasekera, Piyasiri. 2002. “Asian Labour Migration: Issues and Challenges in an Era of
Globalization.” International Labour Office. International Migration Program. Geneva.

Wong Kar-Yiu. 1983. “On Choosing Among Trade in Goods and International Capital and
Labor Mobility,” Journal of International Economics. 14, pp. 223-250
Wood, Adrian. 1994. North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality: Changing Fortunes in
a Skill-Driven World. Oxford: Clarendon Press.




                                            44
                                                                                         45
Table 1
Leading Receiving and Sending Countries for International Migrants, 2000
(in millions of migrants)


Major Receiving        Total Immigrants
Countries              (millions)
United States          35.0
Russia                 13.3
Germany                 7.3

Major Sending          Total Emigrants
countries              (millions)
China                  35.0
India                  20.0
Philippines            7.0




Source: United Nations (2002, Figure 1) for immigration. International Organization of
Migration (2005b) for emigration.




                                             45
                                                                                                     46

    Table 2
    Monthly Earnings in the Same Occupation, by country, 1998-2002


                                   Earnings in US $               Earnings in US $
                                   Using Exchange Rate            Using Purchasing power Parity

Occupation       #         Top 20% Bottom            Ratio of  Top 20%      Bottom 20%         Ratio of
                                        20% point Top 20%      point  in    point  in
                 countries point in                                                            Top 20%
                                                     to Bottom distribution distribution
                           distribution in                                                     to Bottom
                                        distribution 20%                                       20%
Physicians       51         2856         183          15.6         3815         753            5.1
Insurance        41         1668         205          8.1          2214         684            3.2
Agents
Computer         35         2114         166          12.7         2693         774            3.5
Programmers
Clicker Cutter   30         1097         95           11.5         1298         304            4.3
Logger           26         1040         77           13.5         1547         215            7.2


    Source: Freeman and Oostendorp, Occupational Wages Around the World Data File, 2003
    data, <http://www.nber.org/oww/>. To obtain the quintile earnings, I identified the appropriate
    country and gave the earnings of that country – that is, for clicker cutter, I give the earnings of
    the 6th highest country and 6th lowest country.




                                                    46
                                                                                                   47




  Table 3: Trend in Foreign-born Share of Science and Engineering Employment, by Education
  Group.


Group                                  1990                    2000                     2004
Bachelors                              11%                      17%                     17%
Masters                                19%                      29%                     32%
All Ph.D.                              24%                      38%                     37%
Ph.D.s, age less than 45               27%                      52%                      –
Post-Doctoral                          49%                      57%                      --


  Source: 1990 and 2000 bachelor’s, masters, Ph.D. and Ph.D.s less than 45 years of age,
  tabulated from Census of Population, IPUMS data; <http://www.ipums.umn.edu>. 2004
  figures tabulated from NBER merged outgoing rotation files at
  http://www.nber.org/data/morg.html, Post-Doc, NSF, Science and Engineering Indicators,
  2004, figure 2.26, where the figures refer to temporary residents rather than to foreign born.




                                                 47
                                                                                           48



                  Figure 1: Gains & Losses from
                   Immigration and Emigration




Note: The effects of immigration on natives in the receiving country are shown by the increase
in supply from S to S+I. The effects of emigration on natives in the sending country are shown
by the decrease in supply from S+I to S.




                                             48
