                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               CONTRIBUTIONS OF ZVI GRILICHES

                                             James Heckman

                                          Working Paper 12318
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12318


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by James Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Contributions of Zvi Griliches
James Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 12318
June 2006
JEL No. B31, D24, O33

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper summarizes the major research contributions of Zvi Griliches.

James Heckman
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
j-heckman@uchicago.edu
                           Contributions of Zvi Griliches

                                        James Heckman



                                           April 17, 2006


In this article, I summarize Griliches’ contributions to economics and to applied econometrics. It

is a slightly revised version of my Nobel Prize nominating statement, submitted on multiple

occasions before his death.



I. Griliches Major Contributions to Economics

In this section of the article, I focus on three major contributions of Zvi Griliches to the

understanding of the economics of technical change:


   1. His work on the social rates of return to research activity and the role of economic

       incentives in determining the benefits from, and the diffusion of, new technologies;


   2. His work on developing and extending the “hedonic framework” for adjusting prices for

       changes in the quality of products; and


   3. His work on the sources of productivity growth.


His work on (1) laid the foundation for rigorous empirical studies of the private and social

returns to research activity, and hence for the role of formal research activity in generating

growth. His work on (2) provided a way of comparing new to old goods, and thus enabled both

researchers and the statistical agencies to correct quantity and price indices for improvements in
the quality of the goods consumed. His work on (3) transformed the study of productivity growth

from the study of a residual to a study of the measurable factors that caused increases in the

output available from given configurations of inputs, and in so doing changed both official

statistical procedures, and our understanding of how productivity improvements occur.


Griliches’ work on each of these topics has had a major impact on research in economics and on

the practices of statistical agencies of governments. As a result he is one of the most influential

empirical analysts in the history of economics. I review his contribution to these three topics in

the approximate chronological order in which Griliches started working on them.


In addition to these contributions, Professor Griliches has made major contributions to the

development of both the data sources and the econometric tools that underlie much of the applied

empirical work done today (especially empirical work on “micro” data sources). I include a

separate section on Griliches’ contributions to econometrics and to micro applied work more

generally.



1.     Rates of return and economic incentives for research activity

As a student, Griliches recognized that technical change was a major source of measured

productivity growth. This was the message emerging from the agricultural data developed by the

USDA and the national data constructed by the NBER (see, e. g., Barton and Cooper 1948,

Schmookler 1952, Fabricant 1954, Abramovitz 1956). It was also clear in this early research that

such technological changes are not purely “exogenous”. They are the result of economic activity,

especially where the main purpose is to generate such changes, as in organized public and private

research. His teacher, Theodore Schultz, attributed all the productivity growth in agriculture to
public investments in agricultural research (Schultz 1953). While the idea that the rate and

direction of technical change were influenced by economic incentives was not new, there were

almost no quantitative measures of the impacts of these incentives at the time Griliches began his

career.


His early empirical work on the social rate of return to research activity (JPE 1958b), and on the

role of economic incentives in determining the distribution of benefits from new technologies

(Econometrica 1957a), laid the foundations for scientific study of these topics. Their profound

effect on both our profession and on government agencies was a result of two aspects of his

study.


By going to a lower level of aggregation than had been used in previous studies he was able to

establish a direct link between research activity and the output the economy could produce from

its inputs (or its “productivity”), and to quantify the benefits from that research. The data he

gathered and analyzed on the development, diffusion, costs and benefits of hybrids and

hybridization techniques, and his use of a direct consumer surplus measure of the benefits from

hybrids, generated a lower bound to the national benefits from innovations that transformed

agriculture.


This work showed that economic logic can be used to empirically quantify the impacts of the

incentives which determine the distribution of benefits from research activity and, by

implication, the social and private returns from investing in that research. His papers

demonstrated how the diffusion of hybrid corn was related to the profitability from employing it,

and how the benefits from the research investments in different hybrids varied with the extent of

their markets and the cost conditions at the time of their development which in turn depended on
prior development of hybridization techniques.


This work, and subsequent work by Griliches and his coauthors on related topics, were the direct

antecedents to


   •   modern growth theory(which emphasizes the role of the production and transmission of

   knowledge in determining growth and structural change in the economy),


   •   modern productivity analysis and its embodiment in the productivity statistics produced

   by the federal government (which attempts to quantify the role of various factors in

   determining the output that can be produced from given quantities of inputs),


   •   demand analysis in characteristics space, and its embodiment, through hedonic analysis,

   in the price statistics of the federal government.


His subsequent work established additional empirical frameworks for determining the impacts of

knowledge-producing activities in the economy. It also provided initial estimates of relevant

empirical magnitudes, almost always qualified by the author’s own list of possible problems with

his conclusions. The frameworks, and his list of problems, were taken up and expanded upon,

first by the profession and then often by statistical agencies (initially in “experimental”

procedures, but later as part of official statistical procedures). Relevant contributions by

Griliches in approximate chronological order (with partial reference to his publications on these

topics) include:


1. Developing quality adjusted input measures, as in


   •   a series of articles in the JFE 1958b 1959 1960 1963 and the JPE 1963, focusing on the
   impacts of quality change and innovation in inputs on agricultural productivity,


   •   his joint work with Dale Jorgenson, AER 1966, and the Survey of Current Business 1967,

   on accounting for productivity growth in the U.S. economy, and


   •   his work on the returns to schooling and the adjustment of labor input for quality change.

   This includes his work in the Hansen volume 1970, with Mason in the JPE 1972, with

   Chamberlain in the IER 1975, the papers in the JPE 1976 and 1979, and Econometrica 1977.


2. Determining the biases (and their correction) in various econometric estimates of productivity;

this includes the role of left-out variables, errors in measurement, and distributed lags (see the

articles in the JFE 1958a 1959, and 1961, Review of Economics and Statistics 1960, and 1969,

Econometrica 1961 1967a, and 1970);


3. Establishing the hedonic framework for analyzing the relationship between prices and quality,

and hence for adjusting quantity and price data (and consequently productivity) for “quality”

change (Government Price Statistics Hearings 1961, with Irma Adelman in JASA 1961, with

Kaysen and Fisher in JPE 1962, Proceedings of the Business and Economics Statistics Section of

the American Statistical Association 1967, AER 1996),


4. Integrating formal research activity into productivity analysis and separating the influence of

basic versus applied research, as well as privately versus federally funded research activity (AER

1964, articles in the Williams 1973, and Kendrick 1980, volumes, Bell Journal of Economics

1979, AER 1986, and with Adams 1996, 1997).


I will return to (1) and (3) below. Much of the work in (2) is now standard in applied

econometrics more generally (both in course work and in judging applied articles), and I come
back to it in my discussion of Griliches’ impact on modern applied work. I conclude this section

with a brief review of (4) in conjunction with his earlier work on hybrid corn. The focus of this

work is on the role of research activity in generating growth and structural change.


Shortly after writing his seminal pieces on the diffusion and rates of return to hybrids, Griliches

began to question the generality of case studies on the returns to successful innovations and their

use in calculating social rates of return on investments in research programs more generally. It

was in this context that he developed an analysis of the contribution of public expenditures on

agricultural research to the overall productivity in agriculture using state data in the U.S. (AER

1964). By the mid-1960’s, he had presented more general analyses of the productivity growth

puzzle in manufacturing and in the economy at large (Griliches 1967b and Jorgenson and

Griliches 1967). At the same time he began his search for micro data with the twin hopes that; i)

the structure of the processes underlying productivity growth could be better studied at lower

levels of aggregation (see, e.g., Griliches and Ringstad 1971), and ii) by comparing returns at

different levels of aggregation one might learn something about the difference between the

private and social rates of return to research activities. This latter point was made explicitly in his

1979 Bell Journal essay, an essay which was an up-to-date accounting of the empirical progress

and problems in the research and development literature.


The Bell Journal paper exposits the “R&D Capital Model” which has become a standard tool in

this field. It outlines the “spillovers” problem and suggests several approaches to its solution,

some of which were taken up later by his students (e.g., Jaffe 1986) and/or reinvented (Romer

1990). Two related Griliches papers (Griliches 1979 and 1980) report the results of a major, two-

decades long effort to gain access to the detailed individual firm-level data on R&D collected by

the Census for the NSF and match them to parallel company data in the Censuses of
Manufacturers and Enterprise Statistics. I will come back to his work on spillovers after a brief

review of his work on the micro data.


The first paper on micro data was started in the mid-1960’s, reported at the Conference on

Research in Income and Wealth in 1975, but not published until 1980. It is important for two

reasons. It is one of the first attempts at integrating and accessing the micro data bases collected

through U.S. government firm surveys. Over the 1990s, the work done by Griliches and a few

others has helped to make such data available to researchers through the RDC’s (the regional

census data centers of the U.S. Bureau of the Census), and this in turn has had major impacts on

empirical work. This work also provided the first broad-based analysis of the returns to formal

research activity on micro level data.


The main conclusion of this line is of work is that various estimates “indicate an overall elasticity

of output with respect to R&D investments of about .07, which can be thought of as an as

average of .1 for the more R&D-intensive industries such as chemicals and .05 for the less

intensive rest of the universe. [It implies]...0.27 as the overall estimate of the average gross

excess rate of return to R&D in 1963...It is ‘gross’ because neither measure allows for any

depreciation of past R&D, and it is “excess” because the conventional labor and fixed capital

measures already include the bulk of current R&D expenditures once.” Although these numbers

are large, they are not large enough to account for most of the productivity growth in the U.S.

economy. On the other hand since they were based on micro data, they were more clearly

interpreted as measures of private returns, and spillovers of various forms were a possible

explanation for the productivity growth not yet accounted for.


After much labor, a new micro data set was created. It allowed him to update and extend this
work (Griliches 1986). The major advance in this study was the ability to distinguish between

basic and other R&D expenditures, and between privately and federally financed R&D

expenditures. The interesting findings were: (1) R&D contributed positively to productivity

growth and seemed to have earned a relatively high rate of return. Moreover, there was no

evidence of a decline in returns between the two studies, the first covering 1957-65, and the

second 1966-77. (2) Basic research appeared to be more important as a productivity determinant

than other types of R&D, and (3) Privately financed R&D expenditures were more effective, at

the firm level, than federally financed ones. The analysis of these data was updated in the 1980’s

by Lichtenberg and Siegel (1991) and has stood up to the test of time. Additional work using this

database has been done recently by Adams and Jaffe (1996).


The difficulties and long delays involved in working with confidential Census data led him to

look at other, more “open” data sources. In the 1970’s, detailed firm income and balance sheet

data became available in machine-readable form as part of the Compustat tapes. He initiated a

large, NSF-sponsored research project at the NBER in 1978 to study this data. This project

generated an easily accessible and widely used data set on manufacturing firms. A central part of

the project consisted of matching data for U.S. manufacturing firms in the various Compustat

tapes (including those on the over-the-counter market) with the records of their patenting

activity. The effort to analyze these data brought together a number of first-rate students and

collaborators. Much of the first round results of this work was summarized in a series of papers

presented at a 1981 NBER conference at Lenox, MA, and published subsequently in Griliches

(1984). His work on patents, summarized in “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators” (Griliches

1981), explained how the newly computerized patent indicator of knowledge-producing activity

could be used, and discussed both the potential and the weaknesses of the variable. Importantly,
it also pointed his students to the additional information on patent documents (citations,

ownership rights, geographic location, etc.) and encouraged them to use it to trace possible

externalities in the knowledge-generating process (e.g., Trajtenberg 1990, Jaffe 1990, and Jaffe,

Henderson and Trajtenberg 1993 and 1997).


Always aware of the potential importance of knowledge spillovers in the generation of

technological change (see the lengthy discussion in the 1979 “Issues” paper), he had already sent

a number of his students down the path of looking for such spillovers and some of them were

able to produce evidence of their existence (Evenson 1968, Evenson and Kislev 1973,

Schankerman 1979, Pakes and Schankerman 1984,and Jaffe 1986). In 1992, he surveyed the

accumulated literature on spillovers and the conceptual and econometric problems associated

with their estimation. The evidence that had accumulated since his 1979 paper was actually quite

impressive and, if taken at face value, would assign a greater role to R&D in the generation of

productivity growth and possibly also in its slowdown. More recently, he has investigated the

third aspect of this puzzle: the role of science and the productivity of the social resources

invested there (Adams and Griliches 1996 and 1997).


Thus, early on, several components of the new growth theories were integrated into his research:

the emphasis on “endogenous” technical change, the emphasis on R&D spillovers, and the

importance of imperfect competition in the R&D context. That technical change was endogenous

was not “news” to him. That is what he had been studying all along in his work on diffusion

(Griliches 1957a), on the role of purposive R&D expenditures as generators of such change

(Griliches 1964), and the impact of the economy on inventive output (Griliches and Schmookler

1963). The other main component of this literature was the emphasis on the importance of R&D

spillovers and their incorporation into aggregate growth models. Here there was a congruence of
later theoretical and empirical research, especially at the aggregate level (Coe and Helpman

1995, is a leading example of such work). What the new theories of growth added was the

explicit integration of the R&D process with market equilibrium in imperfectly competitive

markets. While the older literature discussed the “appropriability” problem due to the

“nonrivalrous” nature of R&D output, the problem had not been fully integrated into the earlier

growth models or reflected adequately in empirical work (though there is some discussion of it in

Griliches and Mairesse 1984). In so doing, the new growth theory also revived interest in

“creative destruction” (see, e.g., Aghion and Howitt 1992) of knowledge-based quasi-rent

positions, though these topics had been discussed earlier by Griliches and his students under the

label of “depreciation” of knowledge or R&D stocks (see Pakes and Schankerman 1984). The

new combination of theory and empirical work gave impetus to a whole new range of studies

(such as Caballero and Jaffe 1993, and Putnam 1997).


Griliches'work is still central to clarifying exactly what economists can learn from these

endeavors and what needs to be done to sharpen conclusions. A major theme of his AEA

Presidential address (1994) was the difficulty of estimating the productive impacts of R&D in a

world of imperfect output measurement, the problem of data sets that do not produce sharp

parameter estimates, and aggregation difficulties emanating (in part) from the spillover problem.

The address calls for a review and expansion of the national income accounts to include more

and broader measures of economic welfare, especially those that would bring the value and

quality of human time into this framework, and a plea for a lowering of expectations as to what

economics can deliver in this area. Griliches’ qualified, honest analysis of the fundamental

problems in determining how formal R&D activity effects our economy has converted a

theoretical problem into an empirical one, and has greatly advanced our knowledge.
2.      Hedonics

Hedonic price functions are empirical summaries of the relationship between the prices and the

characteristics of goods sold in differentiated product markets. They were introduced by Court

(1931) and revived by Griliches (1961) as a way of accounting for quality change in the prices of

new goods. He reasoned that since newer models of goods (in his case automobiles) often had

more desirable characteristics, the difference between the prices of the newer and the older

models should not be entirely attributed to inflation. On the other hand, if we build price indices

entirely from interperiod price comparisons of goods sold in both periods, that is, if we never

compare “old” to “new” goods directly, we will never capture the effect that switching to new

goods has on welfare, and this will bias price index calculations upward. Griliches suggests

estimating a surface which relates prices to characteristics, and then using the estimated surface

to obtain estimates of “quality adjusted” price changes for products with given sets of

characteristics.


A brief digression on the importance of the problem and of Griliches’ solution to it is in order.

Except in rare instances (and in most of those instances it is because Griliches’ hedonic

procedures have been incorporated into the official statistics), current price indices are built from

data provided by enumerators on price changes of a particular good at a particular outlet (both of

which are chosen by a sampling process). The good is defined by a detailed list of (physical, and

often brand name) characteristics. Identical goods sold at different outlets are not compared, and

even more importantly, newer versions of a good are not directly compared to older versions,

even if both versions perform precisely the same tasks.


No matter how fast new goods are incorporated into the index, without some direct comparison
between the new goods and old goods, the price change for the commodity group will be just a

weighted average of the price changes in the new and old goods. The subindices for the new and

old goods may both be increasing rapidly, even though consumers are transferring to the newer

and incurring a (quality adjusted) price which is only a fraction of the price they previously paid

for the old good. This can produce striking anomalies in the official price indices. For example,

the U.S. had a “flat” computer price index for a very long time, despite the fact that the price of a

“unit of computing power” had declined dramatically. Similarly, until recently, the Producer

Price Index (the PPI) never compared prices of generic drugs to the prices of the patented drugs

to which they were (FDA certified to be) bioequivalent. Thus the lapse of patents and the

introduction of generics never caused a fall in the drug index (this despite the fact that in many

cases most people were paying 30 to 40% of the original price of the patented drug). Only after

Cockburn and Griliches (1994) pointed out the empirical implications of this procedure was the

official PPI revised to make such a comparison.


There are many ways of comparing new to old goods, but most involve estimating utility or

production functions, and this in turn, requires a host of questionable assumptions discussed in

Pollak (1989), and later elaborated by Pakes (1998).1 So the rationale for using hedonics is the

same as that for using a standard index (originally given by Konus 1924), though one has to

accept the switch from goods space to characteristics space. More importantly, the outpouring of

empirical work using hedonics, some of it by Griliches and his coauthors (see the work with

Irma Adelman in 1961, with Kaysen and Fisher in 1962, the American Statistical Association

1967, with Ohta in 1976 and 1986 , with Berndt 1993, with Berndt and Rappaport 1995, with


1
 Using the characteristics of goods, the hedonic index is the Laspeyre’s lower bound to the ideal price index in
characteristic space.
Berndt and Cockburn in1996, with Fisher in 1995, with Cockburn in 1994, and the AER in

1996), but much of it by others (see Triplett 1971; Gordon 1990 and the articles in the Foss,

Manser and Young 1993, and the Bresnahan and Gordon 1997, volumes ), and the experiments

with the use of hedonic indices at the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), made it clear to all

involved that hedonic techniques provided price series that were often much more believable

than those developed using standard procedures.


As a result of this work, the Bureau of the Census adopted hedonics for their housing indices in

the late 1960’s, hedonics were adopted for use in deflating computer prices in the National

Income Accounts in the 1980’s, and subsequently the BLS adopted them for the apparel and

computer components of the CPI. Hedonic procedures are at various stages of development for

several other items in the U.S. and in several other countries. Much of the difficulty in applying

hedonic procedures more generally is that use of hedonics requires different data gathering and

data analysis procedures that will take time to implement.


The Boskin Commission, - set up by the U.S. Senate to investigate possible biases in the BLS’s

Consumer Price Index (CPI) - concluded that a bias of 0.7 per cent per year, out of a total bias of

1.1 per cent a year, was caused by one form or another of new good bias.2 The CPI is used to

determine cost of living increases for all entitlement programs (social security, veterans benefits,

and the like), all federal employees, tax brackets and a myriad of contracts in the private

economy. The implications of an annual bias of this magnitude are enormous. Moreover, similar

new goods and quality-adjustment problems arise in other price indices (notably the PPI).

Further, since quantity indices are generally obtained from dividing sales data by a price index,


2
    The commission consisted of Boskin, Dullberger, Griliches, and Jorgenson and issued its report in 1996.
and productivity is constructed by subtracting an output quantity index from one for inputs, any

bias in the price index transfers immediately into biases (of the opposite sign) in output indices

and subsequently in productivity indices. Thus the wider application of hedonics can be expected

to have further major impacts of policy, research, and descriptive importance.


Finally one should not ignore the intellectual debt applied work in economics owes to hedonics.

The empirical hedonic work made it clear that hedonic functions fit prices quite well. As a result

Griliches, and the others who had been working on hedonics, encouraged a range of researchers,

several of them Griliches students, to take Lancaster’s (1971) characteristic theory seriously, and

build empirical characteristic based models of demand (see Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes 1995

and the literature they cite). The result has been a notable improvement in our ability to estimate

demand systems in a range of markets, and, as a result, improvements in our ability to analyze

both price competition and the advantages of new goods in those markets (e.g., see Davis 1997;

Nevo 1996; and Petrin 1997.)



3.     The sources of productivity growth

Technical change is usually measured by changes in “Total,” or more precisely, “Multi-Factor

Productivity” (TFP, or MFP) at the firm, industry, or economy-wide level. Changes in total

productivity are either constructed as a difference between a change in an index of outputs and a

change in an index of inputs, or obtained as a residual from estimating a production function

relationship between those outputs and inputs.


Recall that Griliches’ early work on the returns to investment in hybridization documented that

the social returns to the investments in hybrid corn had been enormous. In addition, it analyzed
the relationship between the characteristics of the markets for different hybrids and the rates of

return to their successful development, partially answering the question of where successful

innovation is likely to be more socially profitable. On the other hand, it also led him to question

the ability of economists to generalize from case studies on the returns to successful innovations

to the social rates of return on investments in research program more generally.


As a result he started working on the direct measurement of “technological change” in more

aggregated data bases, using both output over input indexes and production function estimation.

This was based on the earlier work in agriculture summarized by Schultz (1953; see also Ruttan

1954 and 1956), which had been applied also to other sectors of the U.S. economy (see

Abramovitz 1956, and Solow’s 1957, elegant formulation). The stylized facts that had emerged

from this research were quite troublesome to Griliches. The major empirical result was that the

lion’s share of the observed growth in output was attributed to “technical change” rather than to

the then existing measures of capital and labor input. However technical change in this context

was no more than an unexplained “residual”, and both his background in econometrics, and his

quality as a social scientist, made him uncomfortable with basing conclusions on a residual, even

when it was renamed “technical change” and thereby implicitly given some explanatory power.


This led him to a research program designed to explain, or at least account for, the residual in

terms of processes which economists could understand and analyze. It had two broad

components;


   1. development of procedures for constructing input and output indexes that accounted for

       the improvements in both that were generated by growth processes,


   2. a deeper look at the model used to connect the input and output indexes.
Research on (2) led him to develop the econometrics of specification analysis including

questions of appropriate functional forms (with Ringstad 1971), of left-out variables (Griliches

ba), of distributed lags (JFE 1959, XLI(1), Econometrica 1961, Econometrica 1967a, and with

A. Pakes in the Review of Economic Studies in 1984), and of errors in variables (with V.

Ringstad in Econometrica 1970, Econometrica 1974, with G. Chamberlain in the IER 1975).

These are all topics which were central to developments in modern applied econometrics, and

which Griliches made substantial contributions to (see the next section). Work on (1) led to the

ingredients, the data, used in the model’s implementation. It directed him to the measurement of

the services of capital equipment, “left out” variables such as R&D, and corrections for; quality

change in material and capital inputs, deflation, quality change in outputs, depreciation, and the

education of the labor force.


This program of research, which was announced, implicitly, in “Measuring Inputs in

Agriculture” (Griliches 1960), and found its fullest expression in his two papers on agricultural

productivity (Griliches 1963 and 1964), are basic contributions to knowledge. In certain aspects,

this line of research was similar to the line of research pursued by Denison (1962) at about the

same time, and in retrospect it is easy to see the debate between Denison, and Griliches and

Jorgenson in the Survey of Current Business (1967) taking shape. Perhaps the biggest difference

between the conventional growth accountants and Griliches was that Griliches often stopped to

consider the broader implications of his findings on economics. Thus he was heavily involved in

the debates on understanding the relationship between education, productivity and wages (see the

next section), and, as documented above, on the interaction between various forms of scientific

activity and productivity.


Griliches'productivity work also had a direct impact on statistical agencies. Productivity
statistics are produced separately from national income accounts by the Division of Commerce.

Official agencies gradually produced a multi-factor, as well as a labor, productivity measure,

adopted the weighting scheme for capital proposed by Jorgenson and Griliches, and recently

integrated an education-based weighting scheme for labor input based on work by the same

authors.



II. The Griliches approach to applied econometrics

A review of Griliches’ contributions would not be complete without a section on his

contributions to econometrics and to applied work more generally. Griliches started his research

in agricultural economics, a field that took both data and econometrics seriously and used it to

attack substantive problems. Econometrics was a tool, not an end in itself. All of Griliches’

econometric work has been stimulated by economic questions. Still, because he was so careful

about the interpretation of his estimates, that he often uncovered problems that had more general

import and provided detailed analysis of them. As a result, many of his insights have now been

incorporated into the “standard” of what constitutes good empirical work.



1.     Specification bias

His paper on specification bias (1957b) was motivated by the contradiction between farm

accounting studies which indicated increasing returns to farm size and production function

estimates which showed no such results. Both the methodology of specification analysis and the

question were pursued by Griliches in a series of papers leading, among other works, to the book

on Economies of Scale with Vidar Ringstad (1971) and continuing to date in his work with Tor

Jacob Klette and Jacques Mairesse. This work is widely used by applied economists. The piece
with Ringstad (1971) extends specification analysis to errors-in-variables and simultaneity

contexts.


In joint work with Yehuda Grunfeld (1960), he raised the question, “what was the gain from

using micro data instead of the then more readily available industry level aggregates?” They

showed that in the context of incomplete and misspecified micro-models, the gain from

disaggregation could be illusory. That work is extended in joint work with Neil Wallace (1965).

The Griliches-Grunfeld paper was quite controversial and led to a small, but important literature.

It discusses the important problem of how much error, or rather, irrelevant variation, there is in

the micro data and how incomplete are micro models as descriptions of actual individual

behavior.


His paper on “Cost Allocation” (1972) started out as a consulting report and an analysis of

alternative ways of dealing with heteroskedasticity but turned quickly into another example of

specification analysis where the answer depends largely on the question one wants to answer.

The issue was economies of scale, but the methodology did not produce a unique answer to it.

Since the resulting function was nonlinear, the answer depended on the level at which the scale

elasticity was evaluated. It mattered whether the question was asked for the average railroad or

the average ton-mile, since the railroads in the sample differed greatly in size.



2.     Distributed lags

In his Ph.D. thesis research (Griliches 1957a), Griliches used logistic curves to analyze the

diffusion of a new technology (hybrid corn). The central fact studied there was the delay in

adjustment to such an event and the slow diffusion of this technology across farmers, space, and
time.


Griliches analyzed the specification problems raised by the presence of lagged dependent

variables in such models (1959). He considered a range of issues. It is difficult to distinguish the

source of the apparent slowness in response to adoption of the technology. Are the actors slow

because they face high adjustment costs? Are they slow because they are uncertain about the

information available to them and are waiting for more evidence for a move? Or are they only

apparently slow because the empirical models omit many factors?


Pondering the latter question led him to write an important paper on serial correlation bias

(1961), which suggested a way of distinguishing between the first and last interpretation of what

appeared to be rather low adjustment coefficients estimated by OLS. The simple idea was to nest

the first in the third, by adding lagged regressors to the equation and testing the pure serial

correlation interpretation. This suggestion became popular in the UK literature under the

“Comfac Test” name and has also been attributed to the late Denis Sargan. Sargan visited

Chicago at about the time Griliches was conducting this research so the allocation of the credit

for this work is ambiguous.


Working with distributed lag models, one quickly wants to move beyond the simple geometric

form introduced by both Cagan and Koyck. A number of efforts were made to generalize the

available functional forms, most notably by Almon (1965) and Jorgenson (1966). What Griliches

did in his “Survey” (1967a) paper was to connect both the functional form and identification

issues in an applied context. There is much useful material there, though the field has moved

away from such models to the estimation of unconstrained VARs at one extreme and an

emphasis on “cointegration” at the other. The increased availability of panel data has made
possible the estimation of more general models but also confronted analysts with new problems.

Estimating distributed lag models requires a history of the relevant influences but, because of the

shortness of such panels, much of the relevant history is pre-history and is absent from the data.

His joint paper with Ariel Pakes (1984) assumes a relatively simple pattern for such “pre-

histories” which allows it to estimate the “visible” part of the lag structure even in the absence of

earlier data.



3.      Errors in variables and panel data

Griliches’ move towards the analysis of micro data forced him to confront a new set of problems,

primarily in the form of erroneous or missing data. The paper with Vidar Ringstad (1970), uses a

very simple model to show that there is a sense in which random errors-in-variables lead to even

greater biases in nonlinear models than in linear ones. His Fisher-Schultz lecture (1974) surveys

the field more generally and discusses issues of specification associated with left-out

“unobservable” variables, such as “ability,” common to several equations or observations, and

introduces the work on siblings. His paper on brothers is joint with Chamberlain (1975) and

represents his effort to solve the left-out “ability bias” problem in the estimation of returns to

education, a topic he had previously worked on, and which I discuss further below. (Griliches

1970 and Griliches and Mason 1972).



4.      Production functions

Griliches wrote extensively on the methodology of estimating production functions. His work on

production functions set forth a large agenda, investigating functional form issues and largely

accepting Cobb-Douglas, looking for economies of scale, and discussing labor and capital
measurement issues (1967c). He also developed a sequel paper on the estimation of CES-type

functions based on manufacturing data by states (1967b). He used micro data on firms directly

instead of on state aggregates in his joint work with Vidar Ringstad published in Economies of

Scale and the Form of the Production Function (North Holland 1971).


His paper with Mairesse, “Heterogeneity in Panel Data” (1990), takes the heterogeneity issue

seriously and tries to estimate, a separate production function for each of the firms in his

samples. It finds too much heterogeneity in the estimates, much more than can be explained by

sampling variability alone, and concludes, along the lines of the Grunfeld-Griliches paper, that

the simple model then in use must be severely misspecified at the micro level. His warnings

against the uncritical use of “twins” data in this context have, unfortunately, not been heeded.

Whether that matters at the more aggregate levels and in what contexts remains an open

question.


Other work with Mairesse (1998) surveys the state of production function estimation at the

micro, firm or plant level. It discusses the “search for identification” in such models and the

trend to estimate them from smaller slices of the data in an attempt to guard oneself against

various sources of simultaneity bias. Griliches shows how errors in variables may defeat such

attempts and discusses a variety of alternative approaches, including methods based on the

Generalized Method of Moments and the more complex alternative approaches.



5.     Automobile prices and hedonic regressions

Griliches has also done important work on the measurement of quality change. Two joint papers

written with Makoto Ohta are of special importance (1976, 1986). Besides the substantive
interest of the results, the first paper cite introduces the concept of “economic significance” in

hypothesis testing and suggests a relevant metric for it, while the second generalizes the usual

hedonic regression by making the parameters of some of the characteristics functions of prices

(gasoline), producing thereby relative stability in the estimated coefficients across both the

OPEC-induced oil price shocks. Griliches continued to be active in this field, working with a

number of coauthors on the measurement of computer and pharmaceutical prices (Berndt and

Griliches 1993; Berndt, Griliches, and Rappaport 1995; Berndt, Cockburn, and Griliches 1996;

Fisher and Griliches 1995; and Griliches and Cockburn 1994) and serving on the U.S. Senate

Finance Committee Advisory Commission on the CPI (see Boskin et al. 1996). I note that the

“hedonic” techniques which he revived and turned into an empirical tool, have already been

incorporated into the construction of some of the component indices that form the basis of the

Consumer and Producer Price Indices in the U.S. and in several other countries. Moreover since

use of hedonics has been shown to reduce various biases in the construction of those indices, we

can expect hedonics to be used more generally by the statistical agencies in the future.



6.     Estimating the returns to education

Griliches has also done influential research on the measurement of the returns to education and

the attempts to unravel them from the other forces that affect the observed wages of individuals.

The first paper in this section (1976) continues the work he started with Mason (Griliches and

Mason 1972). It uses NLS data with IQ scores on individuals and largely supports his earlier

conclusions. His Econometric Society Presidential Address, surveys this whole field (as of that

time) and concludes that if anything, the returns to education have been under, rather than over,

estimated (1977). This conclusion has largely stood the test of time (see the recent work and
surveys by Angrist and Krueger 1991; Card 1995; Ashenfelter and Krueger 1992; and others).

The next two papers deal with more specific aspects of this field; the first surveying the then

still-developing field of sibling data analysis (1979) and the second, with Bound and Hall (1986),

pursuing an intricate missing data methodology, trying to use many of the available pairs and

individuals in the underlying data set (the NLS) to test the hypothesis that the unobserved

“ability” is priced differentially in the market for women than men. The latter paper is based on

the interesting contrast between brother-sister pairs and single sex brother-brother and sister-

sister sibling pairs.
                                          References

Papers by Griliches and co-authors


Adams, J. D. and Griliches, Z., “Measuring Science: An Exploration,” Proceedings of the

National Academy of Sciences 93, November 1996 12664-70.


Berndt, E., Cockburn, I. and Griliches, Z., “Pharmaceutical Innovations and Market Dynamics:

Tracking Effects on Price Indexes for Antidepressant Drugs,” Brookings Papers on Economic

Activity: Microeconomics 1996 133-88.


Berndt, E. and Griliches, Z., “Price Indexes for Microcomputers: An Exploratory Study,” in

Price Measurement and Their Uses, M. F. Foss, M. E. Manser and A. H. Young, eds. 1993,

NBER Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 57, 63-93, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Berndt, E., Griliches, Z. and Rappaport, N., “Econometric Estimates of Prices Indexes for

Personal Computers in the 1990s,” Journal of Econometrics 68(1) 1995, 243-268.


Boskin, M., Dulberger, E., Gordon, R. J., Griliches, Z. and Jorgenson, D., Final Report of the

Advisory Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index, December 1996, Washington, DC:

U.S. Government Printing Office, S. Prt. 104-72.


Bound, J., Hall, B. H. and Griliches, Z. “Wages, Schooling and IQ of Brothers and Sisters: Do

the Family Factors Differ?” International Economic Review, 27(1), Feb. 1986, 77-105.


Chamberlain, G. and Griliches, Z. “Unobservables with a Variance-Components Structure:

Ability, Schooling and the Economic Success of Brothers”, International Economic Review

16(2), June 1975, 422-49.
Cockburn, I. and Griliches, Z., “Industry Effects and Appropriability Measures in the Stock

Market’s Valuation of R&D and Patents,” American Economic Review, 78(2) 1988, 419-23.


Eden, B. and Griliches, Z., “Productivity, Market Power, and Capacity Utilization When Spot

Markets Are Complete,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 83(2) 1993, 219-

223.


Fisher, F. and Griliches, Z., “Aggregates Price Indices, New Goods, and Generics,” The

Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(1), no. 440, February 1995, 229-244.


Griliches, Z., “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change,” Ph.D.

dissertation, University of Chicago 1956.


Griliches, Z., “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change,”

Econometrica, 25(4) 1957a, 501-522.


Griliches, Z., “Specification Bias in Estimates of Production Functions,” Journal of Farm

Economics, 39(1) 1957b, 8-20.


Griliches, Z., “The Demand For Farm Fertilizer: An Econometric Interpretation of a Technical

Change,” Journal of Farm Economics, XL(3) 1958a, 591-606.


Griliches, Z, “Research Cost and Social Returns: Hybrid Corn and Related Innovations,” Journal

of Political Economy, LXVI(5) 1958b, 419-431.


Griliches, Z. “Distributed Lags, Disaggregation, and Regional Demand Functions for Fertilizer,”

Journal of Farm Economics, Feb. 1959, XLI(1), 90-102.


Griliches, Z., “The Demand for a Durable Input: U.S. Farm Tractors 1929-1957,” in A. C.
Harber (ed.) The Demand for Durable Goods, Chicago: University of Chicago Press 1960a 181-

207.


Griliches, Z., “Measuring Inputs in Agriculture: A Critical Survey,” Journal of Farm Economics,

XLII(5) 1960b 1411-1427.


Griliches, Z. “A Note on Serial Correlation Bias in Estimates of Distributed Lags,”

Econometrica, 29(1), Jan. 1961, 65-73.


Griliches, Z., “Production Functions, Technical Change, and All That,” Netherlands School of

Economics, Econometric Institute, Report #6328 1963a.


Griliches, Z., “The Sources of Measured Productivity Growth: U.S. Agriculture 1940-1960,”

Journal of Political Economy, LXXI(4) 1963b, 331-346.


Griliches, Z., “Research Expenditures, Education and the Aggregate Agricultural Production

Function,” American Economic Review, LIV(6) 1964, 961-974.


Griliches, Z. “Distributed Lags: A Survey,” Econometrica 35(1), Jan. 1967a 16-49.


Griliches, Z. “More on CES Production Functions,” Review of Economics and Statistics

XLIX(4), Nov. 1967b, 608-10.


Griliches, Z., “Production Functions in Manufacturing: Some Preliminary Results,” in M.

Brown, ed., The Theory and Empirical Analysis of Production, vl. 31 of NBER, Studies in

Income and Wealth, New York: Columbia University Press 1967c, 275-340.


Griliches, Z., “Production Functions in Manufacturing: Some Additional Results,” Southern

Economic Journal, October 1968, Vol. XXXV(2) 151-156.
Griliches, Z., “Notes on the Role of Education in Production Functions and Growth

Accounting,” in W. Lee Hansen, editor, Education, Income and Human Capital, NBER Studies

in Income and Wealth, Vol. 325, New York: Columbia University Press 1970.


Griliches, Z. “Cost Allocation in Railroad Regulation,” The Bell Journal of Economics and

Management Science 3(1), Spring 1972, 26-41.


Griliches, Z. “Errors in Variables and Other Unobservables,” Econometrica 42(6), Nov. 1974,

971-98.


Griliches, Z. “Wages of Very Young Men,” Journal of Political Economy 84(4) pt 2 1976, S69-

S85, combined refs at S239-S47.


Griliches, Z. “Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems,”

Econometrica, 45(1), Jan. 1977 1-22.


Griliches, Z. “Sibling Models and Data in Economics: Beginnings of a Survey,” Journal of

Political Economy 87(5) pt. 2 1979, S37-S64.


Griliches, Z., “Returns to Research and Development Expenditures in the Private Sector,” in J.

W. Kendrick and B. Vaccara, eds., New Developments in Productivity Measurement, NBER

Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 44 1980, 419-454, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Griliches, Z., “Market Value, R&D and Patents,” Economics Letters, 7 1981 183-187.


Griliches, Z., R&D, Patents and Productivity, Z. Griliches, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago

Press 1984.


Griliches, Z., “Productivity, R&D, and Basic Research at the Firm Level in the 1970s,”
American Economic Review 76(1), March 1986 141-154.


Griliches, Z., Technology, Education and Productivity: Early Papers with Notes to Subsequent

Literature, New York: Basil Blackwell 1988a.


Griliches, Z., “Productivity Puzzles and R&D: Another Nonexplanation,” The Journal of

Economic Perspectives, 2(4) 1988b, 9-21.


Griliches, Z., “R&D and Productivity: Econometric Results and Measurement Issues,” in P.

Stoneman, ed., Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technological Change, Oxford,

UK and Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell 1995, 52-89.


Griliches, Z., R&D and Productivity: The Econometric Evidence, Chicago: University of

Chicago Press 1998.


Griliches, Z. and Cockburn, I., “Generics and New Goods in Pharmaceutical Price Indexes,”

American Economic Review 84(5) 1994 1213-32.


Griliches, Z. and Grunfeld, Y. “Is Aggregation Necessarily Bad?” Review of Economics and

Statistics, Feb. 1960, 42(1) 1-13.


Griliches, Z. and Mason, W., “Education, Income, and Ability,” Journal of Political Economy

80(3), Part II, May 1972, S74-S103.


Griliches, Z. and Mairesse, J., “Productivity and R&D at the Firm Level,” in Z. Griliches, ed.,

R&D, Patents and Productivity, Chicago: University of Chicago Press 1984, 339-374.


Griliches, Z. and Mairesse, J. “Heterogeneity in Panel Data: Are There Stable Production

Functions?” in Paul Champsaur et al., ed., Essays in Honor of Edmond Malinvaud, vol. 3,
Empirical Economics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 1990 192-231.


Griliches, Z. and Mairesse, J., “Production Functions: The Search for Identification,” NBER

Working Paper No. 5067, Cambridge, MA, March 1995.


Griliches, Z. and Mairesse, J. “Production Functions: The Search For Identification,” in Steinar

Strom, ed., The Ragnar Frisch Centennial Symposium, Econometric Society Monograph Series,

Cambridge University Press 1998.


Griliches, Z. and Ohta, M. “Automobile Prices Revisited: Extensions of the Hedonic

Hypothesis,” in N. Terleckyj, ed., Household Production and Consumption, Studies in Income

and Wealth Vol. 40, New York: Columbia University Press for National Bureau of Economic

Research 1976, 325-390.


Griliches, Z. and Ohta, M. “Automobile Prices and Quality: Did the Gasoline Price Increases

Change Consumer Tastes in the U.S.?” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 4(2), April

1986 187-198.


Griliches, Z. and Pakes, A. “Estimating Distributed Lags in Short Panels with an Application to

the Specification of Depreciation Patterns and Capital Stock Constructs,” Review of Economic

Studies, LI(2), No. 165, April 1984, 243-62.


Griliches, Z. and Ringstad, V. “Error-in-the-Variables Bias in Nonlinear Contexts, Econometrica

38(2), March 1970, 368-70.


Griliches, Z. and Ringstad, V., Economies of Scale and the Form of the Production Function,

Amsterdam: North Holland 1971.
Griliches, Z. and Ringstad, V. “Various Bias Formulae,” Appendix C from Z. Griliches and V.

Ringstad, Economies of Scale and the Form of the Production Function: An Econometric Study

of Norwegian Manufacturing Establishment Data 1971, Amsterdam: North Holland 194-98.


Griliches, Z. and Schmookler, J., “Inventing and Maximizing,” American Economic Review,

September 1963, Vol. LIII(4), 725-729.


Griliches, Z. and Wallace, N. “The Determinants of Investment Revisited,” International

Economic Review, Sept. 1965, 6(3), 311-329.


Hall, B. H., Griliches, Z. and Hausman, J. A., “Patents and R&D: Is There a Lag?” International

Economic Review, 27(2) 1986, 265-283.


Jorgenson, D. W. and Griliches, Z., “The Explanation of Productivity Change,” Review of

Economic Studies, 34(3) 1967, 249-83.


Klette, T. J. and Griliches, Z., “The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators when Output

Prices Are Unobserved and Endogenous,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 11(4) 1996, 343-

361.


Mairesse, J. and Griliches, Z., “Heterogeneity in Panel Data: Are There Stable Production

Functions?” in P. Champsaur et al., eds, Essays in Honor of Edmond Malinvaud, vol. 3 193-231,

Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press 1990.
Other References


Abramovitz, M., “Resource and Output Trends in the U.S. Since 1870,” American Economic

Review, 46(2) 1956, 5-23.


Adams, J. D. and Jaffe, A. B., “Bounding the Effects of R&D: An Investigation Using Matched

Establishment-Firm Data,” NBER Working Paper No. 5544, Cambridge, MA, April 1996.


Aghion, P. and Howitt, P., “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,” Econometrica

60(2) 1992, 323-51.


Aigner, D. and S. Goldfeld, “Estimation and Prediction from Aggregate Data when Aggregates

are Measured More Accurately than Their Components,” Econometrica 42(1), Jan. 1974 113-34.


Almon, S., “The Distributed Lag Between Capital Appropriations and Expenditures,”

Econometrica, 33(1) 1965.


Angrist, J. and Krueger, A. B., “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling and

Earning?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 1991, 979-1014.


Ashenfelter, O. and Krueger, A., “Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling from a New

Sample of Twins,” NBER Working Paper No. 4143 1992.


Australian Industry Commission, Research and Development, Report no. 44, Canberra:

Australian Government Publishing Service 15 May 1995.


Barker, T. and Pesaran, M. H., “Disaggregation in Econometric Modeling–An Introduction,” in

T. Barker and M. H. Pesaran, eds., Disaggregation in Econometric Modelling, Routledge 1990

1-14.
Bartelsman, E. J. and Gray, W.B., Manufacturing industry productivity database, NBER

Technical Working Paper, Cambridge, MA, forthcoming 1996.


Basu, S. and Kimball, M., “Cyclical Productivity with Unobserved Input Variation,” Working

Paper 5915, Cambridge, MA: NBER, February 1997.


Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium”,

Econometrica, Vol.63, No.4, pp.841-90.


Biorn, E., “Panel Data with Measurement Errors,” in L. Matyas and P. Sevestre, eds., The

Econometrics of Panel Data: A Handbook of the Theory with Applications, 2nd ed. Dordrecht:

Kluwer 1996, Chap. 10, 236-79.


Bresnahan, T. and Gordon, R (eds), The Economics of New Products, the University of Chicago

Press 1997.


Brown, M. and Conrad, A., “The Influence of Research on CES Production Relations,” in M.

Brown, ed., The Theory and Empirical Analysis of Production, vol. 31 of Studies in Income and

Wealth, New York: Columbia University Press for NBER 1967, 275-340.


Burnside, C., Eichenbaum, M. and Rebelo, S., “Capital Utilization and Returns to Scale,” in B.

Bernanke and J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 10, Cambridge: NBER

1995, 67-109.


Caballero, R. J. and Jaffe, A. B., “How High Are The Giants Shoulders?” in NBER

Macroeconomics Annual 1993, Cambridge, MA 1993.


Cagan, P., “The Monetary Dynamics of Hyper Inflations,” in M. Friedman, ed., Studies in the
Quantity Theory of Money, Chicago: University of Chicago Press 1956.


Card, D., “Earnings, Schooling, and Ability Revisited,” Research in Labor Economics 1995.


Cockburn, I. and Henderson, R., “Public-Private Interaction and the Productivity of

Pharmaceutical Research,” NBER Working Paper 6018, April 1987, Cambridge, MA.


Coe, D. and Helpman, E., “International R&D Spillovers,” European Economic Review 39(5),

May 1995, 859-87.


Cummins, C., “Efficient Estimation of Regression Coefficients with Missing Data,” Ph.D. thesis,

Harvard University 1989.


Davis, P. (1997): “Spatial Competition in Retail Markets: Motion Theaters”, mimeo, M.I.T.


Denison, E. F., The Sources of Economic Growth in the United States, Supplementary Paper No.

13, New York: Committee for Economic Development 1962.


Evenson, R. E., “The Contribution of Agricultural Research and Extension to Agricultural

Productivity,” Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Chicago 1968.


Evenson, R. E. and Kislev, Y., “Research and Productivity in Wheat and Maize,” Journal of

Political Economy, 81(6) 1973 1309-1329.


Ezekiel, M. Methods of Correlation Analysis, 2nd ed., New York: Wiley 1941.


Foss, M., M. Manser and A. Young, Price Measurements and Their Uses, the University of

Chicago Press (Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 57) 1993.


Friedman, M., The Theory of the Consumption Function, National Bureau of Economic Research
General Series No. 63, Princeton University Press 1957.


Gordon, R., The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices, Chicago, the University of Chicago

Press (the NBER) 1990.


Grunfeld, Y., “The Determinants of Corporate Investment,” in A. C. Harberger, ed., The Demand

for Durable Goods, Chicago: University of Chicago Press 1960.


Grossman, G. M. and Helpman, E., Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, Cambridge,

MA: MIT Press 1991.


Hall, B. H., “The Private and Social Returns to Research and Development,” in B. Smith and C.

Barfield, eds., Technology, R&D, and the Economy, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution and

AEI 1996 140-162.


Hall, B. H., Cummins, C., Laderman, E.S. and Mundy, J., “The R&D Master File:

Documentation,” NBER Technical Working Paper 72, Cambridge, MA 1988.


Hall, R. E., “The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry,” Journal of

Political Economy, 96(5) 1988, 921-47.


Heckman, J. J., “Sample Selection as a Specification Error,” Econometrica, 47(1) 1979 153-161.


Henderson, R. and Cockburn, I., “Scale, Scope, and Spillovers: Determinants of Research

Productivity in the Pharmaceutical Industry,” RAND Journal of Economics, 27(1) 1996, 32-59.


Jaffe, A., “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firm’s Patents,

Profits and Market Value,” American Economic Review, 75(6) 1986, 984-1002.
Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M. and Henderson, R., “Geographic Localization of Knowledge

Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(3) 1993, 577-

98.


Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M. and Henderson, R., “Universities as a Source of Commercial

Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting,” Review of Economics and Statistics

1998.


Jorgenson, D., “Rational Distributed Lag Functions,” Econometrica, 34(1) 1966.


Kendrick, J.W., Productivity Trends in the U.S., Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press for

NBER 1961.


Klette, T. and Willassen, Y., “Errors in Variables and Parameter Bounds: An Application to the

Estimation of Production Relationships,” mimeo, Oslo: Central Bureau of Statistics of Norway

1993.


Konus, A.A., “The Problem of the True Cost of Living,” translated in Econometrica 10-29 1939

(original article published in 1924).


Kortum, S., “Equilibrium R&D and the Patent R&D Ratio: U.S. Evidence,” American Economic

Review, 83(2) 1993, 450-457.


Kortum, S. and Lerner, J., “Stronger Protection or Technological Revolution: What Is Behind the

Recent Surge in Patenting?” mimeo, Boston University and Harvard Graduate School of

Business 1997.


Koyck, L.M., Distributed Lags and Investment Analysis, Amsterdam: North Holland 1954.
Lancaster, Kelvin, Consumer Demand: A New Approach, Columbia University Press, New York

1971.


Lanjouw, J., Pakes, A. and Putnam, J., “How To Count Patents and Value Intellectual Property:

Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data,” NBER Working Paper 5741, Cambridge, MA

1996.


Lichtenberg, F. and Siegel, D., “The Impact of R&D Investment on Productivity: New Evidence

Using Linked R&D-LRD Data,” Economic Inquiry, 29(2) 1991, 203-29.


Mairesse, J. and Mohnen, P., “Research & Development and Productivity: A Survey of the

Econometric Literature,” Universite du Quebec a Montreal and CIRANO, December 1995.


Mairesse, J. and Sassenou, M., “R&D and Productivity: A Survey of Econometric Studies at the

Firm Level,” STI Review, 8 1991, 9-43, Paris: OECD.


Mansfield, E., “Rates of Return from Industrial R&D,” American Economic Review, 55 1965,

863-873.


Minasian, J., “The Economics of Research and Development,” in R. R. Nelson, ed., The Rate

and Direction of Inventive Activity, NBER Special Conference Volume 13, New Jersey:

Princeton University Press 1962.


Nadiri, M. I., “Innovations and Technological Spillovers,” WP No. 4423, Cambridge, MA.:

National Bureau of Economic Research 1993.


Nelson, R. R., “The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research,” Journal of Political

Economy, 67(June) 1959, 297-306.
Nelson, R. R. ed., The Rate and Direction of Economic Activity, Princeton, NJ: Princeton

University Press for NBER 1962.


Nevo, Aviv; “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry,” NBER Discussion

Paper, No. 6387 1997.


Olley, S. and Pakes, A., “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment

Industry,” Econometrica, 64(6) 1996 1263-97.


Orcutt, G. and Edwards, J., “Should Aggregation Prior to Estimation Be the Rule?” Review of

Economics and Statistics 51(4) 1969, 409-20.


Pakes, A. and Schankerman, M., “The Rate of Obsolescence of Knowledge, Research Gestation

Lags, and the Private Rate of Return to Research Resources,” in Zvi Griliches, ed., R&D, Patents

and Productivity, Chicago: University of Chicago Press 1984, 73-88.


Pakes, A. “Hedonic Bounds to Ideal Price Indices”, mimeo, Yale University 1997.


Pesaran, H. and Smith, R., “Estimating Long Run Relationships from Dynamic Heterogeneous

Panels,” Journal of Econometrics 65(1) 1995, 79-113.


Petrin, A.; “Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Mini Van”, mimeo,

University of Chicago, Graduate School of Business 1997.


Pollak, R., The Theory of the Cost-of-Living Index, Oxford University Press 1989.



Putnam, J., “The Value of International Patent Rights,” Boston: Charles River Associates 1997.


Ringstad, V., Estimating Production Functions and Technical Change from Micro Data,
Economic Studies No. 21, Oslo, Bureau of Statistics 1971.


Romer, P. M., “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(5)

1990, S71-S102.


Ruttan, V. W., Technological Progress in the Meat Packing Industry 1919-47, Washington,

D.C.: USDA: Marketing Research Report 1954.


Ruttan, V. W., “The Contribution of Technological Progress to Farm Output 1950-75,” Review

of Economics and Statistics, 38(1) 1956, 61-69.


Schankerman, M., “Essays on the Economics of Technical Change: The Determinants Rate of

Return and Productivity Impact of Research and Development,” Harvard Ph.D. thesis 1979.


Schankerman, M., “How Valuable Is Patent Protection: Estimates by Technology Field,” mimeo,

London School of Economics 1997.


Scherer, F. M., “Corporate Inventive Output, Profits, and Growth,” Journal of Political

Economy, 73 1965, 290-97.


Scherer, F. M., “Interindustry Technology Flows and Productivity Growth,” Review of

Economics and Statistics 1982, 627-634.


Scherer, F.M., “Using Linked Patent and R&D Data to Measure Interindustry Technology

Flows,” in Z. Griliches, ed., R&D, Patents and Productivity, Chicago: University of Chicago

Press 1984.


Scherer, R. M., “The Size Distribution of Profits from Innovation,” ZEW Discussion Paper, 96-

13, Mannheim, Germany 1996.
Schmookler, J., “The Changing Efficiency of the American Economy 1869-1938,” Review of

Economics and Statistics, 34(3) 1952, 214-231.


Schmookler, J., “Economic Sources of Inventive Activity,” Journal of Economic History,

22(March) 1962 1-20.


Schultz, T. W., The Economic Organization of Agriculture, New York: McGraw-Hill 1953.


Solow, R. M., “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,” Review of

Economics and Statistics, 39(3) 1957, 312-320.


Terleckyj, N., “Factors Underlying Productivity: Some Empirical Observations,” Journal of the

American Statistical Association 1958.


Trajtenberg, M., “A Penny for Your Quotes”, the Rand Journal of Economics 1990.


Triplett, J. (1971): “Quality Bias in Price Indexes and New Methods of Quality Measurement”

pp. 180-214, in Z. Griliches, op. cit.


Van Reenen, J., “The Creation and Capture of Rents: Wages and Innovation in a Panel of U.K.

Companies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1) 1996 195-226.


Woolridge, J., “Distribution-Free Estimation of Some Nonlinear Panel Data Models,”

unpublished, MIT 1990.
