                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TRADE AND GROWTH WITH HETEROGENOUS FIRMS

                                           Richard E. Baldwin
                                         Frédéric Robert-Nicoud

                                          Working Paper 12326
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12326


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                              June 2006, Revised October 2006




Submitted to JIE February 2005. This paper replaces a July 2004 draft written as a comment on Melitz (2003)
for Econometrica. The (rejecting) referees’ critiques were that our 9 page comment was not fair to the
literature, ignored welfare and omitted intuition. This draft redresses these faults and extends the analysis
in several directions. We are grateful for comments and observations from Thomas Chaney, Jan Haaland,
Gene Grossman, Elhanan Helpman, Wolfgang Keller, Tommaso Mancini, Marc Melitz, Virginia Di Nino,
Toshi Okubo and seminar participants at Hitotsubashi University, LSE,University of Barcelona and at the
2005 CEPR European Workshop on International Trade. Two referees and the JIE editor Jon Eaton provided
excellence advice which much improved the paper. Baldwin; Graduate Institute of International Studies, Av.
de la Paix 11a, CH-1202 Geneva; Robert-Nicoud; Department of Geography and Environment, LSE,
Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Richard E. Baldwin and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Trade and Growth with Heterogenous Firms
Richard E. Baldwin and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud
NBER Working Paper No. 12326
June 2006, Revised October 2006
JEL No. H32, P16

                                           ABSTRACT
This paper explores the impact of trade on growth when firms are heterogeneous. We find that
greater openness produces anti-and pro-growth effects. The Melitz-model selection effects raises the
expected cost of introducing a new variety and this tends to slow the rate of new-variety introduction
and hence growth. The pro-growth effect stems from the impact that freer trade has on the marginal
cost of innovating. The balance of the two effects is ambiguous with the sign depending upon the
exact nature of the innovation technology and its connection to international trade in goods and
ideas. We consider five special cases (these include the Grossman-Helpman, the Coe-Helpman and
Rivera-Batiz-Romer models) two of which suggest that trade harms growth; the others predicting
the opposite.


Richard E. Baldwin
Graduate Institute of International Studies
Av. De la Paix 11a
CH-1202 Geneva
SWITZERLAND
and NBER
baldwin@hei.unige.ch

Frédéric Robert-Nicoud
Department of Geography and Environment
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
f.l.robert-nicoud@lse.ac.uk
                                                                                                                      1

                 Trade and growth with heterogeneous firms
                                   Richard E. Baldwin and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud∗
    July 2004; submitted JIE Feb 2005; revised December 2005; this version: September 2006

       ABSTRACT

       This paper explores the impact of trade on growth when firms are heterogeneous. We
       find that greater openness produces anti-and pro-growth effects. The Hopenhayn-Melitz
       model selection-effect raises the expected cost of introducing a new variety and this
       tends to slow the rate of new-variety introduction and hence growth. The pro-growth
       effect stems from the impact that freer trade has on the marginal cost of innovating. The
       balance of the two effects is ambiguous with the sign depending upon the exact nature
       of the innovation technology and its connection to international trade in goods and
       ideas. We consider five special cases (these include the Grossman-Helpman, the Coe-
       Helpman and Rivera-Batiz-Romer models) two of which suggest that trade harms
       growth; the others predicting the opposite.

       JEL H32, P16.
       Keywords: trade and endogenous growth, heterogeneous firms, dynamic versus static
       efficiency.



                                    1. INTRODUCTION
Until the 1980s, trade theory assumed away intra-industry trade for convenience, but empirical
evidence revealed that much of world trade was exactly of the assumed-away kind (Grubel and
Lloyd 1975). In response, the so-called new trade theory (Helpman and Krugman 1985)
incorporated imperfect competition and increasing returns to account for intra-industry trade. The
modelling choices made by new trade theorists assumed away, again for convenience, differences
among firms. Recent empirical evidence, however, shows that differences among firms are crucial
to understanding world trade. For example, firm differences within sectors may be more
pronounced than differences between sector averages, and most firms – even in traded-goods
sectors – do not export at all (Bernard and Jensen 1995, 1999a,b, 2001; Clerides, Lach and Tybout
1998, Aw, Chung, and Roberts 2000, Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum 2003, Eaton, Kortum, and


∗
  Submitted to JIE February 2005. We are grateful for discussions with, or comments and observations from, Thomas
Chaney, Jan Haaland, Gene Grossman, Elhanan Helpman, Wolfgang Keller, Tommaso Mancini, Marc Melitz, Virginia
Di Nino, Toshi Okubo and seminar participants at Hitotsubashi University, LSE, University of Barcelona and at the
2005 CEPR European Workshop on International Trade. Two referees and the JIE editor Jonathan Eaton provided
excellence advice which much improved the paper. This paper replaces a July 2004 draft submitted to Econometrica as
a comment on Melitz (2003). The (rejecting) referees’ critiques were that our 9 page comment was not fair to the
literature, ignored welfare and omitted intuition. This draft redresses these faults and extends the analysis in several
directions. Baldwin; Graduate Institute of International Studies, Av. de la Paix 11a, CH—1202 Geneva; Robert-Nicoud;
Department of Geography and Environment, LSE, Houghton Street, UK—London WC2A 2AE.
                                                                                                          2
Kramarz 2004; see Tybout 2003 for a survey). In response, what might be called the ‘new new’
trade theory incorporated firm-level heterogeneity to account for the many of the new firm-level
facts. The main theoretical papers in this rapidly expanding literature are Bernard, Eaton, Jensen
and Kortum (2003), Melitz (2003), Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004), Bernard, Redding and
Schott (2004), Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2003), Melitz and Ottaviano (2003), Yeaple (2005),
Luttmer (2005a, b) and Chaney (2005).

Our paper studies the growth effects of greater openness by embedding a heterogeneous-firms trade
model in a series of product-innovation endogenous growth models (Grossman and Helpman 1989,
1991, Romer 1986, 1990, Rivera-Batiz and Romer 1991a, b, Coe and Helpman 1995, Dinopoulos
and Segerstrom 1999a, b, Keller 2004). We show that openness may either slow or speed growth
depending upon the impact of openness on the marginal cost of innovating. Since growth is too
slow from a welfare perspective in our model (as usual in product-innovation models), there can be
a tension between the dynamic and static welfare effects when greater openness slows growth. We
show, however, that the overall welfare impact may be positive even when openness slows growth.

To make these points as simply as possible, we work with a new-new trade model related to
Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004) and a ‘portmanteau’ product-innovation growth model that
includes as special cases Grossman and Helpman’s product innovation model (Grossman and
Helpman 1991 chapter 4), Rivera-Batiz and Romer’s ‘lab-quipement’ model, as well as three other
models. This task is made easier by the fact that these models are based on the well-known
Helpman-Krugman trade model. Indeed, it is insightful to think of our model as the Krugman
(1980) model with three important additions. First, we allow for knowledge spillovers in variety-
creation so that the cost of developing a new variety falls at the same pace as the value of
introducing a new variety. This eliminates the mass of varieties from the equilibrium conditions
with the growth rate of the mass of varieties taking its place as a key equilibrating variable; it also
allows us to endogenise the growth rate. Second, we add heterogeneity in firms’ marginal
production costs, using the Hopenhayn-Melitz variety generation/selection set-up where firms are
randomly assigned a marginal cost after having paid a start-up cost. Third, we add sunk market-
entry costs as in the ‘hysteresis and trade’ literature (Baldwin 1988, Baldwin and Krugman 1989,
Dixit 1989). The sunk costs of establishing a marketing ‘beachhead’ interact with the heterogeneous
marginal costs to produce two types of active firms – firms that sell only locally and firms that
export as well as sell locally.

The paper is organised in five sections after the introduction. The next two present the model
(section 2) and work out the long-run growth path (section 3). The subsequent two sections work
                                                                                                                 3
out the growth effects of greater openness (Section 4) and the welfare implications (Section 5).
Section 6 presents our concluding remarks.

       2. A HETEROGENEOUS FIRMS TRADE MODEL WITH GROWTH
The foundation of our model is the well-known Helpman-Krugman monopolistic competition
model. We work with two identical nations, a single primary factor L, and a single Dixit-Stiglitz
goods sector (‘manufactures’) with differentiated varieties that consumers view as symmetric.
Competition takes the form of Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition among firms facing iceberg
trade costs. Each manufacturing firm’s production cost function is linear, involving a sunk, variety-
development cost (we denote this ‘start-up cost’ as FI where I is a mnemonic for ‘innovation’) and a
constant marginal production cost (we denote the unit labour input coefficient as ‘a’).
Manufacturing firms are assumed to be heterogeneous with respect to their marginal production
cost (Hopenhayn 1992a,b). A typical firm’s ‘a’ is drawn from a density function G[a] whose
support is 0 ≤ a ≤ a0. The firm learns its ‘a’ after it has paid the start-up cost, FI.

Selling a new variety in a particular market also requires the firm to pay a sunk cost that reflects the
cost of adapting the variety to market-specific standards, regulations and norms. These costs –
which we refer to as ‘beachhead’ costs – may differ for locally produced varieties and imported
varieties. The cost of establishing a ‘beachhead’ for locally made products is FD (D is a mnemonic
for domestic) and FX for imported varieties (X is a mnemonic for exports).

The three fixed costs – the start-up cost FI and the two beachhead costs FD and FX – involve units of
‘knowledge’. The start-up cost requires κI units of knowledge, while adapting it to local and export
market conditions requires κD units and κX units of knowledge, respectively. Thus:

(1)                       FI = κ I PK ,      FD = κ D PK ,       FX = κ X PK
where PK is the price of a unit of knowledge (K for knowledge), and the κ’s are expressed in units
of knowledge. Knowledge is created by a perfectly competitive ‘innovation sector’ (I-sector for
short) and sold to potential entrants in the manufacturing sector.1 The I-sector produces knowledge
using labour; its technology can be written implicitly as:

                                  S                    r
(2)                       QK =       ;      PK = c[ w, a , n]
                                  PK




1
 The Hopenhayn-Melitz approach folds variety development into manufacturing, but innovation is the engine of
growth in our model, so we separate innovation and manufacturing by introducing an explicit innovation sector.
                                                                                                        4
where QK is the flow of new knowledge (the I-sector’s output), and S is total spending on new
knowledge (S is a mnemonic for savings since in equilibrium all savings goes to buy new
                                                r
knowledge). Competition ensures PK equals c[ w, a , n] which is the I-sector’s marginal cost
function; its arguments are the price of labour w, the vector of all unit-input coefficients of
                        r
manufactured varieties a , and ‘n’ is the number (mass) of varieties produced in equilibrium. This
allows the cost of producing knowledge to be influenced by the cost of direct inputs (labour) as well
                                                                 r
as the general level of efficiency in the economy as captured by a and n. The only restriction we
impose at this point is that c[⋅] is homogenous of degree minus one in n due to technological
spillovers. This means that the cost of knowledge falls as the I-sector learns from the experience of
making successful varieties as usual in endogenous growth models. We leave c[⋅] implicit for the
moment.

                              3. THE EQUILIBRIUM
This section works out the steady state growth rate and characterises the equilibrium distribution of
firm-level productivity. We first work out the instantaneous equilibrium, i.e. the economy’s
equilibrium at a point on the long-run growth path taking the growth rate as given.

3.1. Instantaneous equilibrium
Entry decisions are the fulcrum of this model and there are two types: 1) the start-up decision, and
2) the two market-entry decisions. Although these are linked, we treat them in sequence.

A firm that has already sunk its start-up cost will enter a particular market if the benefit of doing so
exceeds the cost. The benefit of entering a market depends upon the firm’s anticipated sales and
these, in turn, depend upon the firm’s marginal selling cost relative to that of its competitors.
Relying on the standard logic of fixed costs, we can already anticipate that only firms with
sufficiently low marginal costs will enjoy market shares that are high enough to justify sinking the
beachhead costs. Since there are two beachhead costs (FX and FD) there will be two thresholds, one
for domestic sales, which we denote as aD, and one for export sales, which we denote as aX. These
two thresholds define three types of firms. The most efficient firms, i.e. those with the lowest unit
labour requirements (a<aX) sell locally and also export (we call these X-types, short for export
firms). The least efficient firms (a>aD) do not produce (we call these N-types, short for non-
producers). Firms with intermediate efficiency (aX<a<aD) will produce but only sell locally (we call
these D-types, short for domestic firms).

To flesh out this intuition, we characterise the operating profit that firms would earn if they decided
to enter a given market. Under Dixit-Stiglitz competition, firms find it optimal to charge a constant
                                                                                                                     5
operating profit margin, 1/σ, where σ>1 is the constant elasticity of substitution among varieties.2
Thus the operating profit that a firm earns in a particular market equals the value of the firm’s sales
times 1/σ, where the value of its sales are its market-specific market-share times total spending in
the market, E.

By symmetry, wages are equalised internationally, so taking labour as numeraire (w=1) and using
well-known Dixit-Stiglitz results, firm-j’s price in its local market is aj /(1-1/σ). If it exports, its
price in the export market is τaj /(1-1/σ), where τ≥1 represents the usual iceberg trade costs (τ units
must be shipped to sell one unit in the export market). Thus, a firm’s market share as a function of
its marginal selling cost is:

                    1 m 1−σ                    aD                      aX
(3)        s[m] =    ( ) ;           m1−σ = ∫ a1−σ dG[a aD ] + φ ∫ a1−σ dG[a aD ] ;              0 ≤ φ ≡ τ 1−σ ≤ 1
                    n m                        0                       0


where ‘m’ is the firm’s marginal selling cost (‘a’ for local sales and ‘τa’ for export sales), m can be
thought of as a weighted average of firms’ marginal selling costs in a particular market; technically
m 1−σ is the (1-σ)th moment of the distribution function. Also, G[a a D ] is the conditional

distribution function of the a’s for producing firms, i.e. firms with a’s less than aD.3 A critical
parameter in our paper is the level of trade freeness (phi-ness); φ ranges from zero when trade is
perfectly closed (τ=∞) to unity when trade is perfectly free (τ=1), thus trade gets freer as φ rises.

Equation (3) is pivotal; six observations facilitate intuition and subsequent analysis: i) The ratio,
(m / m ) 1−σ , is a measure of the firm’s market-specific competitiveness, i.e. its marginal selling cost
relative to an average of its competitors’ marginal selling costs; ii) A firm’s market share exceeds
1/n to the extent its m is below the average m ; iii) A firm’s market share (and thus its operating
profit) increases as its marginal cost falls, ceteris paribus; iv) The average marginal selling costs,
m , depends on the two cut-off marginal costs, aD and aX, and the distribution G; v) As the mass of
active firms ‘n’ grows (as it will along the steady state growth path), the market shares of all
existing firms decline in tandem and at the rate at which n grows; vi) Freer trade (i.e. φ rises)
reduces the firms sales in the protected market.




2
    See Guide to Calculations for details available on www.hei.unige.ch/~baldwin/
3
    Since only varieties with a<aD are produced, G[a a D ] equals G[a]/G[aD]. See Melitz (2003) for a proof.
                                                                                                                    6
Cut-off conditions. Given the sunk-ness of the beachhead costs, FD and FX, the relevant benefit
of market entry is the present value of the market-specific operating profit. Defining the discount
rate as γ and using (3), firm-j’s benefit from entering its local and export market are, respectively,
s[aj]E/σγ and φs[aj]E/σγ, where E is total spending on manufactured goods in each (symmetric)
market. The market-entry cut-off conditions are thus:

                            E                           E
(4)               s[a D ]        = PK κ D ; φ s[a X ]        = PK κ X
                            σγ                          σγ
where aD and aX are the cut-off marginal costs for entering the local market and the export market
respectively (D stands for domestic and X for export).

Free entry condition. A potential entrant to the manufacturing sector must pay FI to develop a
new variety, learning the variety’s associated ‘a’ only after sinking FI. The potential entrant then
decides whether to invest in the further knowledge that is necessary to enter the local market and
the export market. Potential entrants that draw N-type varieties (a>aD) abandon their project. Those
lucky enough to get a<aD sink FD and FX, depending upon the revealed ‘a’. Plainly, the value of the
resulting variety depends on its ‘a’; we derive these values in section 4.2.

A firm’s start-up decision can be cast in terms of the expected present value of a ‘winning’ variety
(winning in the sense that it is actually produced, i.e. is a D- or X-type). Because we focus on
steady states, the ex ante likelihood of getting a winner with any particular ‘a’ is exactly the same as
the actual distribution of a’s for winners already in the market. In other words, the expected
operating profit of a winner must exactly match the average operating profit earned in the market.
This average is E/σn because total operating profit worldwide equals 2E/σ (due to the constancy of
the Dixit-Stiglitz operating profit margin) and the worldwide mass of produced varieties is 2n.
Thus:4

                                                              E
                 Expected value of a ‘winner’ =                   .
                                                             σ nγ

Of course, innovators do not come up with a winner every try; only new varieties with a<aD will be
‘winners’. It is straightforward to calculate the expected fixed cost of getting a winner (i.e.
developing a D- or X-type patent). The answer is:




4
 This ‘expected=observed’ result marks the steady state in any model with a memory-less firm-birth and death process.
Eaton and Kortum (2002) use a similar approach.
                                                                                                                               7
                                                         G[a X ]       1
(5)                  F ≡ PK κ ;       κ ≡ κD +κX                 +κI
                                                         G[a D ]     G[a D ]

where F is the expected fixed cost, which depends upon the price of knowledge PK and the
expected units of knowledge required to get a ‘winner.’ The first term in κ is the fixed cost for
local sales – an expense that every winner incurs. The second term reflects the fact that a fraction of
winners are X-types and so incur κX as well; G[aX]/G[aD] is the probability of being an X-type
conditional on being a winner. The third right-hand term reflects the expected variety development
cost, i.e. κI times the inverse probability of getting a winner on a random draw since, i.e. 1/G[aD] is
the number of ‘tries’ needed to get a winner.

The expected pure profit from developing a new variety is (E/σnγ - F ). Free entry drives this to
zero, so the free entry condition for variety introduction is:5

                               E /σ
(6)                                 = PK κ
                                nγ
If we took the ratio of (E/σnγ) and PK κ , (6) would be Tobin’s q=1 equation since E/σnγ is akin to
the expected stock market value and PK κ is the expected replacement cost. As we shall see, all
growth effects of trade work through the replacement cost.6

Since c[⋅] from (2) is homogeneous of degree minus one in n, we can use an ‘intensive form’ of PK,
pK≡nPK. With this notation, the cut-off and free entry conditions, (4) and (6), are:

             EaD 1−σ            E a X 1−σ                                      E                                       r
(7)             ) = pK κ D , φ
                 (                ( ) = pK κ X ,                                      = pK κ ;        pK ≡ nPK = c[ w, a ,1]
           σγ m                σγ m                                            σγ
Observe that ‘n’ drops out of the three conditions (as it must if n is to continue rising forever on the
growth path). In an endogenous growth model, the discount factor γ – which varies with the growth
rate – adjusts as ‘n’ would in a no-growth model.

3.2. Saving, investment and growth
To finish our characterisation of the growth path, we need to address two further issues: the
equilibrium discount rate, and the utility maximising division of income between consumption and
saving/investment. To this end, we work with simple intertemporal preferences, namely:

(8)
                          0
                           ∞
                     U = ∫ e − ρ t ln Dt dt ; D =   (∫
                                                     i∈Θ
                                                           d i1−1 / σ di   )
                                                                           1 /(1−1 / σ )
                                                                                           ; Y = E+S; Y = L+
                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                               σ


5
    See Guide to Calculations for details of the correspondence between ours and the Melitz (2003) approach.
6
    See the Guide to Calculations for details.
                                                                                                                    8
where ρ is the rate of pure time preference, D is the CES consumption composite, Θ is the (time-
varying) set of consumed varieties, and di is consumption of variety-i. Consumers divide income Y
between current expenditure E and saving/investment S, where Y equals labour income, L, plus all
manufacturing operating profit E/σ (I-sector profit is zero). Utility optimisation implies a
transversality condition and the Euler equation7:

(9)               E& / E = r − ρ
where ‘r’ is the rate of return on saving/investment. Expenditure on goods E equals income less
spending on new units of knowledge, S. Since there are zero pure profits in the I-sector, S equals
the value of inputs, i.e. labour employed in the I-sector, LI (recall w=1). Thus E=L+E/σ-LI, so:

                         L − LI
(10)              E=                   ⇔        LI = L − E (1 − 1 / σ )
                        1 − 1/ σ
Thus determining the utility-maximising path of expenditure E also pins down the
savings/investment path S=LI. The implied growth rate of ‘n’ given LI is:

                        QK                       LI                       n&
(11)             n& =              ⇔       g=        ;            g≡
                        κ                       pK κ                      n
where the first and second expressions are related by (2), S=LI and pK≡PKn; g is the growth rate of
n. Note that a constant LI implies a constant growth in the mass of varieties n.

Solving for the time-path of E.            The economy can be described as a dynamic system consisting
of two differential equations, the Euler equation (9) and the growth of varieties equation (11). To
solve these for the steady state, we must specify the state variable. Although the steady state is
unaffected by the choice of state variables, the ease of calculation depends greatly on this choice.
Following Baldwin and Forslid (2000), we choose LI as the state variable.8 The fruit of this choice
is immediately apparent. First, r=ρ given expressions (9) and (10) and the fact that L& I =0 by
definition of steady state. Moreover, if LI stops evolving, (11) tells us that g is constant along the
steady-state growth path. The discount rate γ equals g+ρ. Intuitively, γ reflects pure time preference
ρ and the rate at which the typical variety’s market share falls, namely g.9

Summarising, expenditure E, savings/investment S=LI, the growth rate of varieties g, and the
discount rate γ are time-invariant along the steady state growth path. The dynamic system therefore


7
 See the Guide to Calculations for details.
8
 Our use of ‘state variable’ is somewhat unconventional in the standard terminology of economic dynamics; see the
Guide to Calculations for a detailed discussion on this.
                                                                                                         9
reduces to three equations – the two cut-off conditions and the free entry condition – with three
unknowns, g, aD and aX. The only thing left to find is the utility maximising level of E.

Using γ=ρ+g, (10), (11), and the third expression in (7) yields the intuitive result that the utility-
maximising E equals ‘permanent income’, i.e. the income from labour L plus the rental rate on the
steady-state value of the nation’s capital stock (which equals pK κ ):10

                              E = L + ρ pKκ

Using this and γ=ρ+g in (7), the cutoff and free entry conditions are:

             L + ρ pK κ aD 1−σ          L + ρ pK κ a X 1−σ               L + ρ pK κ
(12)                   ( ) = pK κ D , φ           ( ) = pK κ X ,                    = pK κ
             σ (ρ + g) m                σ (ρ + g) m                      σ (ρ + g )
These three expressions implicitly define the three equilibrating variables, aD, aX and g.

3.3. Discussion of the growth path
The growth path in our model shares many similarities with the growth path of the canonical
Grossman-Helpman product-innovation growth model that assumes homogenous varieties. The
long-run growth path is characterised by a time-invariant division of labour between the production
of capital goods (knowledge in our model) and consumption goods; the division is LI versus L-LI.
The constant application of LI to knowledge creation yields a steadily rising mass of varieties due to
the learning curve assumed in the I-sector, c[⋅]. Observe that ‘g’ here is the equilibrating variable
much as ‘n’ is in no-growth heterogenous firm trade (HFT hereafter) models. Because knowledge
spillovers remove n from the calculation, it is the speed of innovation that ensures zero expected
pure profit from variety introduction. The economic logic is that a faster growth of n drives down
the expected benefit of introducing a new variety since it boosts the rate at which innovators expect
the operating profit of a new variety to decline as per (3).

The constant flow of new varieties together with the time invariant employment of labour in the
production of consumption goods means that consumption/production of each variety continuously
declines at a rate of g. The representative consumer sees her real consumption, E/P, rise at:

                              g
(13)                 gC =
                            σ −1
where gC is the growth rate of real consumption.11 In the working paper version of our paper
(Baldwin and Robert-Nicoud, 2005), we proved that the laissez-faire mass of varieties and cut-off


9
    See Guide to Calculations for discussion.
                                                                                                             10
points along the steady-state growth path are socially optimal, but the laissez-faire growth rate is
too low from the planner’s perspective.

                 4. GROWTH EFFECTS OF MARKET OPENNING
Solving the third expression in (12):

                                L /σ          ρ (σ − 1)
(14)                       g=            −
                                pK κ             σ
Since everything here is a parameter except pK κ , all growth effects of trade must come through the
expected sunk cost of getting a new variety, i.e. the denominator of Tobin’s q. Thus:

Result 1 : Closer international economic integration is pro-growth if and only if it lowers the
expected sunk cost of developing a new, produced variety (namely, pK κ ). This allows us to
define two growth-effect channels: the pK-channel and the κ -channel.

4.1. Pro- and anti-growth effects
Anti-growth. As it turns out, the κ -channel is unambiguously anti-growth since the expected
sunk cost of getting a ‘winner’ rises with freer trade. Intuitively, freer trade makes it easier to
export, so the threshold marginal cost for exporting, aX, rises. The increased competition from
imports makes both markets more competitive and this lowers the common aD (the extra
competition induces the least efficient D-type firms to cease production). From the definition of κ
in (5), this means that the typical winner is more likely to be an X-type and a successful entry will
require more tries before getting a winner; both factors raise κ .12 In short trade may be anti-growth
since it raises the fixed knowledge-requirement of new varieties conditional on entry.

Pro-growth. Freer trade in goods and ideas may alter the price of new knowledge, pK. We cannot
                                                              r
be more precise without an explicit functional form for c[ w, a , n] , but two well-known economic
mechanisms suggest that the pK-channel will usually be pro-growth. One concerns the price-
lowering impact of freer trade on goods prices and the indirect impact of this on pK when the
knowledge-producing sector uses intermediate inputs – ‘lab equipment.’ An entirely separate line of
reasoning concerns international knowledge spillovers. If tighter integration makes the flow of ideas
freer then we would expect learning in each nation to have a greater cost-lowering impact in both
nations and this would show up in a lower pK.

4.2.     Analytic solutions and microfoundations for I-sector technology


10
   From (6), the present value of all varieties, namely E/σγ, equals pK κ , since pK=nPK.
11
   This follows from the fact that the ideal CES price index is P= m {n1/(1-σ)}/ (1-1/σ).
12
   See Melitz (2003) for proof with a general G; below we demonstrate this for a specific functional form.
                                                                                                                                  11
Analysis up to this point has been conducted without resort to a functional form for G. Much of
the subsequent analysis can also be conducted in this manner, but the reasoning is clearer with
explicit solutions for aD, aX and g. We assume a Pareto distribution:

(15)                   G[a ] = ( a / a 0 ) k         0 ≤ a ≤ a0 ≡ 1
where k and a0 are the ‘shape’ and ‘scale’ parameters, respectively. By choice of units, a0 is
normalised to unity without loss of generality. With (15), we solve m and κ , so (12) yields:13
                                                                                   1/ k                                    1/ k
                       L / σ ρ (σ − 1)               ⎛ ( β − 1)κ I            ⎞                      ⎛ Ω( β − 1)κ I   ⎞
(16)            g=          −          ,      a D = ⎜⎜                        ⎟⎟          ,   a X = ⎜⎜                ⎟⎟
                       pK κ      σ                   ⎝ (1 + Ω)κ D              ⎠                     ⎝ (1 + Ω)κ X      ⎠
               r
where pK= c[1, a ,1] , κ = βκ D (1 + Ω) /( β − 1) and14

                       Ω ≡ φ β T 1− β ,        T ≡ κ X /κD,        β ≡ k /(σ − 1) > 1

Omega as a measure of openness.                     Ω (a mnemonic for ‘openness’) is a Cobb-Douglas average of
the two types of trade barriers in the HFT model, variable trade cost (as measured by freeness φ)
and fixed trade costs (as measured by the excessive beachhead cost facing imported varieties,
namely T≡FX/FD). Ω displays several convenient features. It combines the protective effects of
fixed and variable trade costs, and it is bound between zero and unity with zero indicating autarky
and unity indicating free trade.


4.2.1.     Microfoundations for the I-sector marginal cost function
                                                  r
The strength of the pK-channel depends upon c[ w, a ,1] . Five special cases are considered.15

Grossman-Helpman model.                        The canonical Grossman-Helpman product-innovation model
assumes a learning curve where the marginal cost of creating knowledge falls as the I-sector’s
experience in producing successful varieties rises (i.e. as n rises). Specifically:

                             r             w                                        βκ D (1 + Ω)
(17)                   c[ w, a , n] =                    ⇒               pK κ =
                                        n + λn *                                   ( β − 1)(1 + λ )
where 0≤λ≤1 (lambda is a mnemonic for ‘learning’) measures the international dimension of
spillovers; this is for the Home nation, but the Foreign nation’s is identical since n=n* by
symmetry. (The original Grossman-Helpman version considered the extremes of no and perfect



                    1−σ
13
     Specifically, m      = β {(1 + Ω) /( β − 1)}1+ β (κ D / κ I ) β .
14
     The restriction β>1 ensures the integrals converge.
15
     We thank one referee for suggesting the second and third.
                                                                                                                    12
spillovers, i.e. λ=0 and λ=1.) Many justifications of this intertemporal externality are possible.
Romer (1990) rationalizes it by referring to the non-rival nature of knowledge. Grossman and
Helpman (1991) assert that it reflects the impact of ‘public knowledge’ that is created automatically
along with the private, patentable knowledge that leads to new varieties.

Coe-Helpman model. A variant of (17) makes λ a function of trade flows by equating λ to the
fraction of foreign varieties that are imported, namely (aX/aD)k, i.e.:

                     ~                                                      βκ D (1 + Ω)
(18)                λ ≡ (a X / a D )k             ⇒           pK κ =
                                                                         ( β − 1)(1 + Ω / T )
      ~
where λ replaces λ in (17). Coe and Helpman (1995) provide empirical evidence that knowledge
spillovers are related to trade flows; see Keller (2002) for a critique.

Efficiency-linked knowledge spillovers. Expression (17) assumes that I-sector learning is equal
for all varieties (the impact on pK is the same for X- and D-types). An alternative is to assume that
the extent of the spillovers is proportional to the average efficiency of the produced varieties
(efficiency being inversely related to marginal cost), so the n’s are weighted by the average
efficiency m1−σ and (m* )1−σ . Noting n=n* and m = m * :

                          r                       w                                             {( β − 1)κ I }β
(19)                c[ w, a , n] =                                          ⇒           pK κ =
                                     [nm1−σ   + n *(m* )1−σ ] / 2                              (1 + Ω) β κ D β −1
Reverse engineering. The three previous special cases treat I-sector learning as proportional to
the number of successful varieties currently produced. Varieties, however, contain different units of
knowledge depending upon their export status. The average number of knowledge units in a locally
produced variety is κ , as per (5), but it is higher for an imported variety, namely κD+κX+κI .
Presuming that the local I-sector only learns from varieties that it can actually purchase (the idea
                                                     r
being only these can be ‘reverse engineered’), c[ w, a , n] would be:

                                                                                                  −1
                 r                w                                        ⎛ ( β − 1)κ X Ω ⎞
           c[ w, a , n] =                           ⇒               pK κ = ⎜ 1 +
                                                                                 β T (1 + Ω) ⎠⎟
(20)
                            nκ + λ%n * κ X                                 ⎝
                                     ~
where κ X equals κ D + κ X + κ I and λ is from (18); again n=n*.

Lab-equipment model. Another well-known product-innovation model, Rivera-Batiz and Romer
(1991), supposes that knowledge is produced using the final good CES composite, so:16



16
     The same ‘output composite’ can either be consumed or invested as in traditional growth models.
                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                           β
                  r                 n1/(1−σ ) m                                             κD         ⎛ ( β − 1)κ I ) ⎞
(21)        c[ w, a , n] = Pα ; P =             , α = σ −1            ⇒         pK κ =            σ −1 ⎜               ⎟
                                    1 − 1/ σ                                           (1 − 1/ σ ) ⎝ (1 + Ω)κ D ⎠

where P is the CES price index, and the restriction on α is implied by our homogeneity assumption
         r
on c[ w, a , n] . This provides microfoundations for a connection between the cost of goods and the
productivity of the knowledge creating sector.17 Plainly, these five special cases could be mixed and
matched to create a wide range of possibilities.

4.3. Autarky to Free Trade liberalisation
The product p K κ is the pivot for growth effects, as per Result 1. Having worked out the analytic

solutions for p K κ in the five cases, evaluation of the growth effects of freer trade is
straightforward. We start with a base-case comparison of two conceptual extremes, complete
autarky and complete integration. When nations are autarkic in terms of the flow of goods and
ideas, Ω=λ=1/T=0; when they are fully integrated Ω=λ=T=1.

The Grossman-Helpman and Coe-Helpman models display the same growth rate in the two
conceptual extremes. Intuitively, this is because the shift to full goods-market openness (Ω=0 to
Ω=1) increases the amount of knowledge per variety, κ , by exactly the same amount that the
increase in ideas-openness (λ=0 to λ=1) lowers the per-unit price of knowledge. This result does
not hold for the other models of innovation – the efficiency-linked, reverse-engineering and lab-
equipment models. In these models zero-to-full integration is pro-growth. The stark contrast in
results is due to the connection between manufacturing-sector average productivity and innovation-
sector productivity. In the Grossman-Helpman and Coe-Helpman models there is no direct
connection while there is in the other three models, so the well-known productivity enhancing
effects of liberalisation in the HFT models (so-called shifting and sorting effects) stimulate
innovation in the latter but not the former. Next, consider marginal changes in integration.

4.4. The growth effect of freer trade in goods and ideas
The term p K κ is the pivot for growth effects, but observe that all ambiguity of growth effects
stems from the pK-channel. In all five cases, dκ / dφ equals {βκD/(β-1)}(dΩ/dφ)>0, so the κ -
channel is unambiguously anti-growth. If the overall effect is positive, it must be that the pK-
channel is pro-growth and sufficiently strong to overwhelm the negative κ -channel effect. We




17
     In this case, the expression for E in operating profits is just Y since both E and S are spent on goods.
                                                                                                         14
consider freer trade with respect to variable trade costs (i.e. dφ>0), with respect to fixed trade
costs (i.e. dT<0), and with respect to trade in ideas, (i.e. dλ>0).

Lower variable trade-costs. Reducing iceberg trade costs tends to slow growth in two cases,
speeding it in three cases. Given Result 1, Ω≡φβT1-β and the simple analytic solutions in (17)-(21),
the proofs are by inspection of the relevant expression for p K κ .

•      Under the expression (17) knowledge-creating technology (Grossman-Helpman), dφ>0 has
no impact on pK, so the pK-channel does nothing to offset the negative κ -channel effect. The
overall impact is therefore anti-growth (our working paper version, Baldwin and Robert-Nicoud
2005, discusses this case at length).

•      Under the expression (18) knowledge-creating technology (Coe-Helpman), the pK-channel is
positive, but it is not sufficiently large to offset the negative κ -channel effect unless T=1 in which
case the net growth effect is zero (NB: T=1 implies the beachhead cost is the same for a local and
imported variety).

•      Under the expression (19) knowledge-creating technology (efficiency-linked spillovers), the
pK-channel is positive. It is also strong enough to overcome the anti-growth κ -channel. Formally,
the result can be seen by inspection of (19). Intuitively, the pro-growth pK-channel is driven by the
productivity enhancing impact of freer trade, which is in turn driven by a selection effect (weaker
firms are eliminated and more firms export) and a share-shifting effect (the market shares of the
most efficient firms rise while those of inefficient firms falls). The anti-growth effect, however, is
driven by the selection effect alone (i.e. d(aX)>0 and d(aD)<0) and so it is weaker.

•      Under the expression (20) knowledge-creating technology (reverse engineering), the pK-
channel is positive. It dominates the anti-growth κ -channel, so the overall effect is pro-growth as
inspection of (20) reveals. Intuitively, we can think of this as the Coe-Helpman model with an extra
fillip for international knowledge spillovers. This extra fillip is due to the fact that imported
varieties systematically ‘embody’ more knowledge since they have been adapted to meet the
beachhead costs in both markets, while some of the locally-produced varieties embody only κI and
κD units of knowledge. Notice that this extra effect is strong enough to overcome the anti-growth
κ -channel even when T is very large but finite.

•      Under the expression (21) knowledge-creating technology (lab-equipment), the pK-channel
is positive and strong enough to overcome the fact that freer trade raises the expected sunk cost of
                                                                                                        15
getting a ‘winner.’ As in the efficiency-linked-spillovers model, the result is due to the powerful,
pro-efficiency impact of freer trade in the HFT model.

Lower fixed trade-costs. Reducing FX to the level of FD (i.e. dT<0) has qualitatively identical
effects on growth as dφ>0 in three of the five cases since T and φ appear bundled in Ω. These are
the cases where the degree of international spillovers, λ. is exogenous, viz. (17), (19) and (21).
When the international spillovers parameter λ is linked to the fraction of foreign varieties that are
traded, then T has an independent effect on growth since this fraction is a function of T, i.e. from
                           ~           ~
(16) and the definition of λ , we have λ = Ω / T . It is easy to show that taking account of the T
inside Ω and the explicit T in the models where λ is endogenous, i.e. (18) and (20), lower fixed
barriers to trade is always pro-growth. The intuition is obvious. Since lower T encourages spillovers
by increasing the fraction of traded varieties, it tends to be pro-growth and this only adds to the pro-
growth effect from dΩ>0.

Higher knowledge spillovers. It is plain that raising the exogenous λ in isolation is pro-growth
since it lowers the expected cost of getting a ‘winner’ without any direct impact on the reward to
getting a ‘winner.’ In the Grossman-Helpman model, openness to ideas, λ, opposes openness to
goods, Ω, such that they cancel if they are equal, viz. λ=Ω; in this case, greater openness has no
impact on growth.

4.5. The Role of Heterogeneity and beachhead costs
The role of heterogeneity and beachhead effects in trade and growth links are quite obvious.18 If the
beachhead costs are eliminated, integration has no impact on the range of varieties and so the κ -
                                ~
channel is eliminated; it turns λ , m , κ and κ X into parameters. It also eliminates most of the
effects on the pK-channel. Changes in the exogenous learning spillovers (as measured by λ) still
effect growth, and the price lowering impact of integration feeds directly into pK in the lab-
equipment model. Note that when T=FX/FD=1 the growth effects of freer-trade (in the traditional
iceberg sense) are unchanged, except for the Coe-Helpman model. In this case, T=1 implies the
anti-growth κ -channel exactly offsets the pro-growth pK-channel.

4.6. Static versus dynamic productivity effects
A major finding of heterogeneous-firms trade theory is that trade openness can raise productivity
via selection and share-shifting effects (Melitz 2003). Defining ‘measured productivity’ as the ratio


18
     See our working paper version for the mathematical details.
                                                                                                       16
of real manufacture output to manufacturing labour input, we note that openness also boosts
productivity in our model since greater openness lowers the ideal CES price index. However, in
cases such as (17), openness slows the rate at which the price index falls and so slows the rate of
productivity improvement. This implies that there may be tension between the static and dynamic
productivity effects of trade in an HFT model.

                                  5. WELFARE
Most of the welfare issues in our model are simple. The present value of utility on the equilibrium
growth path at time t=0 is U0=E/P0(ρ+g). Using the permanent income expression for E, P from
(21), and the analytic solution for m , we have:
                                                        1 /(σ −1)
                      ⎛ σ ⎞⎛ 1 + Ω 1+ β κ D β      ⎞
(22)           U 0 = ⎜⎜       ⎟⎟⎜⎜ β ( ) ( )       ⎟⎟
                      ⎝ p K κ ⎠⎝ β − 1    κI        ⎠
The first term in parentheses reflects the dynamic welfare aspects, i.e. U0=E/(ρ+g), and the second
captures the static aspects, i.e.1/P0. Plainly greater openness (i.e. dΩ>0) always produces positive
static effects. The sign of the dynamic normative effects of greater openness balances on the same
fulcrum as did the positive effects, namely p K κ .

Indeed, the decentralised growth rate g is suboptimal from a welfare perspective because innovators
do not internalise the positive dynamic (learning) externalities they exert on future innovations (see
Grossman and Helpman 1991 and Baldwin and Robert-Nicoud 2005). As a result, any policy that
raises growth reduces the gap between the market growth rate and the desirable one is welfare
improving in a dynamic sense. To summarise:

Result 2: The static welfare effect of greater openness is always positive; since laissez-faire
growth is sub-optimal from the social-welfare perspective, the dynamic welfare effect is
positive if and only if greater openness raises the growth rate. Given Result 1, this means that
a sufficient condition for greater openness to be welfare enhancing is that greater openness
lowers the expected cost of a new produced variety, namely pK κ .
Thus for 3 of the 5 special cases for I-sector technology, namely (19), (20) and (21, we can say the
welfare effects are unambiguously positive, given the analysis in Section 4. Welfare ambiguity
arises when openness is anti-growth since it creates a tension between welfare-enhancing static
effects and welfare-worsening dynamic effects. In the Grossman-Helpman case in which openness
is the most strongly anti-growth, plugging (17) into (22) yields:
                                                                                                     17
                                                               1/(σ −1)
                                   ⎛           2 −σ +
                                                      k
                                                              ⎞
                    ⎛ σ (1 + λ ) ⎞ ⎜ ⎛ 1 + Ω ⎞ σ −1 κ D σ k−1 ⎟
               U0 = ⎜            ⎟ β⎜        ⎟          ( )
                    ⎝ βκ D ⎠ ⎜⎜ ⎝ β − 1 ⎠                κI   ⎟⎟
                                   ⎝                           ⎠

By inspection, this is unambiguously increasing in openness as measured by λ and as measured by
Ω as well only if σ is small enough; in such cases, openness raise welfare despite the negative
impact on growth.

                          6. CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper explores the growth effects of trade when firms are heterogeneous and face sunk market-
entry costs. Our findings can be viewed as speaking to the trade and growth literature on one hand,
and the new-new trade theory on the other. As far as trade and growth is concerned, our main
finding - that freer trade has an ambiguous impact on growth - contrasts with most findings in the
homogeneous-firms endogenous growth literature where positive effects are the standard result; this
ambiguous finding squares better with the empirical evidence on the effects of trade openness on
growth (see Berg and Krueger, 2003, for a survey). Specifically, our model stresses the need for
empirical researchers to better investigate the link between trade and the dissemination of
knowledge, in particular its impact on the efficiency of the innovation sector. As far as the new-new
trade theory is concerned, our main finding is that there is tension between static and dynamic
productivity effects. Although freer trade improves industry productivity in a level sense, it may
harm it in a growth sense, at least when ideal price indices are used to measure real output.

One line of research that would be interesting would be to explore the impact of unilateral trade
liberalisation. However this analysis becomes very involved, so we leave this for future research.

                                   REFERENCES
Aw, B., Chung, S. and Roberts, M., 2000, ‘Productivity and Turnover in the Export Market: Micro
       Evidence from Taiwan and South Korea’, World Bank Economic Review 14, 65-90.
Baldwin, Richard E. (1988), ‘Hysteresis in Import Prices: The Beachhead Effect, American
      Economic Review, 78(4), 773-785.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud (2005). “Trade and growth with heterogenous
      firms,” CEPR Discussion Paper 4965.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Paul Krugman (1989), ‘Persistent Trade Effects of Large Exchange Rate
      Shocks,’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 419, 635-654.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Rikard Forslid (2000). “Trade liberalisation and endogenous growth: A q-
      theory approach ”, Journal of International Economics 50(2), 497-517.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Rikard Forslid (2004). “Trade liberalisation with heterogenous firms,”
      CEPR Discussion Paper 4635.
                                                                                                 18
Berg, Andrew and Ann O. Krueger (2003). Trade, growth, and poverty: A selective survey. IMF
       working paper no. WP/03/30.
Bernard A. and Jensen B, 1995, ‘Exporters, Jobs and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing, 1976-1987’
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 67-119
Bernard A. and Jensen B., 2001, ‘Why Some Firms Export’, NBER working paper 8349
Bernard A. and Jensen, B., 1999b, ‘Exporting and Productivity: Importance of Reallocation’, NBER
       working paper 7135.
Bernard, A. and Jensen, B., 1999a, ‘Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, Effect, or Both?’
       Journal of International Economics 47, 1-26
Bernard, A.B., J. Eaton, J.B. Jensen and S. Kortum (2003) "Plants and Productivity in International
       Trade", American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 4, September, 1268-1290.
Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen Redding, Peter K. Schott (2004), “Comparative Advantage and
       Heterogeneous Firms,” NBER Working Paper No. 10668.
Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter Schott (2003). “Falling Trade Costs, Heterogeneous
       Firms and Industry Dynamics”, NBER WP 9639.
Chaney, Thomas (2005). “The Dynamic Impact of Trade Opening: Productivity Overshooting with
      Heterogeneous Firms.” MIT mimeo.
Clerides S., Lach, S. and Tybout, J., 1998, ‘Is Learning by Exporting Important? Micro-Dynamic
       Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133,
       903- 904
Coe, David T. & Helpman, Elhanan, 1995. "International R&D spillovers," European Economic
      Review, Elsevier, vol. 39(5), pages 859-887.
Demidovay, Svetlana (2005). “Productivity Improvements and Falling Trade Costs: Boon or
      Bane?”, The Pennsylvania State University mimeo.
Dinopoulos, E. and Segerstrom P, (1999b), “A Schumpeterian Model of Protection and Relative
      Wages”, American Economic Review, 89, 450-473.
Dinopoulos, E. and Segerstrom P., (1999a), “The Dynamic Effects of Contingent Tariffs”, Journal
      of International Economics, 47, 191-222.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002). “Technology, Geography and Trade,” Econometrica,
       70, 5, pp 1741-1780.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002). “Technology, trade, and growth: A unified
       framework,” European Economic Review, vol. 45(4-6), pages 742-755.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz (2004), “Dissecting Trade: Firms,
       Industries, and Export Destinations", American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
       94, 2004, 150-154.
Grossman, G.M. and Helpman, E., 1989. "Trade; Innovation; and Growth," Papers 154, Princeton,
      Woodrow Wilson School - Public and International Affairs.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman. (1991). Innovation and Growth in the World Economy.
      Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Grubel, Herbert G., P.J. Lloyd (1975) Intra-Industry Trade: The Theory and Measurement of
       International Trade in Differentiated Products (London, Macmillan).
                                                                                                  19
Helpman, Elhanan and Paul Krugman (1985), Market structure and Trade, MIT Press.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz and Stephen Yeaple (2004). “Export versus FDI with
      heterogeneous firms,” American Economic Review, 94, 1, pp. 300-317.
Hopenhayn, Hugo (1992a). Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium.
      Econometrica 60:1127-1150.
Hopenhayn, Hugo (1992b). Exit, Selection, and the Value of Firms, Journal of Economic Dynamics
      and Control 16:621-653.
Keller W. (2002). “Trade and the transmission of technology,” Journal of Economic Growth 7, 5-
       24.
Keller, W. (2004). “International technology diffusion,’ forthcoming Journal of Economic
        Literature.
Luttmer, Erzo G.J. (2005a). “Growth and the Size Distribution of Firms.” University of Minnesota
      mimeo.
Luttmer, Erzo G.J. (2005b). “The Size Distribution of Firms in an Economy with Fixed and Entry
      Costs.” Minnesota Fed Working Paper 633.
Melitz, M. (2003). “The impact of trade on intraindustry reallocations and aggregate industry
        productivity,” Econometrica, 71, pp 1695-1725.
Melitz, Marc and Gianmarco Ottaviano (2003), “Market Size, Trade and Productivity”, mimeo.
Rivera-Batiz, L. and P. Romer, 1991a, Economic integration and endogenous growth, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 106, 531-555.
Rivera-Batiz, L. and P. Romer, 1991b, International trade with endogenous technological change",
       European Economic Review 35, 715-721.
Romer, P., 1986, Increasing returns and long-run growth, Journal of Political Economy 94, 1002-
      1037.
Romer, P., 1990, Endogenous technological change, Journal of Political Economy 98, 71-102.
Tybout, J., 2003, Plant- and Firm-level Evidence on "New" Trade Theories’, in E. K. Choi and J.
      Harrigan (eds) Handbook of International Trade Blackwell, Oxford.
Yeaple, S. (2005), Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and Wages, Journal of International
       Economics, 65(1), pp 1-20.
                                                                                                                                                           20



                         Guide to Calculations by Footnote:
                    “Trade and growth with heterogeneous firms”
                                                           (not for publication, will be posted on the web)
                                                          Richard E. Baldwin and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud



2. The constant operating profit mark-up follows directly from the standard Dixit-Stiglitz result of
constant cost-price mark-up; for example, rearranging the first order condition for local sales,
p(1 - 1 σ ) = a   we get that operating profit earned on local sales is (p - a )c = pc σ , where c is local sales.

5. The direct approach to formulating the condition for zero-expected-profit-from-innovation is to
calculate the expected benefit net of market entry costs. Starting from the well-known CES demand
function, the expected operating profit of a firm that draws its ‘a’ from the distribution G[a] will be:

                            aD                                      a 1−σ ( E / σγ )
                       ∫         {        aD                                      aX
                                                                                                               − FD }dG[a]
                                      ∫                  ndG[a a D ] + φ ∫ a
                            0                      1−σ                                     1−σ
                                               a                                                 ndG[a a D ]
                                      0                                        0

                                 aX                                    a 1−σ ( E / σγ )
                       + ∫ {φ                      aD                                  aX
                                                                                                                − FX }dG[a]
                                               ∫        a 1−σ dG[a a D ] + φ ∫ a 1−σ dG[a a D ]
                                0
                                               0                                       0


since ndG[a aD ] gives the frequency of a’s among varieties that are actually produced. Using our

                                                                                  E                                               E
                                                           ∫                                    − FD }dG[a] + ∫ {φa 1−σ
                                                               aD                                                 aX
notation m 1−σ , this becomes:                                      {a 1−σ        1−σ                                             1−σ
                                                                                                                                             − FX }dG[a]
                                                            0                σm            γn                    0           σm         γn

which simplifies to (E/ σ m1−σ γ n )(A[aD]+φA[aX]) minus (G[aD]FD +G[aX]FX), where

A[ x] ≡ ∫ a 1−σ dG[ a ] .
         x
                            Notice, however, that (3) implies G[aD] =(A[aD]+φA[aX])/ m1−σ , since
         0


G[a a D ] = G[a] / G[a D ] . Thus the benefit less market-entry costs is G[aD](E/nσγ)-G[aD]FD -

G[aX]FX. This is set equal to FI in the direct approach. Dividing this through by G[aD] validates our
indirect approach in (6).

We adopt the indirect approach since it allows us to deal more clearly with growth and corresponds
more closely to Tobin’s insightful approach to characterising investment in a general equilibrium
setting. It also allows a direct comparison with standard endogenous growth models (which do not
have market-entry costs) and it facilitates analysis of growth effects by concentrating the impact of
openness and parameter changes in the expected cost of getting a winner.
                                                                                                         21
6. See Baldwin and Forslid (2000), Proposition 1 for a general proof that the direct impact on
Tobin’s q is a sufficient statistic for growth effects in this sort of model. Intuitively, this is obvious
since anything that raise Tobin’s q encourages more investment and this, in an endogenous growth
model, results in faster growth. The faster growth, in turn, returns Tobin’s q back to its steady state
value of unity. All the variables in the numerator of Tobin’s q are either endogenous (e.g. E) or are
parameters unrelated to trade liberalisation.

7. Here we work out the whole dynamic system. In the course of the discussion, the naturalness of
using LI as the state variable becomes clear, but intuitively, the key to constant equilibrium growth
is that a time-invariant amount of the primary factor, labour, is devoted to knowledge creation and
this knowledge creation process is not subject to diminishing returns with respect to the amount of
knowledge created. Since the amount of labour involved in knowledge creation is the key, it is
natural to take it as the variable that stops evolving in steady state, i.e. as the state variable.

Formally, income is L+rW, where W is wealth, r is the rate of return, and W& =L+rW-E describes
wealth accumulation. All variables are measured in terms of the numeraire, i.e. labour. The
Hamiltonian is e-ρtln(E/P)+ ω(L+rW-E) and r and the path of P is exogenous to the consumer/saver.
The necessary conditions are e-ρt/E=ω and -ωr= ω& plus a transversality condition. Manipulation
involving the time derivative of the first condition and substitution of the second condition yields
the Euler equation.

The two differential equations are:
                                             n&   L
                         E& / E = r − ρ ,       = I
                                             n pK κ
Doing a standard change-of-variables transformation, we take LI and g ≡ n& / n as the state variables
and, using (10), the system becomes:

                          − L& I                n&   L
                                 = r − ρ,          = I
                         L − LI                 n pK κ
As usual, changing state variables has no impact on the system dynamics. As is well know from
decades of growth models, this system is saddle path stable. Also, as in most endogenous growth
models, there is no transitional dynamics since the saddle path is a point, namely the steady state
equilibrium. The system jumps immediately to the steady state since otherwise the system would
violate the transversality conditions. All these assertions are proved at great length and generality in
Grossman and Helpman (1991) and other textbooks on growth. The exact proof in this case can be
                                                                                                                   22
found in Baldwin and Forslid (2000) which uses Tobin’s q approach to evaluate the growth
effects of trade in a homogenous goods model.

8. Our use of ‘state variable’ is somewhat unconventional in the standard terminology of economic
dynamics (where state variable means a non-jumper and co-state and control variables are jumpers).
Mathematically speaking, the state vector is the set of variables that defines the state of the system
fully. This includes variables that can jump or only move smoothly. Thus what economists usually
call control variables, co-state variable and state variables are, mathematically speaking, all state
variables. After all, one needs to know them all in order to fully characterise the state of the system.
For example, in the simple differential equation x& = ρx x is the state variable whether it is a jumper
or not. The trick of taking L as numeraire and LI as a state variable opens the door to the intuitive
simplification of working with the static economy representation of the dynamic path, i.e. focusing
on the share of primary resources devoted to creation of new ‘capital’ and the creation of
consumption goods. Anything that raises the share of L devoted to knowledge creation is pro-
growth.

9. The only asset in this model is the ownership of a variety. The income stream, measured in terms
of the numeraire, corresponds to the flow of operating profits. For example, the present value of a
D-type’s operating profit is discounted back to t=0 at the rate of pure time preference and the stream
of operating profit is falling at the rate that n rises, since higher n means lower sales and thus lower
                                                                ∞
operating profit for an existing variety. In symbols,       ∫o
                                                                    e − ρt π [a, n(t )]dt where π[a,n(t)] is the

function that relates the firm’s ‘a’ and the time-varying n to the level of operating profit. Using (3),
                    ∞   ⎧ − ( ρ + g )t a 1−σ E ⎫
                ∫
                                                                                                    gt
this becomes:           ⎨e            ( )        ⎬dt . Noting that m is time-invariant, and n(t)=n0e on the
                o
                        ⎩              m    σn 0 ⎭


steady state growth path (n0 is the initial n), we solve the integral to get: ( a / m )1-σE/σn0γ, where
γ=ρ+g. In other words, discounting at the rate of ρ an income stream that falls at a rate of g, is like
discounting a constant income stream at the rate of ρ+g.
