NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBALIZATION AND ENDOGENOUS FIRM SCOPE
Volker Nocke
Stephen Yeaple
Working Paper 12322
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12322
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006

We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation (grant SES-0422778)
and the University of Pennsylvania Research Foundation. We would also like to thank seminar audiences
at the 2006 NBER ITO Working Group Meeting (Cambridge), the 2005 NBER ITI Winter Meeting
(Stanford), Princeton University, the University of Virginia, the University of Calgary, the University of
Maryland, and the Worldbank. Finally, we thank Georg Strasser for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2006 by Volker Nocke and Stephen Yeaple. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Globalization and Endogenous Firm Scope
Volker Nocke and Stephen Yeaple
NBER Working Paper No. 12322
June 2006
JEL No. F12, F15, L11, L25
ABSTRACT
We develop a theory of multiproduct firms to analyze the effects of globalization on the distributions
of firm size, scope, and productivity. Our model explains two puzzles. First, it explains the
well-known size-discount puzzle: large firms have lower values of Tobin’s Q than small firms.
Second, it explains the globalization-skewness puzzle documented in the empirical part of our paper:
a multilateral reduction in trade costs leads to a flattening of the size distribution of firms. In our
model, globalization not only affects the distribution of observed productivities but also productivity
at the firm level.
Volker Nocke
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
451 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
nocke@econ.upenn.edu
Stephen Yeaple
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19014
and NBER
snyeapl2@ssc.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

Only 41 percent of US manufacturing firms manage multiple products, but these firms account
for 91 percent of sales (Bernard, Redding, and Schott, 2006). Indeed, much of the variation in
sales across firms is due to large firms managing more product lines than small firms.1 This
fact suggests that an important dimension of firm heterogeneity is in how well firms cope with
expanding their product range.
Most economic models involve single-product firms. These models predict that firms with
lower (constant) marginal costs have larger sales and exhibit a higher value of Tobin’s Q, the
ratio between a firm’s market value and its book value. Hence, there should be a positive relationship between firm size and Tobin’s Q in the data. Yet there is strong empirical evidence
showing that the opposite is true (Lang and Stulz, 1994; Eeckhout and Jovanovic, 2002). In
Figure 1 we plot the logarithm of Tobin’s Q on the logarithm of firm sales, using Compustat data for the year 2004. The figure shows a clear negative relationship between firm size
and Tobin’s Q. This “size discount” is robust to controlling for industry fixed eﬀects; see the
Appendix for details.
5

lnTobin’s Q
4

3

2

1

0
-10

-5

0

5

10

15

lnfirm sales

-1

-2

-3

Figure 1: The relationship between the logarithm of Tobin’s Q and the logarithm of firm sales.
The relationship between intrinsic firm eﬃciency, observed productivity, and firm size is
fundamental in understanding the productivity eﬀects of economic policies such as trade liberalization and market integration. There is a large and growing literature that is concerned
1
In fact, Berger and Ofek (1995) report that sales per product line are larger for single-product firms than
for multiproduct firms.

1

with the productivity implications of international trade (e.g., Melitz, 2003; Melitz and Ottaviano, 2005). But this literature predicts (as do other standard models of firm heterogeneity)
a positive relationship between firm size and Tobin’s Q.
In the empirical part of this paper, we present another puzzle for existing models in which
firms produce a single product and diﬀer in their marginal costs. Intuition suggests that a
multilateral trade liberalization induces an increase in the intensity of competition and thereby
compresses firms’ markups over marginal costs. This amplifies small diﬀerences in marginal
costs, and leads to a more skewed domestic size distribution of firms. (In the Appendix, we
provide a formal exposition of this argument.) As we show in Section 5, the opposite is true in
the data: a technology-driven reduction in shipping costs has induced a less skewed domestic
size distribution of U.S. firms. That is, as the world has become more globalized, the domestic
size distribution has become flatter, not steeper.
In this paper, we develop a theory of multiproduct firms that allows us to explain both
puzzles: the size-discount puzzle and the globalization-skewness puzzle. In the equilibrium of
our model, there will be a negative relationship between firms’ (constant) marginal costs and
firms’ size. This implies a negative relationship between firm size and Tobin’s Q, resolving the
size-discount puzzle. Further, since firms with lower marginal costs will sell less, a globalizationinduced increase in the intensity of competition leads to a flattening of the domestic size
distribution, resolving the globalization-skewness puzzle.
Our model has three key ingredients. First, each firm chooses how many product lines to
manage. Second, there are decreasing returns to the span of control at the firm level: the more
product lines a firm chooses to manage, the less good it is at managing each one of it, and
so the higher are its marginal costs. This ingredient is consistent with the finding by Schoar
(2002) that the total factor productivity of a firm’s existing product lines decreases when new
product lines are added. Third, firms diﬀer in their organizational capabilities: the greater is a
firm’s organizational capability, (i) the lower are its marginal costs, holding fixed the number
of product lines, and (ii) the less responsive are marginal costs to increases in the number of
product lines.
In equilibrium, each firm chooses the number of product lines so that the profit of the
marginal product line is equal to the negative eﬀect that the marginal product line exerts on
the profits of the inframarginal product lines. Suppose firm 1 chooses the number of product
lines optimally, while firm 2, having better organizational capability than firm 1, chooses the
number of product lines in such a way that its marginal costs are the same as those of firm 1.
In this case, the profit of the marginal product line is the same for both firms but — since firm
2 has greater organizational capability — the marginal product line of firm 2 imposes a smaller
negative eﬀect on the profits of its inframarginal product lines. This implies that firm 2 should
optimally add product lines so that its marginal costs are higher than those of firm 1. Hence,
firms with greater organizational capability have higher marginal costs — and thus lower values
of Tobin’s Q — than firms with inferior organizational capability. This solves the size-discount
puzzle.
We embed our theory of multiproduct firms in a two-country model of international trade
in order to analyze the eﬀects of trade liberalization and market integration. We show that a
multilateral trade liberalization leads to a less skewed size distribution: large firms downsize
2

by selling product lines while small firms expand the number of product lines. Our model thus
generates a surge of (partial) firm acquisitions and divestitures following a trade liberalization,
which is consistent with the data (e.g., Breinlich, 2005). A trade liberalization aﬀects productivity both at the level of the firm and the industry. Average industry productivity can be
shown to increase as high-cost firms downsize while low-cost firms expand. In the empirical
part of the paper, we use Compustat data on publicly traded U.S. manufacturing companies.
Our empirical results confirm the model’s predictions that a multilateral reduction in shipping
costs is associated with a flattening of the domestic size distribution: the globalization-skewness
puzzle.
Related Literature. Our paper contributes to the recent and growing literature that is
concerned with the within-industry reallocation eﬀects of trade liberalization (e.g., Melitz,
2003; Melitz and Ottaviano, 2005). In these papers, firms diﬀer in their constant and exogenous
marginal costs, and each firm produces a single product. The papers cannot explain the sizediscount and globalization-skewness puzzles.
Our paper also contributes to the literature on multiproduct firms and endogenous firm
scope. The industrial organization literature on this topic (e.g., Brander and Eaton, 1984;
Shaked and Sutton, 1990; Johnson and Myatt, 2003) assumes that firms are identical and
focusses on strategic eﬀects. An exception is Santalo (2002) where firms are price takers in
each market and diﬀer in their diseconomies of scope. In international trade, there is a nascent
literature concerned with firm scope as an additional “margin of adjustment” for resource
allocation. Eckel and Neary (2005) explore how trade liberalization aﬀects the optimal scope
of identical firms. In a model with firm heterogeneity, Bernard, Redding, and Schott (2005)
focus on the eﬀects of trade liberalization on average productivity. Baldwin and Gu (2005)
extend the model by Melitz and Ottaviano (2005) by allowing for multiproduct firms.
There is a small literature in corporate finance that attempts to explain the size-discount
puzzle. Most of these papers, including Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales (2000), provide an explanation based on agency costs that result in the misallocation of resources across divisions.
In recent work, Maksimovic and Phillips (2002) argue that the size-discount puzzle can better
be explained by diseconomies of scope rather than agency problems. This literature is not
concerned with the skewness of the size distribution, nor with globalization.
To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first that considers the eﬀects of globalization
on the skewness of the size distribution of firms. One of the few empirical papers that has a
bearing on the link between globalization and firm size is Head and Ries (1999). They show that
a reduction in Canadian tariﬀs reduces the average size of Canadian plants, while a reduction
in U.S. tariﬀs has the opposite eﬀect. But they do not analyze the eﬀects of trade liberalization
on the skewness of the size distribution.2
Plan of the Paper. In the next section, we present our theory of multiproduct firms in a
simple environment where each firm is a monopolist for each of its products. We show that firms
with greater organizational capability choose to have higher marginal costs and thus a lower
2

In industrial organization, there is a large literature on the shape of the size distribution of firms; see Sutton
(1997) for a survey. More recently, Cabral and Mata (2003) explore the eﬀects of financial constraints on the
skewness of the size distribution. Sutton (1998) derives a bound on the size distribution of firms, based on
aggregation eﬀects across independent submarkets.

3

value of Tobin’s Q. In Section 3, we extend the model by allowing firms to export their products
to a foreign market. We show that a reduction in trade costs leads to a merger wave and a
decrease in the skewness of the firm size distribution. In Section 4, we introduce monopolistic
competition (and free entry) into the two-country version of our model. We show that a
multilateral trade liberalization leads to a less skewed domestic size distribution, while the
opposite result obtains in the liberalization country following a unilateral trade liberalization.
In Section 5, we test and confirm the predictions of our model on the eﬀect of globalization on
the domestic size distribution. We conclude in Section 6.

2

A Theory of Endogenous Firm Scope

This section is organized as follows. We first introduce our theory of multiproduct firms that
diﬀer in their organizational capabilities and that choose how many product lines to manage.
We then analyze how firms with diﬀerent organizational capabilities solve the fundamental
trade oﬀ between firm scope and productivity.

2.1

The Model

There is a mass M of atomless firms that diﬀer
£ ¤ in their organizational capabilities. A firm’s
organizational capability is denoted by θ ∈ θ, θ , where θ > 0, and the distribution of organizational capabilities in the population of firms is given by the distribution function G. Each
firm can manage any number n ≥ 1 of product lines. (For simplicity, we will treat n as a
continuous variable.) We assume that firms have constant marginal costs at the product level
but decreasing returns to the span of control at the firm level: the more product lines a firm
manages, the higher are its marginal costs for each product line.
The firm faces two types of costs. First, there is a fixed cost r per product line. This can
be thought of as either a cost of inventing a product or as a cost of purchasing an existing
product line. Second, there is a constant marginal cost c(n; θ) associated with the production
of each unit of output, which is the same for all n product lines. This marginal cost function
has the following properties. First, an increase in the number of product lines increases a
firm’s marginal cost, ∂c(n; θ)/∂n > 0. This property is suggested by Schoar’s (2002) empirical
finding that adding new product lines decreases the total factor productivity of all inframarginal
product lines. Second, we want to abstract from exogenous cost diﬀerences amongst singleproduct firms and focus instead on the idea that organizational capability is about how good
firms are at coordinating the production of multiple products. We thus assume that c(1; θ) is
independent of θ and that ∂ 2 c(n; θ)/∂n∂θ < 0. This implies that, holding fixed the number
n > 1 of product lines, firms with greater organizational capability have lower marginal costs:
∂c(n; θ)/∂θ < 0 for n > 1. To capture these properties and for simplicity, we assume that
organizational capability θ is the inverse of the elasticity of marginal cost with respect to the
number of product lines:
(1)
c(n; θ) = c0 n1/θ .
On the demand side, product lines are symmetric, and there are no demand linkages (and,
hence, no cannibalization eﬀects). For each product line, a firm faces inverse market demand
4

P (q), where q is the quantity sold of that product. We assume that demand is downwardsloping, P 0 (q) < 0 for all q such that P (q) > 0. Further, we impose a mild regularity condition
on the inverse demand function which is familiar from Cournot oligopoly and requires that
demand is not too convex:
P 0 (q) + qP 00 (q) < 0 for all q > 0 such that P (q) > 0.

(2)

Each firm’s optimization problem consists in choosing the number of product lines, n, and
the quantity for each product line k, qk , so as to maximize its profit. (Since each firm is
a monopolist for each of its product lines, it could equivalently choose price pk rather than
quantity.)

2.2

The Optimal Choice of Firm Scope

Consider a firm with organizational capability θ. We first analyze the firm’s quantity-setting
problem, holding fixed the number n of product lines. Since the firm has the same (constant)
marginal cost for each product line and the demand function is the same for each product
line, the firm will optimally sell the same quantity of each product line. Let q(c(n; θ)) denote
the profit-maximizing quantity per product line of a firm with organizational capability θ that
manages n product lines. Since there are no demand linkages between product lines, the firm’s
quantity-setting problem can be analyzed separately for each product line. Hence,
q(c(n; θ)) ≡ arg max[P (q) − c(n; θ)]q.
q

The first-order condition is given by
P (q(c(n; θ))) − c(n; θ) + q(c(n; θ))P 0 (q(c(n; θ))) = 0.

(3)

We consider now the firm’s optimal choice of the number of product lines. Given the optimal
output policy, the profit of a firm with organizational capability θ that manages n product lines
is given by
n [π(c(n; θ)) − r] ,
where
π(c(n; θ)) ≡ [P (q(c(n; θ))) − c(n; θ)] q(c(n; θ))

(4)

is the firm’s gross profit per product line. From the envelope theorem, π 0 (c(n(θ); θ)) =
−q(c(n(θ); θ)), and so the first-order condition for the optimal choice of the number of product
lines, n(θ), can be written as
[π(c(n(θ); θ)) − r] − n(θ)q(c(n(θ); θ))

∂c(n(θ); θ)
= 0.
∂n

(5)

The impact of an additional product line on the firm’s profit can be decomposed into two
eﬀects. The first term on the l.h.s. of equation (5) is the net profit of the marginal product
line. The second term summarizes the negative eﬀect that the marginal product line imposes
5

on the n(θ) inframarginal product lines: the production cost of each product line increases by
q(c(n(θ); θ))∂c(n(θ); θ)/∂n since the firm is now less good at managing each one of them. We
will henceforth refer to this second term as the “inframarginal cost eﬀect”.
From the cost function (1), n(θ)∂c(n(θ); θ)/∂n = (1/θ)c(n(θ); θ). Hence, the optimal choice
of the number of product lines, n(θ), enters the first-order condition (5) only through the
induced marginal cost c(n(θ); θ). This means that the firm’s problem can equivalently be
viewed as one of choosing c rather than n. Indeed, using the gross profit function (4), the
first-order condition can be rewritten as
Ψ(c(θ); θ) ≡ [P (q(c(θ))) − c(θ)] q(c(θ)) − r −

c(θ)
q(c(θ)) = 0,
θ

(6)

where c(θ) ≡ c(n(θ); θ).
Henceforth, we will assume that the fixed cost r is not too large so that the firm can make
a strictly positive profit by managing a single product line, i.e.,
π(c0 ) = [P (q(c0 )) − c0 ] q(c0 ) > r.
We are now in the position to state our central result on the relationship between a firm’s
organizational capability and its observed productivity.
Proposition 1 The optimal choice of product lines is such that the induced marginal cost c(θ)
is weakly increasing in the firm’s organizational capability θ. Specifically, there exists a unique
θ, and c(θ) is strictly increasing in θ for all θ ≥ e
θ.
cutoﬀ e
θ such that c(θ) = c0 for all θ ≤ e

Proof. See Appendix.
For a given number n of product lines, the inframarginal cost eﬀect that the marginal
product line exerts is the smaller, the greater is the firm’s organizational capability. Not
surprisingly then, firms with greater organizational capability will optimally choose a weakly
larger number of product lines than firms with inferior organizational capability: n(θ) = 1 for
θ≤e
θ, and n(θ) is strictly increasing in θ for θ ≥ e
θ. Perhaps paradoxically, however, for θ ≥ e
θ,
n(θ) is increasing so fast with θ that firms with greater organizational capability will, in fact,
exhibit higher unit costs. To see this, consider two firms, firm 1 and firm 2, with organizational
θ and θ2 > θ1 , respectively. From the first-order condition (6), firm 1 will
capability θ1 ≥ e
optimally choose n(θ1 ) such that its marginal cost c(θ1 ) satisfies Ψ(c(θ1 ); θ1 ) = 0. Suppose
now firm 2 were to choose the number of product lines such that its induced marginal cost
is also equal to c(θ1 ). If so, the two firms would sell the same quantity q(c(θ1 )) per product
line, and thus fetch the same price P (q(c(θ1 ))). Hence, the net profit of the marginal product
line, [P (q(c(θ))) − c(θ)] q(c(θ)) − r, would be the same for the two firms. However, as can
be seen from equation (6), the absolute value of the inframarginal cost eﬀect imposed by the
marginal product line, χ(c(θ); θ) ≡ (1/θ)c(θ)q(c(θ)), is smaller for the firm with the greater
organizational capability, and so Ψ(c(θ1 ); θ2 ) > 0. Hence, firm 2 can increase its profit by
further adding product lines, even though this implies higher unit costs, c(θ2 ) > c(θ1 ). This is
illustrated graphically in figure 2.

6

c; 1 
c; 2 

c  r

c
c 1  c 2 

Figure 2: The induced choice of marginal cost balances the net profit per product line, π(c) −r,
and the inframarginal cost eﬀect, χ(c; θ). A firm with greater organizational capability, θ2 > θ1 ,
chooses to have higher marginal costs, c(θ2 ) > c(θ1 ).

7

Remark 1 For convenience, we have chosen a particular functional form for marginal cost
c(n; θ) that permits a simple interpretation of organizational capability θ as the inverse of
the (constant) elasticity of marginal cost with respect to the number of product lines. But
Proposition 1 holds more generally. Let
ε(n; θ) ≡

∂c(n; θ) n
∂n c(n; θ)

denote the elasticity of marginal cost with respect to n. It can be shown that Proposition 1 holds
if (i) c(n; θ) is strictly increasing in n, and weakly decreasing in θ; and (ii) ε(n; θ) is strictly
decreasing in θ and not increasing at too fast a rate with n:
Ã ∂c(n;θ) !
∂ε(n; θ)
∂ε(n; θ) − ∂θ
< 0 for all n ≥ 1 and θ ∈ [θ, θ].
+
∂c(n;θ)
∂n
∂θ
∂n

Proposition 1 shows that observed unit cost is inversely related to the firm’s intrinsic
eﬃciency (its organizational capability θ). This raises a potentially important conceptual issue
for empirical work that attempts to identify a firm’s intrinsic eﬃciency from its costs. Our
model shows that even if unit costs are observable such an exercise is valid only if one corrects
for the number of product lines:
ln(n)
θ = ³ ´.
ln cc0
In practice, it is often hard to measure costs correctly. A popular alternative measure of
firm eﬃciency is Tobin’s Q, the market-to-book ratio
T (θ) ≡

m(θ)
,
b(θ)

where m(θ) is the market value of the firm (including its assets) and b(θ) the book value of the
assets used by the firm (independently of whether the assets are rented or owned). The firm’s
assets are its product lines as well as any capital it uses for production. Suppose each firm has
a Cobb-Douglas production function and α is the capital share in production costs. Then, the
firm’s book value is given by
b(θ) = n(θ)r + n(θ)αc(θ)q(c(θ)),
where the first term is the book value of the product lines and the second term the book value
of the capital used for production. The market value of the firm (and its assets) is given by
m(θ) = n(θ)P (q(c(θ)))q(c(θ)) − n(θ)(1 − α)c(θ)q(c(θ)),
where the first term is revenue and the second term labor costs. The next lemma shows that
the market-to-book ratio is negatively related to a firm’s intrinsic eﬃciency.
Lemma 1 A firm’s market-to-book ratio (Tobin’s Q), T (θ), is decreasing in the firm’s organizational capability θ.
8

Proof. See Appendix.
Our model predicts a relationship between organizational capability θ and various measures
of firm size. Let
S(θ) ≡ n(θ)q(c(θ))P (q(c(θ)))
denote the sales of a firm with organizational capability θ.
Lemma 2 A firm’s sales S(θ), book value b(θ), and market value m(θ) are increasing in the
firm’s organizational capability θ.
Proof. See Appendix.
Lemma 1 establishes a negative relationship between Tobin’s Q and organizational capability, while Lemma 2 establishes a positive relationship between firm size and organizational
capability. As shown in the following proposition, our model can explain the size-discount
puzzle found in the data.
Proposition 2 A firm’s market-to-book ratio (Tobin’s Q), T (θ), is inversely related to various
measures of firm size: sales S(θ), book value b(θ), and market value m(θ).
Proof. This follows immediately from Lemmas 1 and 2.
The empirical evidence on the relationship between market-to-book ratio and firm size is
consistent with our model, but contradicts standard models of firm heterogeneity where firms
diﬀer in their constant marginal costs.3 While there is strong empirical evidence showing
a negative relationship between Tobin’s Q and firm size, there are a number of empirical
papers (e.g., Schoar, 2002) that find a positive relationship between firm size and total factor
productivity. There is, however, good reason to be skeptical about any cross-firm comparison
in measured total factor productivity: the data does not contain information on input quality.
In particular, it is well known that large firms pay higher wages, and many authors have argued
that this is, at least in part, because they hire better workers. This implies that any empirical
study of total factor productivity that does not account for input quality overestimates the total
factor productivity of large firms compared to small firms. Our model naturally gives rise to the
positive relationship between average wages and firm size found in the data if managing many
product lines requires the firm to hire more highly talented workers to oversee and coordinate
production.
Our model also predicts a negative relationship across firms between the number of product
lines, n(θ), and sales per product, P (q(c(θ)))q(c(θ)). Indeed, taking the derivative of sales per
product with respect to θ and using the first-order condition for optimal output, (3), yields
θ since q 0 (c(θ)) < 0
dP (q(c(θ)))q(c(θ))/dθ = c(θ)q 0 (c(θ))c0 (θ), which is strictly negative for θ > e
3
Consider, for example, Melitz (2003). Since consumers have CES preferences, a firm with eﬃciency ϕ charges
a constant markup over marginal cost, p(ϕ)/c(ϕ) = ρ > 1, and output is of the form q(ϕ) = γc(ϕ)−ε , where
γ > 0 and ε > 1. Tobin’s Q can then be written as

T (ϕ) =

[ρ − (1 − α)]
,
r
+α
γc(ϕ)1−ε

which is decreasing in firm eﬃciency ϕ, while firm sales are increasing in ϕ.

9

and c0 (θ) > 0. Noting that n(θ) is increasing in θ, the asserted negative relationship between
n(θ) and P (q(c(θ)))q(c(θ)) then follows. This prediction is consistent with the empirical evidence presented in Berger and Ofek (1995), who document that the mean sales per product
line of single-product firms are about 20 percent higher than those of multi-product firms.
In this section, we have assumed that each firm acts as a monopolist for each one of
its product lines. Alternatively, we could have assumed monopolistic competition between
firms. If the residual demand curve that firms face for each product line satisfies the mild
regularity condition we imposed on P (·), Proposition 1 carries over to this setting: firms with
greater organizational capability have higher unit costs than firms with inferior organizational
capability.

3

Trade Costs and the Size Distribution of Firms

In this section, we extend our model by introducing a second country to which firms can export.
We then study the eﬀects of changes in trade costs on firm scope, aggregate productivity, and
the size distribution of firms.
For notational simplicity, we assume that market demand is the same in both countries.
(None of our results depend on this assumption.) A firm that exports to the foreign country
incurs two types of trade costs: a specific tariﬀ and iceberg-type transport costs. Specifically,
if c(n; θ) denotes the marginal cost of production of a type-θ firm managing n product lines,
then
τ c(n; θ) + t
is this firm’s marginal cost of serving the foreign market, where τ ≥ 1 and t ≥ 0. We assume
that τ − 1 and t are suﬃciently small so that each firm finds it optimal to sell in both countries.
In this section, we are concerned with the short-run eﬀects of a change in trade costs. By
short run, we mean that the mass M of firms and the mass N > M of product lines is fixed. We
may think of M and N being in pre-shock long-run equilibrium. While the mass N of product
lines is fixed in the short-run, firms can buy and sell product lines at an endogenous market
price r. Trade in product lines correspond to partial acquisitions and divestitures, which are
about half of all M&A activity in the US (Maksimovic and Phillips, 2001).
A firm makes output decisions separately for each country. If e
c is the firm’s marginal cost
of serving a particular market, then
c] q
q(e
c) ≡ arg max [P (q) − e
q

denotes the firm’s profit-maximizing output for that market. The first-order condition for
optimal output choice is given by
c)) = 0.
P (q(e
c)) − e
c + q(e
c)P 0 (q(e

(7)

Let π(c(n; θ)) denote the gross profit per product line of a type-θ firm managing n product
lines:
π(c(n; θ)) = [P (q(c(n; θ))) − c(n; θ)] q(c(n; θ))+[P (q(τ c(n; θ) + t)) − τ c(n; θ) − t] q(τ c(n; θ)+t),
10

where the first term is the gross profit in the domestic market and the second term is the gross
profit in the foreign market. The firm’s problem of choosing the optimal number n(θ; t) of
production lines can then be written as
max n [π(c(n; θ)) − r] .
n

Let n(θ) denote the solution to this problem. The first-order condition is given by
¶
¸
·
µ
1
c(θ) q(c(θ))
Φ(c(θ); θ; τ ; t) ≡ P (q(c(θ))) − 1 +
θ
·
µ
¶
¸
1
+ P (q(τ c(θ) + t)) − 1 +
τ c(θ) − t q(τ c(θ) + t) − r
θ
= 0

(8)

where c(θ) ≡ c(n(θ); θ). It is straightforward to show that Propositions 1 and 2 carry over
this setting: firms with greater organizational capability have higher marginal costs and lower
values of Tobin’s Q. For convenience, we will assume that θ is suﬃciently large so that for all
firms with organizational capability θ ∈ [θ, θ], the implicit choice of c(θ) is given by the solution
to the first-order condition Φ(c(θ); θ; τ ; t) = 0, and so n(θ) ≡ [c(θ)/c0 ]θ > 1.
Since the mass M of firms and the mass N > M of product lines are fixed in the short run,
the endogenous market price of a product line, r, must adjust to ensure market clearing. The
clearing condition for the market for product lines is given by
N =M

Z

θ

n(θ)dG(θ).

(9)

θ

We define a short-run equilibrium as the collection {q(·), n (·) , c (·) , r} satisfying the cost
function (1), the first-order condition for optimal output, (7), the first-order condition for the
choice of the number of product lines, (8), and the merger market clearing condition (9).
We now consider a small increase in the specific tariﬀ t. We will show that, under some
reasonable condition on demand, the rise in trade costs will lead to a more skewed size distribution of firms: (large) high-θ firms will expand by purchasing product lines from (small) low-θ
firms. Hence, c(θ) will increase for high-θ firms and decrease for low-θ firms.
Applying the implicit function theorem to the first-order condition for the optimal choice of
the number of product lines, (8), we obtain dc(θ)/dt = −Φt (c(θ); θ; τ ; t)/Φc (c(θ); θ; τ ; t), where
Φs denotes the partial derivative of Φ with respect to s ∈ {c, t}. Since the first-order condition
defines a profit maximum, Φc (c(θ); θ; τ ; t) < 0, and so the sign of dc(θ)/dt is equal to the sign
of Φt (c(θ); θ; τ ; t). We have
µ
¶µ
¶
−τ q 0 (τ c(θ) + t)
c(θ)
dr
Φt (c(θ); θ; τ ; t) = −q(τ c(θ)+t)− +
[q(c(θ)) + τ q(τ c(θ) + t)] .
dt
q(c(θ)) + τ q(τ c(θ) + t)
θ
An increase in the specific tariﬀ t has the following eﬀects on the marginal net benefit of an
additional product line. First, it reduces the gross profit per product line; this is the first
11

term on the r.h.s. of the last equation. Second, it changes the endogenous market price of a
product line; this is the second term, and it is the same for all firms. Third, the higher tariﬀ
induces firms to produce less output per product line, and thereby reduces the inframarginal
cost eﬀect; this is the third term. This change in the inframarginal cost eﬀect is the product of
two factors: (i) the absolute value of the fractional change in the firm’s shipped world output
per product line4 due to the increase in t, and (ii) the size of the inframarginal cost eﬀect itself.
From the first-order condition (8), the inframarginal cost eﬀect is equal to the net profit per
product line. Hence, we can rewrite the expression as
µ
¶
−τ q 0 (τ c(θ) + t)
dr
+
[π(c(θ)) − r] ,
(10)
Φt (c(θ); θ; τ ; t) = −q(τ c(θ) + t) −
dt
q(c(θ)) + τ q(τ c(θ) + t)
where θ enters only through c(θ).
In order to understand what types of firms have more incentives to acquire additional
product lines, we need to analyze how the change in the marginal net benefit of an additional
product line, induced by a tariﬀ increase, varies across firms with diﬀerent organizational
capabilities. This analysis is simplified because of the following envelope-type result (which
follows from the first-order condition for optimal output):
¶
µ
d
τ q 0 (τ c(θ) + t)
[π(c(θ)) − r]
−τ q 0 (τ c(θ) + t) = −
q(c(θ)) + τ q(τ c(θ) + t) dc
On the l.h.s. is the derivative of the first term on the r.h.s. of (10) with respect to c, while the
r.h.s. is the derivative of the third term on the r.h.s. of (10) with respect to c, holding fixed
the first factor of this term. Hence, when taking the derivative of equation (10) with respect
to θ, we are left with
µ
¶
τ q 0 (τ c(θ) + t)
dΦt (c(θ); θ; τ ; t)
d
0
= c (θ) [π(c(θ)) − r]
−
.
dθ
dc
q(c(θ)) + τ q(τ c(θ) + t)
This means that in order to understand how the change in the marginal net benefit of an additional product line, induced by a tariﬀ increase, varies with θ, we need to consider only how
the fractional change in the firm’s shipped world output per product line varies with the firm’s
organizational capability. Intuitively, firms that optimally choose a larger fractional drop in
output per product line have therefore more incentives to add product lines than other firms.
Indeed, since c0 (θ) > 0 from Proposition 1 and since the net profit per product line is positive,
dΦt (c(θ); θ; τ ; t)/dθ is positive if the condition d {−τ q 0 (τ c(θ) + t)/ [q(c(θ)) + τ q(τ c(θ) + t)]} > 0
holds. As transport costs become small, τ → 1 and t → 0, this condition becomes d {−q 0 (c)/q(c)} >
0. We will assume that P 00 (q) and P 000 (q) are not too large so that −τ q 0 (τ c+t)/[q(c)+τ q(τ c+t)]
is strictly increasing in c. In particular, this assumption holds if demand is linear.
We have thus shown that, under our assumption on demand, dc(θ)/dt is strictly increasing
in θ. Since the mass of product lines is fixed in the short run, dc(θ)/dt cannot be positive for
all θ since this would mean that all firms are adding product lines. Similarly, dc(θ)/dt cannot
4

Because of iceberg-type transport costs, the firm ships τ q(τ c(θ) + t) units of output to the foreign country,
but only q(τ c(θ) + t) units arrive there.

12

be negative for all θ since this would mean that all firms are selling product lines. Hence, the
endogenous market price of a product line, r, will adjust so that
h there
´ exists a threshold type
¡ ¢
b
b
θ ∈ θ, θ such that all firms with organizational capability θ ∈ θ, θ respond to an increase in
t by ³selling
i product lines (and so dc(θ)/dt < 0), whereas all firms with organizational capability
b
θ ∈ θ, θ respond to an increase in t by buying product lines (and so dc(θ)/dt > 0).
We summarize the eﬀect of an increase in the specific tariﬀ t in the following proposition.
Proposition 3 Assume d {−τ q 0 (τ c + t)/[q(c) + τ q(τ c + t)]} /dc > 0 for all c ≥ c0 , and consider a small increase in the specific tariﬀ t. In short-run equilibrium, there exists a threshold
h ´
¡ ¢
type b
θ ∈ θ, θ such that dn(θ)/dt < 0 for all firms with organizational capability θ ∈ θ, b
θ ,
³ i
whereas dn(θ)/dt > 0 for all firms with organizational capability θ ∈ b
θ, θ .

The proposition implies that any change in trade costs induces a “merger wave” in the
short run. Following an increase in trade costs, small firms sell product lines to large firms,
and so the size distribution of firms becomes more skewed, while the opposite result obtains
following a reduction in trade costs. Proposition 3 is concerned with the eﬀect of changes in the
specific tariﬀ. As the following proposition shows, the same qualitative result obtains following
an increase in the iceberg-type transport costs.
Proposition 4 Suppose that the demand condition of Proposition 3 holds, and assume that
d [−q 0 (c)/q(c)] /dc > 0 for all c ≥ c0 . Consider a small increase in the iceberg
¡ ¢ transport
b
cost parameter τ . In short-run equilibrium, there exists a threshold
type
θ
∈
θ, θ such that
h ´
θ , whereas dn(θ)/dτ > 0 for
dn(θ)/dτ < 0 for all firms with organizational capability θ ∈ θ, b
³ i
all firms with organizational capability θ ∈ b
θ, θ .

Proof. See Appendix.
While the phrasing of the proposition suggests that Proposition 4 requires a stronger condition on demand than Proposition 3, this is not the case. In fact, for small trade costs, τ ≈ 1
and t ≈ 0, the prediction of Proposition 4 obtains under a fairly weak condition, namely if
the absolute value of the elasticity of output with respect to marginal cost is increasing in
marginal cost, d [−cq 0 (c)/q(c)] /dc > 0. In the remainder of this section, we assume that the
demand conditions of Propositions 3 and 4 are satisfied. The following corollary is an immediate
implication of Propositions 3 and 4 and Lemma 1.
Corollary 1 Consider a reduction in trade costs, i.e., either a decrease in t or in τ . Then,
firms with large market-to-book ratios T (θ) purchase product lines from firms with small marketto-book ratios.
To the extent that much of the merger and acquisition activity is due to “globalization”
(or, alternatively, positive productivity shocks), our model predicts that firms with high values
of Tobin’s Q buy corporate assets from firms with low Tobin’s Q. This is indeed consistent
with the empirical evidence summarized by Andrade, Mitchell, and Staﬀord (2001).
13

Propositions 3 and 4 suggest that an increase in trade costs induces a more skewed size
distribution of firms. This intuition is indeed correct, as the following proposition shows, if one
measures the size of a firm with organizational capability θ by its domestic sales (or revenue)
S(θ) ≡ n(θ)P (q(c(θ)))q(c(θ)).
Proposition 5 An increase in trade costs — either in the specific tariﬀ t or in the iceberg-type
transport cost τ — increases (decreases) the domestic sales of a type-θ firm, S(θ), if and only
if it induces an increase (decrease) in the optimal choice of the number of product
¡ ¢lines n(θ).
b
Hence, following an increase in trade costs, therehexists
´ a threshold type θ ∈ θ, θ such that
b
the domestic sales of all (small) firms of type θ ∈ θ, θ fall, while those of all (large) firms of
³ i
type θ ∈ b
θ, θ rise.
Proof. See Appendix.

4

Monopolistic Competition: Trade Liberalization and the Size
Distribution of Firms

In this section, we turn to the eﬀects of trade liberalization and market integration on firm
scope and the size distribution of firms in a two-country model with monopolistic competition.
We are concerned with the eﬀects of trade liberalization both in the short run, where the
number of firms and the aggregate number of product lines is fixed, and the long run, where
the number of firms and the aggregate number of product lines are endogenous.
There are two countries, country 1 and country 2, and a population of atomless firms in
each. Firms can sell in both countries but can produce only in their home country. In this
section, we will refer to c(n; θ), which is again given by (1), as the firm’s marginal cost, and
to the additive cost parameter t as the transport cost or tariﬀ. The transport cost or tariﬀ
is indexed by a country pair (i, j): tij is the transport cost or tariﬀ per unit of output from
country i to country j. Transport costs and tariﬀs have to be incurred only for exports from
one country to the other, and so t11 = t22 = 0, t12 > 0, and t21 > 0. Countries diﬀer only in
their tariﬀs.
In each country, there is a mass L of identical consumers with the following linear-quadratic
utility function:
·Z
¸2
Z
Z
2
x(k)dk + H,
(11)
U = x(k)dk − [x(k)] dk − 2σ
where x(k) is consumption of product line k, H is consumption of the Hicksian composite
commodity, and σ > 0 is a parameter that measures the degree of product diﬀerentiation. Assuming that consumer income is suﬃciently large, each consumer’s inverse demand for product
line k is then given by
Z
p(k) = 1 − 2x(k) − 4σ

x(l)dl.

We assume that each firm can set a diﬀerent output (or price) in the two countries. Since
each product line is of measure zero, a firm’s choice of output for one product line does not
14

aﬀect its choice of output for another product line. Consider now a firm with marginal cost c
from country i selling in country j (which may or may not be the same country). It can be
shown that its profit-maximizing output qij (c) and gross profit per product line π ij (c) from
sales in country j are given by
qij (c) =

L
(aj − tij − c), i, j = 1, 2,
4

and

L
(aj − tij − c)2 , i, j = 1, 2,
8
respectively, where aj is the endogenous residual demand intercept in country j. This endogenous demand intercept is given by
R
R
1 + σ (c + t1j )µ1j (dc) + σ (c + t2j )µ2j (dc)
R
R
aj =
,
(12)
1 + σ µ1j (dc) + σ µ2j (dc)
π ij (c) =

where µij is the Borel measure over marginal costs of those product lines that are produced
in country i and sold in country j. To simplify notation, we will henceforth normalize market
size L ≡ 8.
We will focus on the case where the tariﬀs imposed by the two countries are initially the
same, t12 = t21 = t, so that the demand intercepts are also the same, a1 = a2 = a. If t is
suﬃciently small, as we will henceforth assume, then each firm will find it optimal to sell in
both countries.5
The first-order condition for the optimal choice of the number of product lines then becomes
o
n
Ωi (ci (θ); θ; t12 , t21 ) ≡
[ai − ci (θ)]2 + [aj − tij − ci (θ)]2 − ri
−

2ci (θ)
{[ai − ci (θ)] + [aj − tij − ci (θ)]}
θ

= 0,

(13)

where ci (θ) = c0 [ni (θ)]1/θ is the implicit choice of marginal cost by a firm with organizational
capability θ based in country i, and ri the fixed cost per product line
£ in¤ country i. As in
Section 3, we assume that the domain of organizational capabilities, θ, θ , is such that this
£ ¤
first-order condition determines the optimal choice of ci (θ) for all θ ∈ θ, θ . Applying the
implicit function theorem to (13), we obtain
c0i (θ) =

ci (θ) {[ai − ci (θ)] + [aj − tij − ci (θ)]}
.
θ {[ai − ci (θ)] + [aj − tij − ci (θ)]} + θ {[ai − 2ci (θ)] + [aj − tij − 2ci (θ)]}
2

(14)

Since each firm makes positive sales from selling in each country, ai > ci (θ) and aj > tij + ci (θ),
the first-order condition (13) implies that θ {[ai − ci (θ)] + [aj − tij − ci (θ)]} > 2ci (θ). It then
follows that Proposition 1 carries over the two-country setting with monopolistic competition:
c0i (θ) > 0.
5

A suﬃcient condition is that t < 2a/(2 + θ).

15

Let Mi denote the mass of firms producing in country i, and Ni the mass of product lines
managed by firms from country i The endogenous demand intercept in country i can then be
written as
R
1 + σ [Mi ni (θ)ci (θ) + Mj nj (θ)cj (θ)] dG(θ) + σNj tji
, i 6= j, i = 1, 2.
(15)
ai =
1 + σ(N1 + N2 )
Aggregating the endogenous numbers of product lines over all Mi firms from country i yields
the mass Ni of product lines managed by these firms:
Z θ
Ni = Mi
ni (θ)dG(θ), i = 1, 2.
(16)
θ

A change in trade costs will lead to diﬀerent responses across firms in their choice of the
number of product lines, and these diﬀerent responses will alter the distribution of induced
marginal costs and, hence, the endogenous demand intercept a. The following lemma shows
how a and average marginal costs change when high-θ firms add product lines while low-θ firms
reduce the number of product lines.
θ2 such that all firms in country i ∈ {1, 2}
Lemma 3 Suppose there exist marginal types b
θ1 and b
b
θi , while all other
with organizational capability θ > θi divest product lines, ∆ni (θ) < 0 for θ > b
θi , holding the total mass of product
firms in country i add productR lines, ∆ni (θ) > 0 for θ < b
lines in each country i fixed, ∆ni (θ)dG(θ) = 0. Then, the weighted average (by the number
of product lines) marginal costs of firms producing in country i decreases:
¯
Z
¯
d
[nci (n; θ)]¯¯
∆ni (θ)dG(θ) < 0.
dn
n=ni (θ)
Hence, the endogenous demand intercept ai decreases, ∆ai < 0.

Proof. See Appendix.
We now turn to the short-run and long-run eﬀects of trade liberalization and market integration.

4.1

The Short-Run Eﬀects of Trade Liberalization

In short-run equilibrium, the mass of firms producing in country i, Mi , is fixed, as is the mass
of product lines managed by these firms, Ni . Since the location of production of a product
line is assumed to be fixed in the short run (and there is no foreign direct investment), the
endogenous (short-run) market price of a product line, ri , may diﬀer across countries. We
can then define a short-run equilibrium as a collection {ci (·), ni (·), ai , ri }2i=1 satisfying the cost
equation (1), the first-order condition for the optimal choice of the number of product lines,
(13), the equation for the endogenous demand intercept, (15), and the merger market condition
(16).
We now analyze the short-run eﬀects of multilateral and unilateral tariﬀ changes on firm
scope and the size distribution of firms. For this purpose, we assume that, prior to the change
in tariﬀs, the two countries are identical: N1 = N2 = N , M1 = M2 = M , and t12 = t21 = t.
We first consider a small symmetric reduction in the common tariﬀ t.
16

Proposition 6 Suppose that the countries impose identical tariﬀs, t12 = t21 = t, and consider
the short-run eﬀects of a small symmetric trade liberalization, dt < 0. There exists a marginal
θ respond by divesting prodtype b
θ ∈ (θ, θ) such that all firms with organizational capability θ > b
b
uct lines, while all firms with organizational capability θ < θ respond by purchasing additional
product lines.

Proof. See Appendix.
In response to a multilateral trade liberalization, large firms decide to downsize by divesting
product lines. If the market price of a product line were unchanged, all firms would actually
want to purchase product lines. But the number of product lines is fixed, and so the price
per product line r increases in response to a multilateral trade liberalization. Given this
endogenous price increase, only the firms with the lowest marginal costs (i.e., the firms with
inferior organizational capability) find it optimal to add product lines. Proposition 6 thus
mirrors our earlier result, Proposition 3, on the eﬀects of a change in trade costs when each
firm is a monopolist for each of its product lines. A crucial step in the proof consists in showing
that the “indirect eﬀect” of a multilateral trade liberalization through a change in the intensity
of competition (i.e., through the endogenous demand intercept a) does not outweigh the “direct
eﬀect” identified in the earlier proposition.
Proposition 6 in conjunction with Lemma 3 implies that a multilateral trade liberalization
reduces the weighted (by number of product lines) average production costs in the industry. To
the extent that the Canadian-U.S. free-trade agreement can be viewed as a multilateral trade
liberalization, this last prediction is consistent with Trefler (2004), who attributes a 15 percent
increase in average labor productivity in Canada to the free-trade agreement.
Next, we consider a small unilateral reduction in the tariﬀ imposed by country 1 on imports
from country 2, t21 .
Proposition 7 Suppose that the countries initially impose identical tariﬀs, t12 = t21 = t, and
consider the short-run eﬀects of a small unilateral trade liberalization by country 1, dt21 < 0.
In the liberalizing country 1, there exists a marginal type b
θ1 ∈ (θ, θ) such that all firms with
organizational capability θ > b
θ1 respond by purchasing additional product lines, while all firms
with organizational capability θ < b
θ1 respond by divesting product lines. In contrast, in country
b
2, there exists a marginal type θ2 ∈ (θ, θ) such that all firms with organizational capability
θ2
θ>b
θ2 respond by divesting product lines, while all firms with organizational capability θ < b
respond by purchasing additional product lines.

Proof. See Appendix.
The short-run eﬀects of a unilateral trade liberalization are very diﬀerent from those of
a multilateral trade liberalization. In the liberalizing country 1, increased competition with
foreign firms induces the largest firms to add product lines while the smallest firms become
even smaller as they divest product lines. Hence, a country that unilaterally reduces its trade
barriers with the rest of the world will experience a steepening of the size distribution of its
firms. The improved access of country-2 firms to country 1’s market has the opposite impact
on firms in that country: the size distribution of firms producing in country 2 becomes flatter
as large firms contract and small firms expand. That is, for the non-liberalizing country 2, the
qualitative eﬀects are the same as for a multilateral trade liberalization.
17

4.2

The Long-Run Eﬀects of Trade Liberalization

In our analysis of the eﬀects of trade liberalization on firm scope and the size distribution of
firms, we have assumed so far that the mass of firms and the aggregate mass of product lines
produced in each country is fixed. Here, we consider a diﬀerent set of assumptions: we assume
that both the mass of firms and the aggregate mass of product lines will adjust in response to
changes in tariﬀs. We are thus concerned with the long-run eﬀects of trade liberalization.
Specifically, there is a suﬃciently large mass of ex ante identical potential entrants. If a
firm decides to enter, it has to pay a fixed entry cost φ; if it decides not to enter, it obtains
a payoﬀ normalized to zero. After paying the entry cost, a firm receives a random draw of
its organizational capability θ from the c.d.f. G(·). A firm then decides on the number of its
product lines. In both countries, the fixed development cost per product line is r. We assume
that the life span of each product line is limited, which implies that, in long-run equilibrium, the
market price of each product line is equal to the exogenous development cost r, and the merger
market does not play any allocative role. Since potential entrants are ex ante identical, the
expected net profit of each entrant in country i must be equal to zero in long-run equilibrium:
Z θ
o
n
(17)
ni (θ) [ai − ci (θ)]2 + [aj − tij − ci (θ)]2 − ri dG(θ) − φ = 0, i = 1, 2.
θ

We define a long-run equilibrium as a collection {ci (·), ni (·), ai , Ni , Mi }2i=1 satisfying the cost
equation (1), the first-order condition (13), the equation for the endogenous demand intercept,
(15), the adding-up condition (16), and the free-entry condition (17).
We now analyze the long-run eﬀects of (unanticipated) multilateral and unilateral tariﬀ
changes on firm scope and the size distribution of firms. For this purpose, we assume that
the industry is in a long-run equilibrium, both before and after the change in tariﬀs. As
before, we assume that, prior to the change in tariﬀs, the two countries are identical, and so
N1 = N2 = N , M1 = M2 = M , and t12 = t21 = t. We first consider a small symmetric
reduction in the common tariﬀ t.

Proposition 8 Suppose that the countries impose identical tariﬀs, t12 = t21 = t, and consider
the long-run
£ ¤eﬀects of a small symmetric trade liberalization, dt < 0. There exists a marginal
θ have a reduced number of
type b
θ ∈ θ, θ such that all firms with organizational capability θ > b
product lines, dn(θ) < 0, while all firms with organizational capability θ < b
θ have an increased
number of product lines, dn(θ) > 0.

Proof. See Appendix.
Qualitatively, the long-run eﬀects of a trade liberalization are similar to the short-run
eﬀects: there is a tendency for small firms with inferior organizational capability (but low
marginal cost) to increase the number of product lines, while the reverse holds for large firms
with superior organizational capability (but high marginal cost). In contrast to the short run,
however, it is conceivable that n(θ) moves in the same direction for all firms, namely when
b
θ = θ.
θ = θ or b
Next, we consider the long-run eﬀects of a small unilateral reduction in the tariﬀ imposed
by country 1 on imports from country 2, t21 .
18

Proposition 9 Suppose that the countries initially impose identical tariﬀs, t12 = t21 = t, and
consider the long-run eﬀects of a small unilateral trade liberalization
£ ¤ by country 1, dt21 < 0.
In the liberalizing country 1, there exists a marginal type b
θ1 ∈ θ, θ such that all firms with
organizational capability θ > b
θ1 have an increased number of product lines, dn1 (θ) > 0, while all
firms with organizational capability θ < b
θ1 have a reduced number
£ of¤product lines, dn2 (θ) < 0.
In contrast, in country 2, there exists a marginal type b
θ2 ∈ θ, θ such that all firms with
organizational capability θ > b
θ2 have a reduced number of product lines, dn2 (θ) < 0, while
all firms with organizational capability θ < b
θ2 have an increased number of product lines,
dn2 (θ) > 0.
Proof. See Appendix.
The long-term implications of a unilateral trade liberalization for the size distribution of
firms are similar to those of the short-run. In the liberalizing country, production becomes
more concentrated in the largest firms while production becomes less concentrated in the other
country. As was the case for multilateral liberalization, it is conceivable that all firms within a
country increase or decrease the number of their product lines.

4.3

Globalization and the Size Distribution of Firms

The predictions of our model on the eﬀects of globalization on the size distribution of firms
are in contrast to what models with single-product firms predict. Suppose in each country
there is a population of single-product firms that diﬀer in their (constant) marginal costs of
production, c. Following a multilateral trade liberalization (i.e., a decrease in the specific tariﬀ
t), competition becomes more intense in that the endogenous markups over marginal costs
narrow. (In our linear demand model, markups become smaller since the endogenous demand
intercept a decreases. This holds for both the short run, where the number of firms is fixed, and
the long-run, where there is free entry of firms.) But this increase in the intensity of competition
amplifies diﬀerences in marginal costs: a larger fraction of domestic sales will be concentrated
amongst firms with low marginal costs. That is, standard models with single-product firms
predict a flattening of the domestic size distribution of firms following a multilateral trade
liberalization. (In the Appendix, we provide a formal proof of this assertion in the context of a
two-country model where demand is linear.) As we will show in the next section, the opposite
relationship holds true in the data. We call this the globalization-skewness puzzle.
Our theory of multiproduct firms can explain this puzzle. Indeed, as Proposition 6 and 8
show, a multilateral trade liberalization induces large firms to shed product lines and small
firms to add product lines. The short-run eﬀects on the changes in domestic sales by firm type
are illustrated in Figure 3 for a numerical example. A numerical example of the long-run eﬀects
is given in Figure 4. As both figures show, a multilateral trade liberalization induces a larger
percentage decline in domestic sales for a (large) high-θ firm than for a (small) low-θ firm. That
is, a multilateral trade liberalization results in a less skewed distribution of domestic sales.
We now explain why our results on the relationship between globalization and skewness
are diﬀerent from those of standard models. Holding fixed the number of product lines, what
matters for a firm’s incentives to adjust its scale (output per product line) is the “eﬀective size”
19

Percent Change in Domestic Sales

-2.0%

-2.5%

-3.0%

-3.5%

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9



Figure 3: The Short-Run Eﬀects of a Symmetric Trade Liberalization on Domestic Sales by
Firm Type. (The parameters are: M = 100, N = 1000, L = 800, σ = 0.0008, θ ∼ U [1, 2], and
c0 = 0.05; the change in tariﬀ is from t = 0.02 to t = 0.)

Percent Change in Domestic Sales

-7.5%

-8.0%

-8.5%

-9.0%
1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0



2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

Figure 4: The Long-Run Eﬀects of a Symmetric Trade Liberalization on Domestic Sales by
Firm Type. (The parameters are: L = 800, σ = 0.01, r = 0.5, θ ∼ U [1, 3], and c0 = 0.03; the
change in tariﬀ is from t = 0.01 to t = 0.)

20

of its domestic market. An increase in the intensity of competition, caused by a multilateral
reduction in trade costs, shifts the firm’s residual demand curve in its domestic market inwards,
thereby reducing the eﬀective size of the market. In standard models where each firm has a
single product line, therefore, globalization leads to a steepening of the domestic size distribution, as discussed above. In our model with endogenous firm scope, the number of product
lines a firm chooses to manage is determined not by the eﬀective size of the domestic market
but by the eﬀective size of the world market (faced by that firm). While a symmetric reduction
in trade costs shifts the residual demand curve in each country inwards, this indirect eﬀect of
globalization is dominated by the direct eﬀect of the reduction in trade costs, thereby increasing the eﬀective size of the world market. But an increase in the eﬀective size of the world
market dampens diﬀerences in intrinsic eﬃciencies (organizational capabilities), thus leading
to a flattening of the domestic size distribution of firms.
Following a unilateral trade liberalization, the eﬀective size of the market in the liberalizing
country shrinks (due to the improved access by foreign firms), as does the eﬀective size of the
world market faced by firms in the liberalizing country (who still face the same trade costs).
Hence, both our model and standard single-product models predict that a unilateral trade
liberalization induces a steepening of the domestic size distribution in the liberalizing country.

5

Empirics

In this section, we use firm-level panel data to test our model’s predictions on the eﬀects of
globalization on the skewness of the domestic size distribution of firms. According to Proposition 6, a reduction in trade costs that is symmetric across countries will induce large, high-θ
firms to shed product lines and small, low-θ firms to add product lines. As a result, a symmetric fall in trade costs is associated with less skewness of the domestic size distribution of firms
within an industry.
The size distribution of firms is often summarized by the gradient of the logarithm of a
firm’s sales with respect to the logarithm of its sales rank within its industry (e.g., Axtell,
2001; Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple, 2004). Indeed, if the size distribution of firms were Pareto
(as claimed by some authors), this gradient would be a constant. The following specification
extends this methodology by allowing the gradient to vary with the logarithm of the rank of
firm size and, in particular, with changes in international trade costs:
ln SALESjit = αit + β i ln RAN Kjit + γ i (ln RAN Kjit )2 + δ (t ln RAN Kjit )

(18)

+η (T COST Sit ) ln RAN Kjit + εjit ,
where SALESjit are the domestic sales of firm j in industry i at time t, RAN Kjit is the
rank of this firm in the size distribution (the largest firm has RAN Kjit = 1), T COST Sit is
an ad-valorem measure of trade costs in industry i at time t, αit is an industry-time fixed
eﬀect, and εjit are unobserved determinants of a firm’s sales. Note that our specification is
very flexible. First, by including (ln RAN Kjit )2 , the specification allows for non-linearities in
the relationship between firm size and size rank. Second, the intercept (αit ) is allowed to vary
within a year across industries, and within an industry across years. Third, the coeﬃcients
21

lnSALES

high TCOSTS

low TCOSTS

lnRANK

0

Figure 5: The skewness of the size distribution of firms.
on ln RAN Kjit and (ln RAN Kjit )2 are allowed to vary across industries. Fourth, by including
t ln RAN Kjit , the gradient of the size distribution is allowed to follow a time trend.
We are interested in the eﬀects of changes in international trade costs on the “steepness” of
the size distribution of U.S. firms: as the gradient of ln SALESjit with respect to ln RAN Kjit
becomes steeper (negative, but with greater absolute value), a greater share of production is
concentrated amongst the larger firms. From (18), this gradient is given by
∂ ln SALESjit
= β i + 2γ i ln RAN Kjit + δt + η(T COST Sit ).
∂ ln RAN Kjit
Our model predicts that a multilateral rise in trade costs (an increase in T COST Sit ) should
be associated with a steeper gradient, and so η < 0. Figure 5 provides an illustration.
To estimate (18), we require firm-level rather than plan-level data. For this reason, we use
firm-level data from the Compustat database. To compute a firm’s domestic sales rank and
to identify the relevant freight costs and tariﬀs, we need to carefully define a firm’s industry.
Too broad a definition of an industry has two disadvantages: (i) many firms within the same
industry may not be competing with each other, and (ii) there may be insuﬃcient cross-industry
variation in freight costs and tariﬀs. Too narrow a definition of an industry runs the risk of
excluding important competitors and relevant freight costs and tariﬀs. For these reasons, we
classify firms by their primary three-digit SIC industry.
22

From the Compustat database we obtained an unbalanced panel of the sales of 4,319 firms
in 116 three-digit manufacturing SIC industries over the years 1989-2001. We removed exports
and any other sales in foreign markets to calculate each firm’s sales in the U.S. market. We
then computed each firm’s rank by domestic sales within its three-digit SIC industry.
Our measure of trade costs is constructed from the Feenstra, Romalis, and Schott (2002)
dataset.6 They distinguish between two types of trade costs: (i) freight and insurance costs,
F REIGHTit , and (ii) U.S. tariﬀs, T ARIF Fit . We are interested in the variation in these
variables over time and across industries. Freight costs between any two trading partners
are roughly the same in either direction. We therefore treat changes in freight costs over
time as being symmetric across countries. The period covered by our dataset, 1989-2001, is
characterized by bilateral trade agreements such as the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement
and NAFTA as well as multilateral trade liberalizations in the wake of the Uruguay Round.
Following Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006), and in light of the lack of disaggregated time
series data on foreign tariﬀs, we therefore assume that reductions in U.S. tariﬀs are mirrored
by similar reductions in the tariﬀs of major U.S. trading partners.7
The variable F REIGHTit is calculated as freight and insurance charges (C.I.F. imports less
F.O.B. imports) divided by F.O.B. imports by industry and year, while the variable T ARIF Fit
is the value of U.S. import duties paid divided by F.O.B. imports into the U.S. We are interested in changes in intrinsic freight costs and tariﬀs rather than changes in F REIGHTit and
T ARIF Fit caused by changes in U.S. trade patterns. We therefore computed F REIGHTit
and T ARIF Fit holding fixed the U.S. trade pattern in 1995 (the mid-point of our sample).
Specifically, for each four-digit SIC industry, year, and foreign country, we compute the advalorem measures of freight costs and import tariﬀs. We then aggregate these measures to the
three-digit industry-year-level using the following weights:
IM
P P l,k,1995
,
k
l∈Li IMl,k,1995

where IMl,k,1995 is the value of imports (F.O.B.) in the four-digit industry l from country k, and
Li is the set of four-digit industries in the three-digit industry i. Given that both F REIGHTit
and T ARIF Fit are ad-valorem measures of trade costs, we have followed Bernard, Jensen, and
Schott (2006) in summing the two so as to obtain our measure of trade costs: T COST Sit =
F REIGHTit + T ARIF Fit . Descriptive statistics for these data (including controls) are shown
in Table 1.
The first column of Table 2 reports the results of estimating equation (18). The coeﬃcient on
T COST S ln RAN K is negative and statistically significant at a very high level of confidence.
As predicted by our model, a symmetric increase in trade costs is associated with greater
dispersion within an industry as the size of the larger firms increases relative to that of the
smaller firms.
6

The time span of our data is driven by the time span of this dataset. For years outside of this range industry
codes are diﬀerent and therefore diﬃcult to concord into industry classifications that are consistent with those
of Compustat.
7
Indeed, Head and Ries (1999) find that U.S. and Canadian tariﬀ reductions are highly collinear.

23

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics.

ln SALES
ln RAN K
(ln RAN K)2
T COST S
ln GDP
ln INT GAP
T COST S × ln RAN K
ln GDP × ln RAN K
ln INT GAP × ln RAN K

Number Obs
35,367
35,367
35,367
35,367
35,367
35,367
35,367
35,367
35,367

Mean
4.017
3.071
11.518
5.970
8.995
-0.268
15.982
27.616
-0.840

Std Dev
2.552
1.445
8.656
4.148
0.112
0.182
10.800
12.988
0.754

Min
-6.908
0
0
0
8.851
-0.511
0
0
-2.937

Max
11.823
5.781
33.417
34.853
9.199
0.039
99.968
52.186
0.211

A potential concern is that our variables are correlated with macroeconomic trends. To
address this issue, we include the interaction of GDP with firm rank, ln GDPt ln RAN Kjit ,
in our regression. Another potential concern is that changes in the size distribution are correlated with changes in credit market conditions which aﬀect small firms more than large
firms. For this reason, we include the interaction between the logarithm of the diﬀerence between the nominal interest rates charged to high-risk and low-risk borrowers and firm rank,
ln IN T GAPt ln RAN Kjit . (The data on GDP and the interest rate gap are collected from the
Economic Report of the President, 2005, tables B-2 and B-73.) As the second column of Table
2 shows, the coeﬃcients on our key variable, T COST S ln RAN K, keeps its predicted negative
sign and remains statistically significant at a very high level of confidence. The negative and
strongly significant coeﬃcient on ln IN T GAP ln RANK strongly suggests that the perceived
credit risk is negatively related to firm size. One explanation for the negative and significant
coeﬃcient on ln GDP ln RAN K is that small firms are more constrained than large firms in
their ability to expand in good times, possibly due to credit constraints.
The last two columns in Table 2 report the results of estimating equation (18) in four-year
diﬀerences (after de-meaning the data by industry-year). Relative to the regression in levels,
the estimated coeﬃcients on the variables of interest are similar. This shows that the long-run
responses to changes in international trade costs mirror the short-run responses, as predicted
by our theory. Note that the time-diﬀerencing also purges the data of any time-invariant
firm-specific eﬀects.
We performed two other robustness checks. First, we re-estimated equation (18) for only
those firms that were in the sample for the whole period. Second, we re-estimated equation (18)
removing the smallest ten percent of firms in each industry and year. The estimated coeﬃcient
on the trade-cost variable barely changed. Both specifications yielded nearly identical coeﬃcient
estimates as the baseline specification.

24

Table 2: Estimation of the Size Distribution.
Dep. var.:
ln SALES
T COST S
× ln RAN K
t × ln RANK

level
(1)
−0.0359∗∗∗
(0.0108)
−0.0364∗∗∗
(0.0048)

ln GDP
× ln RAN K
ln IN T GAP
× ln RAN K
Number Obs
R-squared

35,367
0.8756

level
(2)
−0.0356∗∗∗
(0.0091)
0.0534∗∗
(0.0211)
−3.6418∗∗∗
(0.6300)
−0.9075∗∗∗
(0.0640)
35,367
0.8804

diﬀ.
(3)
−0.0392∗∗
(0.0174)
−0.0290∗∗∗
(0.0112)

6,325
0.5749

diﬀ.
(4)
−0.0279∗∗
(0.0133)
−0.0152
(0.0182)
−1.1841∗∗
(0.5659)
−1.0010∗∗∗
(0.0800)
6,325
0.6204

The industry-specific coeﬃcients on ln RANK and (ln RANK)2 are suppressed. Level regressions include full
3-digit SIC-year fixed eﬀects. Standard errors (in parenthesis) robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering by
industry-year. ∗∗∗ significant at 1%, ∗∗ significant at 5%.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we have developed a theory of multiproduct firms and endogenous firm scope.
In our model, firms have constant marginal costs of production for each of their product lines.
But there are decreasing returns to the span of control at the firm level: the more product
lines a firm manages, the higher are its marginal costs. Firms diﬀer in their organizational
capability: the greater is a firm’s organizational capability, the less responsive are its marginal
costs to an increase in the number of its product lines.
A key feature of our model is that marginal costs are endogenously determined and depend
on the firm’s inherent organizational capability and its profit-maximizing choice of scope. In
equilibrium, firms with greater organizational capability expand their scope to such an extent
that, paradoxically, they have higher marginal costs. This solves the empirical puzzle on the
positive relationship between Tobin’s Q and firm size.
Since marginal costs are endogenous, our model allows us to explain why trade liberalization
has productivity eﬀects at the firm level. Even without the selection eﬀects that are the focus
of the recent literature on trade and firm heterogeneity, trade liberalization has aggregate
productivity eﬀects because firms respond diﬀerently to market integration. This diﬀerential
response to trade liberalization across firms implies systematic changes in the size distribution
of firms. A multilateral trade liberalization leads to a flattening of the domestic size distribution
in each country. This solves the globalization-skewness puzzle that we establish in the empirical
part of the paper, using firm-level data on U.S. manufacturing. In contrast, a unilateral trade
liberalization induces a more skewed size distribution in the liberalizing country.

25

7

Appendix

The Relationship between Tobin’s Q and Firm Size. To examine the relationship
between Tobin’s Q (i.e., the ratio between market value and book value) and firm size, we
use the Compustat database. We use data for the most recent year available, namely 2004.
We follow Jovanovic and Rousseau (2002) in calculating market value as the market value of
common equity (product of items 24 and 25), plus the book value of preferred shares (item
130) and short- and long-term debt (items 34 and 9). Book value is computed similarly but
uses book (rather than market) value of common equity (item 60). Our measure of firm size is
firm sales (item 9). Our variable ln Ti is then the logarithm of the ratio of firm i’s market value
and book value, while ln SALESi is the logarithm of firm i’s sales. Deleting outliers where
ln Ti ≥ 4, we are left with 5,965 observations.
We regress ln Ti on ln SALESi and a set of industry fixed eﬀects (according to the firm i’s
main line of business). Using 2-digit SIC fixed eﬀects, the coeﬃcient on ln SALESi is -0.5648
with a standard error of 0.0036. Using 4-digit SIC fixed eﬀects, the coeﬃcient on ln SALESi
becomes -0.4489 with a standard error of 0.0037.
Proof of Proposition 1. Recall that
Ψ(c; θ) ≡ q(c) {P (q(c)) − (1 + 1/θ) c} − r.
The first-order condition (6) then states that Ψ(c(θ); θ) = 0. We proceed in several steps.
Step 1. We show that Ψ(c; θ) is strictly decreasing in c whenever Ψ(c; θ) ≥ 0. Taking the
derivative with respect to c, we obtain
£
¤
Ψc (c; θ) = −(1 + 1/θ)q(c) + P (q(c)) − (1 + 1/θ) c + q(c)P 0 (q(c)) q 0 (c)
= −(1 + 1/θ)q(c) − (1/θ)cq 0 (c)
ª
1©
= −q(c) −
q(c) + cq 0 (c) ,
θ

where the second equality follows from using the first-order condition for output, equation (3).
Suppose the expression in curly brackets is nonnegative. Then, Ψc (c; θ) < 0. Suppose now that
the expression in curly brackets is negative. Since Ψ(c; θ) ≥ 0 implies that
P (q(c)) − c
1
<
,
θ
c
we then obtain
Ψc (c; θ) < −q(c) −

µ

P (q(c)) − c
c

¶

ª
©
q(c) + cq 0 (c) ≡ δ

We will now show that δ ≤ 0, and so Ψc (c; θ) < 0. Applying the implicit-function theorem to
the first-order condition for optimal output choice, (3),
q 0 (c) =

1
2P 0 (q(c)) + q(c)P 00 (q(c))

26

.

(19)

Inserting this expression into the equation for δ, we obtain
¾
½
¤
1
P (q(c)) £ 0
00
δ=− 0
q(c)
2P (q(c)) + q(c)P (q(c)) + P (q(c)) − c .
2P (q(c)) + q(c)P 00 (q(c))
c

Since our assumption on demand implies that 2P 0 (q(c)) + q(c)P 00 (q(c)) < 0, we have δ ≤ 0 if
and only if the expression in curly brackets in nonnegative. It follows that δ ≤ 0 if
¤ P (q(c)) − c
P (q(c)) £ 0
≤ 0.
2P (q(c)) + q(c)P 00 (q(c)) +
c
q(c)

From (3), this inequality holds if

¤
P (q(c)) £ 0
2P (q(c)) + q(c)P 00 (q(c)) − P 0 (q(c)) ≤ 0.
c

Since P (q(c)) ≥ c and 2P 0 (q(c)) + q(c)P 00 (q(c)) ≤ 0, the last inequality is implied by P 0 (q(c)) +
q(c)P 00 (q(c)) ≤ 0, which holds by assumption. Hence, δ ≤ 0, and so Ψc (c; θ) < 0 whenever
Ψ(c; θ) ≥ 0. In particular, Ψc (c(θ); θ) < 0 for any θ > 0. It follows that for each θ, there exists
at most one value of c such that Ψ(c; θ) = 0. (In fact, there exists exactly one such value of c
for all those θ such that Ψ(c0 ; θ) ≤ 0, while there exists no such value of c for all θ such that
Ψ(c0 ; θ) > 0.)
Step 2. It can easily be verified that
Ψθ (c; θ) =

cq(c)
> 0.
θ2

Step 3. We now show that c(θ) = c0 if and only if θ ≤ e
θ, where
e
θ≡

c0 q(c0 )
[P (q(c0 )) − c0 ] q(c0 ) − r

is the unique solution to Ψ(c0 ; θ) = 0. Since Ψθ (c; θ) > 0, it follows that Ψ(c0 ; θ) ≤ 0 for all
θ≤e
θ, and Ψ(c0 ; θ) > 0 for all θ > e
θ. Moreover, since Ψc (c; θ) < 0 whenever Ψ(c; θ) ≥ 0, it
follows that Ψ(c; θ) < 0 for all θ ≤ e
θ and all c > c0 . Hence, the corner solution c(θ) = c0 obtains
for all θ ≤ e
θ. In contrast, for all θ > e
θ, c(θ) is given by the first-order condition Ψ(c(θ); θ) = 0.
Step 4. We finally show that c(θ) is strictly increasing in θ for all θ ≥ e
θ. Using the implicit
function theorem, we have
Ψθ (c(θ); θ)
dc(θ)
=−
> 0,
dθ
Ψc (c(θ); θ)
where the inequality follows from Ψθ (c(θ); θ) > 0 and Ψc (c(θ); θ) < 0. Since c(θ) is uniquely
defined by the first-order condition (for θ ≥ e
θ), this comparative static result holds globally.
Proof of Lemma 1. Tobin’s Q is given by
T (θ) ≡

[P (q(c(θ))) − (1 − α)c(θ)] q(c(θ))
,
r + αc(θ)q(c(θ))
27

(20)

which is independent of θ for θ ≤ e
θ since then c(θ) = c0 . Assume now that θ > e
θ so that
0
c (θ) > 0.
Step 1. Consider the numerator in (20),
[P (q(c(θ))) − (1 − α)c(θ)] q(c(θ)).

(21)

We claim that this term is strictly decreasing in θ. Since the net profit per product line is
strictly decreasing in θ, this claim is correct if c(θ)q(c(θ)) is nondecreasing in θ. Suppose now
instead that c(θ)q(c(θ)) is strictly decreasing in θ. Then, the term in (21) is strictly decreasing
in α. Since α ∈ [0, 1], this implies that the term is strictly decreasing in θ if revenue per product
line,
P (q(c(θ)))q(c(θ)),
is decreasing in θ. But we have
dP (q(c(θ)))q(c(θ))
dθ

=

© 0
ª
P (q(c(θ))q(c(θ)) + P (q(c(θ))) q 0 (c(θ))c0 (θ)

= c(θ)q 0 (c(θ))c0 (θ)
< 0,

where the second equality follows from the first-order condition for the optimal output choice,
equation (3), and the inequality from c0 (θ) > 0 and q 0 (c(θ)) < 0.
Step 2. Since the numerator in (20) is decreasing in θ, dT (θ)/dθ < 0 if
½
¾
d [P (q(c(θ))) − (1 − α)c(θ)] q(c(θ))
< 0,
(22)
dθ
αc(θ)q(c(θ))
or

d
dθ

½

P (q(c(θ))) 1 − α
−
αc(θ)
α

¾

< 0.

Taking the derivative of P (q(c(θ)))/c(θ) with respect to θ, we obtain
·
¸
µ 0
¶
ª
c (θ) © 0
d P (q(c(θ)))
=
P (q(c(θ)))q 0 (c(θ))c(θ) − P (q(c(θ)))
2
dθ
c(θ)
[c(θ)]
µ 0
¾
¶½
c (θ)
P 0 (q(c(θ)))c(θ)
=
− P (q(c(θ))) ,
2P 0 (q(c(θ))) + q(c(θ))P 00 (q(c(θ)))
[c(θ)]2
where the second equality follows from the first-order condition for optimal output choice,
equation (3). Our assumption on demand, equation (2),
P 0 (q(c(θ)))c(θ)
< c(θ).
2P 0 (q(c(θ))) + q(c(θ))P 00 (q(c(θ)))
Since c0 (θ) ≥ 0 and c(θ) < P (q(c(θ))), it follows that
·
¸
d P (q(c(θ)))
< 0,
dθ
c(θ)
28

(23)

and so equation (22) does indeed hold.
Proof of Lemma 2. Step 1. We first show that a firm’s sales,
S(θ) = n(θ)q(c(θ))P (q(c(θ))) =

µ

c(θ)
c0

¶θ

q(c(θ))P (q(c(θ))),

are increasing in θ. Taking the derivative with respect to θ, we obtain
µ
¶
¶
µ
¶
c(θ)
c(θ) θ
θ c(θ) θ−1 0
ln
c (θ)q(c(θ))P (q(c(θ)))
q(c(θ))P (q(c(θ))) +
c0
c0
c0
c0
µ
¶
£
¤
c(θ) θ 0
+
q (c(θ))c0 (θ) P (q(c(θ))) + q(c(θ))P 0 (q(c(θ)))
c0
µ

Clearly, the first term is strictly positive for θ > e
θ (and equal to zero for θ < e
θ). We now show
e
that the sum of the second and third terms is also strictly positive for θ > θ. Collecting terms
and noting that P (q(c(θ))) + q(c(θ))P 0 (q(c(θ))) = c(θ), this sum can be written as
·

c(θ)
c0

¸θ−1

o
c0 (θ) n
θq(c(θ))P (q(c(θ))) + [c(θ)]2 q 0 (c(θ)) .
c0

Since c0 (θ) > 0 for θ > e
θ (Proposition 1), this expression is positive if the expression in curly
brackets is positive. From the first-order condition (6), θ > c(θ)/ [P (q(c(θ))) − c(θ)], and so
the expression in curly brackets is strictly positive if
¸
·
q(c)P (q(c))
0
+ cq (c) ≥ 0,
c
P (q(c)) − c
where c ≡ c(θ). Using the first-order condition for optimal output, (3), and (19), this inequality
can be rewritten as
c
P 0 (q(c)) [2P 0 (q(c)) + q(c)P 00 (q(c))]

© £
¤
£
¤ª
× −c P 0 (q(c)) + q(c)P 00 (q(c)) + q(c)P 0 (q(c)) 2P 0 (q(c)) + q(c)P 00 (q(c))

≥ 0.

It can easily be verified that this inequality is implied by our assumption on demand, P 0 (q) +
qP 00 (q) ≤ 0. Hence, S(θ) is increasing in θ.
Step 2. We now show that a firm’s book value,
b(θ) = n(θ)r + n(θ)αc(θ)q(c(θ)),
θ), it suﬃces to
is increasing in θ. Since n0 (θ) ≥ 0 (with a strict inequality if and only if θ ≥ e
show that
d
{n(θ)c(θ)q(c(θ))} > 0
dθ
29

for θ ≥ e
θ. This inequality can be rewritten as
½
µ
¶¾
c(θ)
d
S(θ)
> 0.
dθ
P (q(c(θ)))
But S(θ) is increasing in θ, as we have shown in step 1. Moreover, from equation (23) in the
proof of Lemma 1, c(θ)/P (q(c(θ))) is increasing in θ. Hence, the inequality does indeed hold.
Step 3. Finally, we show that a firm’s market value,
m(θ) = n(θ)P (q(c(θ)))q(c(θ)) − n(θ)(1 − α)c(θ)q(c(θ)),
is increasing in θ. It is immediate to see that m(θ) is constant for θ ≤ e
θ. We need to show that
m(θ) is strictly increasing in θ for θ ≥ e
θ. We can rewrite the market value as the sum of the
firm’s net profit and its book value:
m(θ) = n(θ) {[P (q(c(θ))) − c(θ)] q(c(θ)) − r} + b(θ).
Clearly, a high-θ can always replicate the choice of product lines by a small-θ firm, but at lower
θ, as we
unit costs, and so a firm’s net profit is increasing in θ. Moreover, b0 (θ) > 0 for θ ≥ e
have shown in step 2. Hence, the firm’s market value is strictly increasing in θ for θ ≥ e
θ.
Proof of Proposition 4. Applying the implicit function theorem to the first-order condition for the optimal choice of the number of product lines, (8), we obtain dc(θ)/dτ =
−Φτ (c(θ); θ; τ ; t)/Φc (c(θ); θ; τ ; t), where Φs denotes the partial derivative of Φ with respect
to s ∈ {c, τ }. Since the first-order condition defines a profit maximum, Φc (c(θ); θ; τ ; t) < 0,
and so the sign of dc(θ)/dτ is equal to the sign of Φτ (c(θ); θ; τ ; t). We have
τ [c(θ)]2
dr c(θ)
−
q(τ c(θ) + t) −
q(τ c(θ) + t)
dτ
θ
θ
µ
¶
dr
q(τ c(θ) + t)
= −c(θ)q(τ c(θ) + t) −
+ [π(c(θ)) − r]
dτ
q(c(θ)) + τ q(τ c(θ) + t)
½
¾
0
−τ q (τ c(θ) + t)
×
−1 ,
q(τ c(θ) + t)

Φτ (c(θ); θ; τ ; t) = −c(θ)q(τ c(θ) + t) −

where the second equality follows from (8). Taking the derivative with respect to θ, and
collecting terms, we obtain
¶
½ µ
−τ c(θ)q 0 (τ c(θ) + t)
d
dΦτ (c(θ); θ; τ ; t)
0
= c (θ) [π(c(θ)) − r]
(24)
dθ
dc q(c(θ)) + τ q(τ c(θ) + t)
µ
¶¾
d
−q(τ c(θ) + t)
+
.
dc q(c(θ)) + τ q(τ c(θ) + t)
The first term in curly brackets is strictly positive:
µ
¶
µ
¶
d
−τ c(θ)q 0 (τ c(θ) + t)
d
−τ q 0 (τ c(θ) + t)
>
> 0,
dc q(c(θ)) + τ q(τ c(θ) + t)
dc q(c(θ)) + τ q(τ c(θ) + t)
30

where the second inequality is the condition on demand from Proposition 3. As regards the
second term in curly brackets in equation (24),
µ
¶
−q(τ c(θ) + t)
d
≥0
dc q(c(θ)) + τ q(τ c(θ) + t)
if
−

q 0 (c(θ))
τ q 0 (τ c(θ) + t)
≥−
.
q(τ c(θ) + t)
q(c(θ))

But this last inequality is implied by our condition on demand, d [−q 0 (c)/q(c)] /dc > 0, and the
fact that τ ≥ 1. Hence, the curly bracket in equation (24) is strictly positive. Since the net profit
per product line is strictly positive and c0 (θ) > 0, it follows that dΦτ (c(θ); θ; τ ; t)/dθ > 0, and
so dc(θ)/dτ is strictly increasing in θ. Since the mass of product lines is fixed, the endogenous
¡ ¢
b
market price of a product line, r, will adjust so that there
exists
a
threshold
type
θ
∈
θ, θ
h ´
such that all firms with organizational capability θ ∈ θ, b
θ respond to an increase in τ by

selling
lines (and so dc(θ)/dτ < 0), whereas all firms with organizational capability
³ product
i
b
θ ∈ θ, θ respond to an increase in τ by buying product lines (and so dc(θ)/dτ > 0).
Proof of Proposition 5. Taking the derivative of domestic sales with respect to κ ∈ {t, τ }
yields
½
¾
£
¤ c(θ) 0
dn(θ)
dS(θ)
0
=
P (q(c(θ)))q(c(θ)) + P (q(c(θ))) + q(c(θ))P (q(c(θ)))
q (c(θ)) , (25)
dκ
dκ
θ
where c(θ; t) ≡ c0 n(θ)1/θ . We need to show that the term in curly brackets is strictly positive.
Applying the implicit function theorem to the first-order condition for output choice, equation (7), we obtain
q 0 (c(θ; t)) =

1
2P 0 (q(c(θ; t))) + q(c(θ; t))P 00 (q(c(θ; t)))

>

1
P 0 (q(c(θ; t)))

,

(26)

where the inequality follows from our assumption on demand, equation (2). This implies that
the markup P (q(c)) − c is decreasing in marginal cost c since
d [P (q(c)) − c]
= P 0 (q(c))q 0 (c) − 1 < 0,
dc
where the first inequality follows from (26) and P 0 (q(c)) < 0. Hence, P (q(c)) − c ≥ P (q(c +
t)) − (c + t), and so from the first-order condition for the optimal number of product lines, (8),
¶
µ
1
c(θ).
(27)
P (q(c(θ))) ≥ 1 +
θ

31

The term in curly brackets in equation (25) can thus be re-written as
¾
½
c(θ)2 0
q (c(θ))
P (q(c(θ)))q(c(θ)) +
θ
¾
½
P (q(c(θ)))q(c(θ))P 0 (q(c(θ))) + c(θ)2 /θ
≥
P 0 (q(c(θ)))
½
¾
−P (q(c(θ))) [P (q(c(θ))) − c(θ)] + c(θ)2 /θ
=
P 0 (q(c(θ)))
½
¾
−(1 + 1/θ)c(θ)2 /θ + c(θ)2 /θ
≥
P 0 (q(c(θ)))
> 0,
where the first inequality follows from equation (26), the equality follows from the first-order
condition for the optimal choice of quantity, equation (7), and the second inequality follows
from equation (27). Hence, dS(θ)/dκ, κ ∈ {t, τ }has the same sign as dn(θ)/dκ. The sign of
dn(θ)/dκ then follows from Propositions 3 and 4.
¯
d
Proof of Lemma 3. The first step consists in showing that dn
[nci (n; θ)]¯n=n (θ) is positive
i
and strictly increasing in θ. To see this, note that
¯
d
¯
c0 [n](1+θ)/θ ¯
dn
n=ni (θ)
¶
µ
1+θ
c0 [ni (θ)]1/θ
=
θ
¶
µ
1+θ
ci (θ)
=
θ
> 0.

d
ni (θ)ci (ni (θ); θ)|n=n(θ) =
dn

The second step consists in showing that (1 + θ)c(θ)/θ is strictly increasing in θ. We have
µ
µ
¶
¶
1+θ 0
c(θ)
d 1+θ
ci (θ) =
c (θ) − 2 .
dθ
θ
θ
θ
−1
0
−1
Using equation (14), it can easily be seen
¯ that c (θ) > θ (1+θ) c(θ). The claim then follows.
d
¯
We have thus shown that dn [nci (n; θ)] n=n (θ) is positive and strictly increasing in θ.
iR
¯
d
[nci (n; θ)]¯n=n (θ) ∆ni (θ)dG(θ) < 0. But this
The next step consists in showing that dn
i
¯
follows immediately from the following observations: (i) d [nci (n; θ)]¯
is positive and
dn

n=ni (θ)

strictly
increasing in θ, (ii) ∆ni (θ) > 0 for θ < b
θ and ∆ni (θ) < 0 for θ > b
θ, and (iii)
R
∆ni (θ)dG(θ) = 0.
The final step consists in showing that ∆ai < 0 for each country i. But this follows
immediately from the previous results and the equilibrium condition for ai , equation (15).
Proof of Proposition 6. We need to show that dc(θ)/dt is positive for high-θ (i.e., high-c)
firms and negative for low-θ (i.e., low-c) firms. Under symmetric tariﬀs, the first-order condition
32

(13) can be rewritten as
Ω(c(θ); θ; t) ≡

o
n
(a − c(θ))2 + (a − t − c(θ))2 − r

−

2c(θ)
{(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))}
θ

= 0,

(28)

Applying the implicit function theorem to this equation, we obtain
dc(θ)
Ωt (c(θ); θ; t)
=−
,
dt
Ωc (c(θ); θ; t)
where the subscript s ∈ {t, c} indicates the partial derivative with respect to variable s. Note
that Ωc (c(θ); θ; t) < 0 since Ω(c(θ); θ; t) = 0 is a profit maximum. Consequently, the sign of
dc(θ)/dt is equal to the sign of Ωt (c(θ); θ; t). Market clearing for product lines requires that
some firms sell product lines while others purchase product lines, and so the sign of Ωt (c(θ); θ; t)
will vary with θ. In the following, we will show that dΩt (c(θ); θ; t)/dθ > 0.
Taking the partial derivative of Ω(c(θ); θ; t), as defined by equation (28), with respect to
the cost parameter t, yields
¾
½
2c(θ) da
Ωt (c(θ); θ; t) = 2 (a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ)) −
θ
dt
2c(θ) dr
−2(a − t − c(θ)) +
− .
(29)
θ
dt
From the first-order condition (28),
2c(θ)
(a − c(θ))2 + (a − t − c(θ))2 − r
=
.
θ
(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))
Inserting this expression into equation (29) and simplifying, we obtain
¾·
¸
½
2(a − c(θ))(a − t − c(θ)) + r
da
dr
Ωt (c(θ); θ; t) =
2 −1 +t− .
(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))
dt
dt
Observe that θ enters this equation only through the endogenous marginal cost c(θ). Hence,
½
¾·
¸
dc(θ)
dΩt (c(θ); θ; t)
d 2(a − c(θ))(a − t − c(θ)) + r
da
=
2 −1
dθ
dc
(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))
dt
dθ
(£
)·
¤
¸
(a − c(θ))2 + (a − t − c(θ))2 − r
da
dc(θ)
2 −1
.
= −2
2
dt
dθ
[(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))]
From the first-order condition (28), the expression in curly brackets is strictly positive. Since
dc(θ)/dθ > 0, the sign of dΩt (c(θ); θ; t)/dθ is thus equal to the sign of [1 − 2da/dt].
We claim that da/dt < 1/2. To see this, suppose first that da/dt = 1/2. Then, dΩt (c(θ); θ; t)/dθ =
0, and so three cases may arise: (i) dc(θ)/dt > 0 for all θ, (ii) dc(θ)/dt < 0 for all θ, or else
33

(iii) dc(θ)/dt = 0 for all θ. But cases (i) and (ii) cannot occur since there is a fixed number of
product lines. Hence, case (iii) must apply: dc(θ)/dt = 0 for all θ; that is, there is no trade
in product lines. But then, from equation (15), da/dt = σN/[1 + 2σN ] < 1/2. A contradiction. Next, suppose that da/dt > 1/2. Then, dΩt (c(θ); θ; t)/dθ < 0. Hence, there exists a
θ
threshold type b
θ ∈ (θ, θ) such that — following a small increase in t — all firms with θ < b
b
purchase product lines (and so dc(θ)/dθ < 0) while all firms with θ > θ sell product lines (and
so dc(θ)/dθ > 0). From Lemma 3, it follows that this “reshuﬄing” of product lines reduces the
endogenous demand intercept a. From (15), the direct eﬀect of an increase in t on a, holding
n(θ) fixed, satisfies ∂a/∂t < 1/2. Hence, the total eﬀect of a small increase in t on a satisfies
da/dt < 1/2. A contradiction. We have thus shown that da/dt < 1/2, and so there exists a
threshold type b
θ, such that — in response to a small increase in t — all firms with θ < b
θ sell
product lines while all firms with θ > b
θ acquire product lines. The reverse conclusion holds if
dt < 0.
Proof of Proposition 8. We need to show that there exists a b
θ ∈ [θ, θ] such that dc(θ)/dt
is positive for θ > b
θ and negative for θ < b
θ. As shown in the proof of Proposition 6, the sign
of dc(θ)/dt is equal to the sign of Ωt (c(θ); θ; t), where
¾
½
2c(θ) da
Ωt (c(θ); θ; t) = 2 (a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ)) −
θ
dt
2c(θ)
−2(a − t − c(θ)) +
θ
since dr/dt = 0 in the long run. Using the same steps as in the proof of Proposition 6,
¾·
¸
½
2(a − c(θ))(a − t − c(θ)) + r
da
Ωt (c(θ); θ; t) =
2 − 1 + t,
(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))
dt
and
dΩt (c(θ); θ; t)
= −2
dθ

(£
)·
¤
¸
(a − c(θ))2 + (a − t − c(θ))2 − r
da
dc(θ)
2 −1
.
2
dt
dθ
[(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))]

(30)

We now claim that da/dt < 1/2 in the long run. To see this, suppose otherwise that
da/dt ≥ 1/2. Then, the profit of each firm of type θ would strictly increase following a small
increase in t, even holding fixed the choice of the number of product lines, n(θ):
ª
d ©
(a − c(θ))2 + (a − t − c(θ))2 > 0 for all θ.
dt

But this is inconsistent with free entry.
Since da/dt < 1/2, equation (30) implies that dΩt (c(θ); θ; t)/dθ > 0. Hence, the assertion
of the proposition follows.
Proof of Proposition 7. We need to show that dc1 (θ)/dt21 is negative for high-θ (i.e.,
high-c) firms and positive for low-θ (i.e., low-c) firms, while the opposite holds for dc2 (θ)/dt21 .
From the first-order condition (13), Ωi (ci (θ); θ; t12 , t21 ) = 0, and so
(ai − ci (θ))2 + (aj − tij − ci (θ))2 − ri
2ci (θ)
=
.
θ
(ai − ci (θ)) + (aj − tij − ci (θ))
34

(31)

Applying the implicit function theorem to the first-order condition, we obtain
Ωi (ci (θ); θ; t12 , t21 )
dci (θ)
,
= − t21
dt21
Ωic (ci (θ); θ; t12 , t21 )
where the subscript s ∈ {t, c} indicates the partial derivative with respect to variable s.
Note that Ωic (ci (θ); θ; t12 , t21 ) < 0 since Ωi (ci (θ); θ; t12 , t21 ) = 0 is a profit maximum. Consequently, the sign of dci (θ)/dt21 is equal to the sign of Ωit21 (ci (θ); θ; t12 , t21 ). Market clearing
for product lines requires that some firms sell product lines while others purchase product lines,
and so the sign of Ωit21 (ci (θ); θ; t12 , t21 ) will vary with θ. In the following, we will show that
dΩ1t21 (ci (θ); θ; t12 , t21 )/dθ < 0 and dΩ2t21 (ci (θ); θ; t12 , t21 )/dθ > 0.
Consider first country 1. Using the first-order condition (13) and initial symmetry between
countries, we obtain
¸·
¸
·
da1
da2
2c(θ)
da2
dr1
1
− 2t
+
−
Ωt21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 ) = 2(a − c(θ)) −
θ
dt21 dt21
dt21 dt21
·
¸
¸·
2
da1
(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))2
da2
= 2(a − c(θ)) −
+
(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))
dt21 dt21
da2
dr1
−2t
−
,
dt21 dt21
where the second equality follows from equation (31). Taking the partial derivative of this
expression with respect to c, yields
½
¾·
¸
dΩ1t21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 )
(a − c(θ))2 + (a − t − c(θ))2 − r
da1
da2 dc(θ)
= −2
.
+
dθ
dt21 dt21
dθ
[(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))]2
From the first-order condition, the expression in curly brackets is strictly positive. Since
dc(θ)/dθ > 0, the sign of dΩ1t21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 )/dθ is thus equal to the sign of −[da1 /dt21 +
da2 /dt21 ].
Consider now country 2. We have
¸·
¸
·
¸
·
da1
dr2
2c(θ)
da2
da1
2
−
+
− 1 + 2t 1 −
Ωt21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 ) = 2(a − c(θ)) −
θ
dt21 dt21
dt21
dt21
·
¸
¸·
2
2
da1
(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))
da2
= 2(a − c(θ)) −
+
−1
(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))
dt21 dt21
·
¸
da1
dr2
+2t 1 −
,
−
dt21
dt21
where the second equality follows again from equation (31). Taking the partial derivative of
this expression with respect to c, yields
½
¾·
¸
dΩ2t21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 )
(a − c(θ))2 + (a − t − c(θ))2 − r
da1
da2
dc(θ)
= −2
.
+
−1
2
dθ
dt21 dt21
dθ
[(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))]
35

From the first-order condition, the expression in curly brackets is strictly positive. Since
dc(θ)/dθ > 0, the sign of dΩ2t21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 )/dθ is thus equal to the sign of [1 − da1 /dt21 −
da2 /dt21 ].
We claim that 0 < da1 /dt21 + da2 /dt21 < 1. To see this, suppose first that da1 /dt21 +
da2 /dt21 ≥ 1. Then, dΩ1t21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 )/dθ < 0 and dΩ1t21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 )/dθ ≤ 0. Hence,
there exists a threshold type b
θ1 ∈ (θ, θ) in country 1 such that firms of type θ > b
θ1 in country
1 will sell product lines to firms of type θ < b
θ1 . In country 2, either n2 (θ) remains unchanged,
θ2 ∈ (θ, θ) such that
namely if da1 /dt21 +da2 /dt21 = 1, or else there also exists a threshold type b
θ2 . From Lemma 3,
firms of type θ > b
θ2 in country 2 will sell product lines to firms of type θ < b
it follows that this “reshuﬄing” of product lines reduces the endogenous demand intercepts a1
and a2 . Moreover, from (15), the “direct” eﬀect of an increase in t21 on the demand intercepts
satisfies ∂a1 /∂t21 < 1/2 and ∂a2 /∂t21 = 0. It follows that the total eﬀect of a small increase
in t21 on the demand intercepts satisfies da1 /dt21 + da2 /dt21 < 1. A contradiction. A similar
argument can be used to show that da1 /dt21 + da2 /dt21 ≤ 0 leads to a contradiction.
Proof of Proposition 9.
We need to show that there exist thresholds e
θ1 ∈ [θ, θ] and
e
θ2 ∈ [θ, θ] such that dc1 (θ)/dt21 is negative for θ > e
θ1 and positive for θ < e
θ1 , while the
opposite holds for dc2 (θ)/dt21 . As shown in the proof of Proposition 7, the sign of dci (θ)/dt21
is equal to the sign of Ωit21 (ci (θ); θ; t12 , t21 ), where
¸·
¸
·
da1
(a − c(θ))2 + (a − t − c(θ))2
da2
1
+
Ωt21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 ) = 2(a − c(θ)) −
(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))
dt21 dt21
da2
,
−2t
dt21
and
Ω2t21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 ) =

¸·
·
¸
da1
(a − c(θ))2 + (a − t − c(θ))2
da2
2(a − c(θ)) −
+
−1
(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))
dt21 dt21
·
¸
da1
+2t 1 −
,
dt21

since r is fixed in the long run. As we have shown in the proof of Proposition 7,
½
¾·
¸
dΩ1t21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 )
(a − c(θ))2 + (a − t − c(θ))2 − r
da1
da2 dc(θ)
= −2
.
+
dθ
dt21 dt21
dθ
[(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))]2
and
dΩ2t21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 )
= −2
dθ

½

(a − c(θ))2 + (a − t − c(θ))2 − r
[(a − c(θ)) + (a − t − c(θ))]2

¾·

¸
da1
da2
dc(θ)
.
+
−1
dt21 dt21
dθ

We now claim that da1 /dt21 + da2 /dt21 < 1 in the long run. To see this, suppose otherwise
that da1 /dt21 + da2 /dt21 ≥ 1. Consider the change in the profit per product line of a country-1
firm with marginal cost c(θ):
¸
·
da2
da1
da2
d [π 11 (c(θ)) + π 12 (c(θ))]
− 2t
= 2(a − c(θ))
+
.
dt21
dt21 dt21
dt21
36

Free entry implies that this expression cannot be strictly positive for all values of c(θ). Hence,
da2 /dt21 > 0. Consider now change in the profit per product line of a country-2 firm with
marginal cost c(θ):
·
¸
da1
d [π 22 (c(θ)) + π 21 (c(θ))]
da2
da2
= 2(a − t − c(θ))
+
− 1 + 2t
.
dt21
dt21 dt21
dt21
Free entry implies that this expression cannot be strictly positive for all values of c(θ) ≤ a − t
(which holds by assumption). Hence, da2 /dt21 ≤ 0. A contradiction.
We now claim that da1 /dt21 + da2 /dt21 > 0 in the long run. To see this, suppose otherwise that da1 /dt21 + da2 /dt21 ≤ 0. Free entry implies that d [π 11 (c(θ)) + π 12 (c(θ))] /dt21
cannot be strictly negative for all values of c(θ). Hence, da2 /dt21 ≤ 0. Free entry also implies
that d [π 22 (c(θ)) + π 21 (c(θ))] /dt21 cannot be strictly negative for all values of c(θ). Hence,
da2 /dt21 > 0. A contradiction.
Since 0 < da1 /dt21 + da2 /dt21 < 1, it then follows that dΩ1t21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 )/dθ < 0 <
2
dΩt21 (c(θ); θ; t12 , t21 )/dθ.
Trade Liberalization and Single-Product Firms. We now briefly show that a standard
model with heterogeneous single-product firms has very diﬀerent implications for the eﬀects of
a symmetric trade shocks on the size distribution of firms. Specifically, consider the symmetric
two-country setting of Section 4. In each country, there is a mass L of identical consumers with
utility function (11).
All firms produce a single product line but firms diﬀer in their marginal costs. The fraction
of firms with marginal cost less than or equal to c ∈ [c, c] is given by F (c). In the short run,
the mass M of firms is fixed. In the long run, there is free entry of ex ante identical firms:
firms get a draw of their marginal cost c from the distribution function F only after paying the
fixed entry fee φ.
The gross profit of a firm with marginal cost c that sells in both markets is
Π(c) =

L
L
(a − c)2 + (a − c − t)2 ,
8
8

where t is the symmetric (specific) tariﬀ, and a the endogenous demand intercept. For simplicity, assume that c + t < a so that all firms export. The endogenous demand intercept is then
given by
R
1 + 2σM cdG(c) + σM t
.
a=
1 + 2σM
Consider now a symmetric increase in the specific tariﬀ t. We claim that in both the short
run and the long run, da/dt > 0. In the short run, this can be shown by taking the derivative
of the endogenous demand intercept a with respect to t, holding the mass M of firms fixed.
To see that da/dt > 0 in the long run, suppose otherwise that da/dt ≤ 0. But then the gross
profit Π(c) of each firm would decrease, which is inconsistent with free entry.
The rank of a firm with marginal cost c, R(c), is the mass of firms with (weakly) larger
sales: R(c) = M F (c). We are concerned with how the gradient of the domestic size distribution,

37

∂ ln S(c)/∂ ln R(c), is aﬀected by changes in the specific tariﬀ t. We can rewrite this gradient
as follows:
∂ ln S(c)
∂ ln R(c)

=
=

∂ ln S(c)
∂c
∂c
∂ ln R(c)
∂ ln S(c) F 0 (c)
,
∂c
F (c)

where the second equality follows from applying the implicit function theorem to ln R(c) −
ln M − ln F (c) = 0. It follows that the sign of the gradient ∂ ln S(c)/∂ ln R(c) is equal to the
sign of ∂ ln S(c)/∂c, and depends on the mass M of entrants only insofar as M aﬀects domestic
sales S(c). The logarithm of domestic sales of a firm with marginal cost c is
ln S(c) = ln(L/8) + ln(a2 − c2 ).
The derivative of this expression with respect to c is
2c
∂ ln S(c)
=− 2
.
∂c
a − c2
Recall that an increase in the specific tariﬀ t induces an increase in the endogenous demand
intercept a, both in the short run and in the long run. But the increase in a reduces 2c/(a2 −c2 ),
i.e., makes the size distribution flatter.
This shows that a symmetric trade liberalization (a reduction in t) leads to a steeper size
distribution, in contrast to the prediction of our multiproduct model (and the empirical evidence
presented in this paper).

References
(2005): Economic Report of the President. U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce.
Andrade, Gregor, M. M., and E. Stafford (2001): “New Evidence and Perspectives on
Mergers,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(2), 103—120.
Axtell, R. L. (2001): “Zipf’s Distribution of US Firm Sizes,” Science, 293(5536), 1818—1820.
Baldwin, J. R., and W. Gu (2005): “The Impact of Trade on Plant Scale, Production-Run
Length and Diversification,” Mimeo, Statistics Canada.
Berger, P. G., and E. Ofek (1995): “Diversification’s Eﬀect on Firm Value,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 37(1), 39—65.
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, and P. Schott (2006): “Trade Costs, Firms, and Productivity,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(5).
Bernard, A. B., S. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2005): “Multi-Product Firms and Trade
Liberalization,” Mimeo, London School of Economics.
38

(2006): “Multi-Product Firms and the Dynamics of Product Mix,” Mimeo, London
School of Economics.
Brander, J., and J. Eaton (1984): “Product Line Rivalry,” American Economic Review,
74(3), 323—334.
Breinlich, H. (2005): “Trade Liberalization and Industrial Restructuring Through Mergers
and Acquisitions,” Mimeo, London School of Economics.
Cabral, L., and J. Mata (2003): “On the Evolution of the Firm Size Distribution: Facts
and Theory,” American Economic Review, 93(4), 1075—1090.
Eckel, C., and J. P. Neary (2005): “Multi-Product Firms and Flexible Manufacturing in
the Global Economy,” Mimeo, University of Göttingen.
Eeckhout, J., and B. Jovanovic (2002): “Knowledge Spillovers and Inequality,” American
Economic Review, 92(5), 1290—1307.
Feenstra, R., J. Romalis, and P. Schott (2002): “U.S. Imports, Exports, and Tariﬀ
Data,” NBER Working Paper 9387, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Head, K., and J. Ries (1999): “Rationalization Eﬀects of Trade Liberalizations,” Journal of
International Economics, 47(2), 295—320.
Helpman, E., M. J. Melitz, and S. R. Yeaple (2004): “Exports versus FDI with Heterogeneous Firms,” American Economic Review, 94(1), 300—316.
Johnson, J. P., and D. P. Myatt (2003): “Multiproduct Quality Competition: Fighting
Brands and Product Line Pruning,” American Economic Review, 93(3), 748—777.
Jovanovic, B., and P. Rousseau (2002): “The Q-Theory of Mergers,” American Economic
Review, 92, 198—204.
Lang, L., and R. Stulz (1994): “Tobin’s Q, Diversification, and Firm Performance,” Journal
of Political Economy, 102(6), 1248—1280.
Maksimovic, V., and G. Phillips (2001): “The Market for Corporate Assets: Who Engages
in Mergers and Asset Sales and Are There Eﬃciency Gains?,” Journal of Finance, 55(6),
2019—2065.
(2002): “Do Conglomerate Firms Allocate Resources Ineﬃcienctly Across Industries?
Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Finance, 57(2), 721—767.
Melitz, M. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695—1725.
Melitz, M. J., and G. Ottaviano (2005): “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,” NBER
Working Paper 11393, National Bureau of Economic Research.
39

Rajan, R. G., H. Servaes, and L. Zingales (2000): “The Cost of Diversity: The Diversification Discount and Ineﬃcient Investment,” Journal of Finance, 55(1), 35—80.
Santalo, J. (2002): “Organizational Capital and the Existence of a Diversification and Size
Discount,” Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Schoar, A. (2002): “The Eﬀect of Diversification on Firm Productivity,” Journal of Finance,
62(6), 2379—2403.
Shaked, A., and J. Sutton (1990): “Multiproduct Firms and Market Structure,” Rand
Journal of Economics, 21(1), 45—62.
Sutton, J. (1997): “Gibrat’s Legacy,” Journal of Economic Literature, 35(1), 40—59.
(1998): Technology and Market Structure. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Trefler, D. (2004): “The Long and the Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement,”
American Economic Review, 94(4), 870—895.

40

