                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               NEW EVIDENCE ON GENDER DIFFERENCES IN PROMOTION
               RATES: AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF A SAMPLE NEW HIRES

                                            Francine D. Blau
                                              Jed DeVaro

                                          Working Paper 12321
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12321


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




The authors thank Harry Holzer for helpful discussions about the data, and Henri Fraisse, David Rosenblum
and Derrill Watson for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Francine D. Blau and Jed DeVaro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
New Evidence on Gender Difference in Promotion Rates: An Empirical Analysis of a Sample of
New Hires
Francine D. Blau and Jed DeVaro
NBER Working Paper No. 12321
June 2006
JEL No. J16, J31, J71, M51

                                           ABSTRACT

Using a large sample of establishments drawn from the Multi-City Study of Urban Inequality
(MCSUI) employer survey, we study gender differences in promotion rates and in the wage gains
attached to promotions. Several unique features of our data distinguish our analysis from the
previous literature on this topic. First, we have information on the wage increases attached to
promotions, and relatively few studies on gender differences have considered promotions and wage
increases together. Second, our data include job-specific worker performance ratings, allowing us
to control for performance and ability more precisely than through commonly-used skill indicators
such as educational attainment or tenure. Third, in addition to standard information on occupation
and industry, we have data on a number of other firm characteristics, enabling us to control for these
variables while still relying on a broad, representative sample, as opposed to a single firm or a
similarly narrowly-defined population. Our results indicate that women have lower probabilities of
promotion and expected promotion than do men but that there is essentially no gender difference in
wage growth with or without promotions.

Francine D. Blau
Department of Labor Economics
265 Ives Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
fdb4@cornell.edu

Jed DeVaro
Department of Labor Economics
268 Ives Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
jld48@cornell.edu
                                                  I. INTRODUCTION
        Much of the literature on gender differences in the labor market concerns wages. A smaller
literature focuses on gender differences in job assignment and, specifically, promotions. Ultimately the
two topics are linked, since promotions are typically accompanied by increases in wages. Although an
understanding of gender differences in the career experiences of workers in firms requires an empirical
analysis that accounts for both promotions and wages, relatively few studies of gender differences in
promotions have also considered gender differences in the wage changes attached to promotion. One
reason that the omission of wages is problematic is that the concept of a promotion is quite broad. An
observation of equal promotion rates between equally-skilled and observationally similar women and men
would be misleading if the promotions received by each group differed in quality, with men perhaps
receiving the more desirable promotions. We can address this issue to some extent since the wage change
attached to a promotion provides some indication of how large a step up the hierarchy a given promotion
is, with larger steps usually being accompanied by larger wage increases.1
        The empirical literature on gender differences in promotions investigates whether equally
qualified men and women with similar observable characteristics have the same chances of receiving a
promotion or, more generally, of advancing their careers. Studies in this literature differ in terms of the
type of data used; some use data from one or a small number of firms or establishments (with data on
many or all of the workers employed), and others use samples of workers (generally resulting in no more
than one worker per establishment).
        This literature has yielded mixed results. Some studies have found that promotion rates are lower
for women than for men with similar observed characteristics (Cabral, Ferber, and Green, 1981; Olson
and Becker, 1983; Cannings 1988; Spurr 1990; McCue 1996; Cobb-Clark 2001; Ransom and Oaxaca
2005; Acosta 2005). Others, such as Stewart and Gudykunst (1982), Gerhart and Milkovich (1989),
Hersch and Viscusi (1996), Spilerman and Petersen (1999), and Barnett, Baron, and Stuart (2000) have
found the reverse. Still other studies have found no significant gender difference in promotion rates. This
was the finding in Lewis (1986), Hartmann (1987), Powell and Butterfield (1994), and Paulin and Mellor
(1996). Similarly, Giuliano, Levine, and Leonard (2005) found no gender difference in promotion rates,
using data from a single, large, U.S. retail employer. And, in a longitudinal study of individual educators
in Oregon and New York, Eberts and Stone (1985) found that a gender difference favoring males in the
early 1970s diminished and became insignificant by the late 1970s, arguing that equal opportunity


1
 We do not mean to suggest that job quality differences are described only by wages. A large number of other factors, for
example work-life balance, clearly determine the worker’s perception of the “quality” of a promotion. Nonetheless, the extent
of movement up the hierarchy is an important factor in assessing employers’ treatment of observationally similar men and
women.
employment enforcement contributed to the decline. Finally, using personnel data for managerial,
administrative and professional occupations within a construction and engineering company, Petersen and
Saporta (2004) found no gender differences in promotion after controlling for individual characteristics,
though they found higher promotion rates for women in the absence of controls. Their evidence also
contradicts the notion of a glass ceiling for women, since promotion rates were higher for men at the low
end of the hierarchy and higher for women towards the top of the hierarchy.2
         While many previous studies have considered only promotion probabilities and not the wage
increases attached to promotions, several have studied both. Olson and Becker (1983) and McCue (1996)
found lower promotion rates for women than for men, but comparable wage increases attached to
promotions for the two groups. Gerhart and Milkovich (1989) also found comparable wage increases
attached to promotions, though in that study promotion rates were higher for women than for men.
Hersch and Viscusi (1996) and Barnett, Baron, and Stuart (2000) found that women had higher promotion
rates but men had higher promotion-associated wage increases. Cobb-Clark (2001) found precisely the
opposite pattern: men had higher promotion rates but women had higher wage increases attached to
promotions. Finally, using a panel of British households, Booth, Francesconi, and Frank (2003) found
that, after controlling for observed and unobserved worker heterogeneity, women are promoted at roughly
the same rate as men but receive smaller wage increases from promotion.3
         Given the mixed empirical results concerning gender differences in promotions and the limited
number of studies that analyze both promotion and compensation, further work in this area remains of
interest. Our goal in this paper is to contribute to this literature by analyzing data on promotions and
wages for a large sample of recently hired workers spanning many establishments. Our data are of a
unique type that has not been used previously in this literature. The sample is from the Multi-City Study
of Urban Inequality (MCSUI), a large, cross-sectional survey of employers (establishments) in four
metropolitan areas of the United States in the mid-1990s. Many of the survey questions pertain to the
establishment’s most recently hired worker, including information on promotions, expected promotions,



2
  Similar findings of lower female promotion rates at low levels of the job hierarchy but higher promotion rates higher up in the
hierarchy are reported by Tsui and Gutek (1984), Lewis (1986), DiPrete 1989 (chapter 9), Rosenfeld (1992), and Spilerman
and Petersen (1999).
3
  While these studies used data from the United States, others have investigated gender differences in promotion rates outside
the United States. As a whole, the international evidence is somewhat less favorable to women than is the evidence based on
US data. Studies finding lower promotion rates for women include Bamberger, Admati-Dvir, and Harel’s (1995) study of two
Israeli high-tech companies; Pekkarinen and Vartianinen’s (2004) analysis of panel data on Finnish metalworkers; Sabatier and
Carrere’s (2005) analysis of academic researchers in France; and Ranson and Reeves’ (1995) study of computer professionals
in a western Canadian city. Wright, Baxter, and Birkelund (1995) compare the U.S., Canada, the U.K., Australia, Sweden,
Norway, and Japan, concluding that evidence of lower promotion rates for women is weaker in the U.S. than for the other
countries. Also relevant is Winter-Ebmer and Zweimuller’s (1997) finding, based on white-collar workers from the Austrian
Microcensus, that females have to meet higher ability standards than males to achieve promotions.

                                                               2
and wages, as well as measures of worker performance, tenure (i.e. the amount of time that has elapsed
between the hiring and survey dates), and detailed worker and firm characteristics.
        Several features of the data are particularly appealing for an analysis of gender differences in
promotions. First, as mentioned, we have information not only on promotions but on the wage increases
attached to promotions, allowing us to consider both in the same study. Second, the data include an
extensive set of controls for worker and firm characteristics that is paramount in an analysis of gender
differences in promotion rates or in any other labor market outcome. Of particular importance on the
worker side are direct measures of productivity or job performance. The available measures in this
literature are rarely job-specific, and typically the best available proxy is the worker’s educational
attainment.4 While we control for education and other worker characteristics, we can also control for
performance more completely using numerical job-specific ratings reflecting supervisors’ appraisals of
worker performance, as well as the same supervisors’ rating of the performance of “typical workers” in
the same job into which the establishment’s most recent worker was hired. This offers an unusual
opportunity to control for job-specific worker performance in both an absolute and relative sense. The
data sets used in studies in the promotions literature based on broad, representative samples such as ours
lack information on worker performance ratings.5
        A potential deficiency of the performance ratings, however, is that they might be biased in a way
that is correlated with gender. As noted in Blau, Ferber, and Winkler (2006, p. 179), it has been found
that identical papers were given higher ratings by students who believed the authors were male instead of
female, and similar findings were reported in studies that asked raters to consider the qualifications of
applicants for employment.6 Bartol (1999) reviews several field and experimental studies of gender bias
in performance appraisals, concluding that findings are contradictory, with some studies finding a bias
and others finding no bias. Later in the paper we present some evidence that the gender of the immediate
supervisor has no effect on the most recently hired worker’s performance rating in the starting job. While
this does not prove that the ratings in our data our unbiased, it does at least cast doubt on certain types of
gender-related bias. Further, if there is a bias against women in the performance appraisals, this would
serve to lower our estimate of the “unexplained” gender gap in performance—yielding a conservative
estimate of this difference (at least with respect to this factor).
4
  In addition to educational attainment, Cobb-Clark (2001) controls for AFQT scores in her analysis using the NLSY, though as
an overall measure of ability the AFQT score is less directly informative than is a job-specific performance rating.
5
  The performance ratings in this survey have been exploited previously in Neumark (1999) in an analysis of gender and racial
differentials in starting wages, though that study did not consider promotions or the wage growth arising from promotions.
Neumark finds some evidence consistent with employers having worse information about new female than new male
employees that may partly explain the lower starting wages paid to women, though he notes that the evidence is not strong
from the standpoint of statistical significance.
6
  Further information on gender bias in performance ratings can be found in the studies reviewed in Valian (1998) and in
Steinpreis, Anders, and Ritzke (1999).

                                                             3
        In addition to the worker performance ratings, a further advantage of the MCSUI for our analysis
is that it contains a number of firm characteristics that were unavailable for use as controls in earlier
promotion studies. For example, the survey includes an indicator for nonprofit status. Our data show that
women are more heavily represented in the nonprofit than in the for-profit sector; the fraction working in
the for-profit sector is 74 percent for women versus 87 percent for men. Recent empirical work by
DeVaro and Samuelson (2005) documents a pronounced difference in promotion rates between for-profit
and nonprofit organizations, with promotions less likely in nonprofits. These considerations suggest that
nonprofit status should be controlled in analyses of gender differences in promotion rates. To our
knowledge, no prior studies of promotions have had access to data that would allow nonprofit status to be
controlled. In addition to nonprofit status, we control for industry, establishment size, number of sites of
operation, whether or not the firm is a franchise, and the percentage of workers covered by collective
bargaining agreements.
        The contribution of an analysis using these data may be illustrated by considering some
contrasting studies. McCue (1996) analyzes promotions using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID), and Booth, Francesconi, and Frank (2003) use the British Household Panel Survey. While both
data sets are nationally-representative panels with detailed worker characteristics, they are thin on firm
characteristics.7 Furthermore, neither of these data sets contains job-specific measures of worker
performance. In contrast, case studies of single firms or small numbers of firms are able to control for
firm and job characteristics very precisely, but only by restricting the analysis to one or a small number of
firms from which it may be difficult to draw general inferences (e.g. Ransom and Oaxaca 2005 and
Giuliano, Levine, and Leonard 2005). Like the studies using broader samples, these single-firm analyses
lack individual performance ratings. Our data represent a middle ground that we see as a useful
complement to this literature, particularly given the unique presence of worker performance ratings. We
work with a broad, representative sample (though representative of the population of establishments in
four major U.S. metropolitan areas rather than a nationally representative sample of workers). At the
same time, we are able to control for firm characteristics more precisely than is usually possible with such
a broad sample, though inevitably not as precisely as in case studies.
        Competing explanations for gender differences in promotion rates may be classified into two
broad categories: those that are based on productivity or female preferences for different types of jobs and
those that are based on discrimination or broader structural factors. The productivity/preference-based
explanations suggest that outcomes (such as promotion rates) may be less favorable for women than men

7
 Using data on white men and women from the NLSY, Cobb-Clark (2001) controlled for a limited set of firm characteristics
(dummies for two firm-size groups, whether the worker is covered by a collective bargaining agreement, whether the employer
has multiple locations, and whether the firm is in the public sector).

                                                             4
due to gender differences in productivity or in job-related preferences (e.g., for authority or demanding
positions). Productivity differences could arise due to gender differences in schooling and other pre-
market training as well as labor force attachment. Job-related preferences may be influenced by
socialization, among other factors. Gender differences in productivity or job preferences could also arise
from the division of labor in the family. For example, Becker (1985) argues that since housework is more
effort-intensive than other household activities such as leisure, and since women have historically
performed a greater share of housework than men, married women spend less energy on each hour of
market work than men working the same number of hours. This yields lower market wages for women
and also induces women to economize on energy expended on market work by seeking less demanding
jobs. If this explanation is correct, the presence of job-specific performance ratings offers us a unique
opportunity to address productivity-related explanations for gender differences in promotion rates.
        Theories of gender discrimination based on personal tastes could take the form of prejudice on the
part of employers, customers, or co-workers (Becker 1957). In the case of employer-based prejudice, this
would imply that supervisors prefer to manage males rather than females. To the extent that this
preference is stronger for higher-level positions, gender differences in promotion could result. For
example, it could be that many managers prefer women in low-level jobs, but not managerial ones (Eagly
and Karau 2002).
        Theories of statistical discrimination, following early work by Phelps (1972) and Arrow (1973),
could also yield gender differences in promotions or wage growth even in the absence of personal
prejudice. In such models, employers facing imperfect information about worker productivity rely on
certain group characteristics (such as gender) as signals of individual productivity. Lazear and Rosen
(1990) offer one such story that gives rise to gender discrimination in promotions. In their model, the
employer rationally discriminates against women because gender is correlated with some unobserved
factor (such as one’s productivity in nonmarket work, which is assumed to be higher for women than for
men) that is relevant to promotions and thereby serves as a signal to the employer.
        Either the productivity/preferences or discrimination explanations could lead to promotion
differences that are associated with differences in the types of jobs men and women hold. As we have
seen, Becker (1985) provides a rationale for women to prefer less demanding jobs. And, models of
statistical discrimination suggest that employers may prefer not to hire women for jobs which typically
have long promotion ladders.8 Thus, we explicitly investigate the extent to which differences in


8
 There is evidence from the sociology literature that longer job ladders tend to be found in jobs and firms that are
predominantly male (Petersen and Saporta, 2004, p. 877), and that the step sizes between levels of the promotional hierarchy
are larger for jobs that are predominantly male, implying that promotions yield greater advancement for men than women
(Barnett, Baron, and Stuart, 2000).

                                                              5
occupation can explain the residual gender gap in promotion rates. As is well known, the distribution of
employment across occupations is quite different for women versus men. If women are more heavily
concentrated in occupations with lower promotion rates, this could potentially account for the gender
difference in promotions. It is also possible that gender differences in firm characteristics are important
for understanding promotion differences. While previous analyses have explored the role of occupation,
our data contain information on firm characteristics that have not been available in earlier studies, so it is
interesting to see the incremental value of these firm characteristics in explaining the gender gap in
promotions. As noted above, one possibility is that women are more heavily represented in the nonprofit
sector where promotion rates tend to be lower.
       While it is not possible to ascertain whether gender differences in occupation distributions and
firm characteristics are due to personal preferences, discrimination, or a combination of the two, it is still
of interest to learn the extent to which they constitute the mechanism generating observed gender
differences in promotion rates. Further, the sociology literature emphasizes the importance of sex
segregation as a causal mechanism that induces other gender differences in careers (Reskin and Bielby
2005). As noted in Reskin and Bielby (pp. 71-72), “By concentrating men and women in different jobs,
segregation exposes them to more or less similar employment practices and reward systems that can, in
turn, exacerbate or moderate sex differences in other work outcomes.” More generally, sociologists point
out that “structural roles in which individuals find themselves affect their tastes, outlooks, power, social
networks, and group loyalties in ways that could not have been anticipated in advance.” (England and
Farkas, 1994, p. 345). To some extent then the occupation and industry variables may capture some of
these effects. Moreover, it is likely that the unexplained component of the gender gap in our promotion
models reflects the impact of such structural factors as well as the impact of discrimination and other
unmeasured factors. An unexplained component of the gender promotion gap, even in models such as
ours that control for reported job-specific worker productivity, is consistent with Granovetter’s (1994, p.
207) observation that, “Even if productivity were easily gauged, promotions often result from motives or
causes not clearly related to it, but easily understandable when relevant social structures and motives are
analyzed.”
       A potential limitation of our analysis, as with most other analyses of promotions, is that the
empirical definition of a promotion is broad, so that a promotion might mean something different for men
than for women. The data are not sufficiently rich to rule out this possibility. While we can observe the
wage differences arising from promotions, it might be that promotions differ in some other respect (such
as prestige) than the compensation attached to jobs. Another limitation is that our analysis is restricted to
one worker per establishment, in particular the most recently hired worker. Ideal data would contain


                                                       6
multiple workers per establishment with longer average job tenures than experienced by our sample of
recent hires. Furthermore, while we can control for worker characteristics and occupation, we do not
observe the hierarchy of jobs in these establishments. For each establishment we observe only a “slice” of
the hierarchy, namely the position into which a worker was hired and the position into which s/he has
been or could potentially be promoted.
                         II. DATA: MULTI-CITY STUDY OF URBAN INEQUALITY
        We use data from the Multi-City Study of Urban Inequality (MCSUI), a cross-sectional employer
telephone survey collected between 1992 and 1995. There are 3510 establishments in the data, and the
sampling universe consists of four metropolitan areas: Atlanta, Boston, Detroit, and Los Angeles. The
survey respondent was the owner in 14.5% of the cases, the manager or supervisor in 42%, a personnel
department official in 31.5%, and someone else in 12%. Screening identified a respondent who actually
carried out hiring for the relevant position, and the survey instrument took 30-45 minutes to administer on
the telephone, with an overall response rate of 67%. For more information about the data, see Holzer
(1996). Our analysis is based on the entire sample, except for seventeen cases we delete in agriculture,
forestry, and fishing.
        Data were collected in two subsamples and then merged to produce the final release. The first
subsample, covering slightly less than two thirds of the cases, was drawn from regional employment
directories provided by Survey Sampling, Inc. based on local telephone directories. This subsample
(called the SSI sample) was stratified by establishment size (25% 1-19 employees, 50% 20-99 employees,
25% 100 or more employees) and was designed to be self-weighting. It was restricted to employers who
had hired a worker within the previous three years for a position that did not require a college degree.
The second subsample was drawn from the current or most recent employer reported by respondents in
the companion MCSUI household survey, which over-sampled low-income areas and areas with high
concentrations of racial minorities. This subsample is not restricted to jobs not requiring a college degree.
Sampling weights adjust for all of these considerations, and we use these weights throughout our study.9
        A substantial fraction of survey questions asks about the most recently hired worker, and these
questions form the basis for the empirical analysis. The survey asks whether the most recently hired
worker has been promoted by the survey date, and the employer’s response to this question is the main
dependent variable in the first part of our analysis. We also present results using a measure of expected


9
  As stated in the codebook, “[the weights] make use of the link to the MCSUI household file, for those firms that were
sampled in this manner, thereby taking account of the household sampling structure and response rates. They also adjust for
the fact that the Boston and LA firm samples were incomplete, and the fact that the SSI sample deliberately omits jobs that
require college degrees … When the observations in the employer database are weighted by this variable the result should be a
representative sample of firms, such as would occur if a random sample of employed people were drawn from each city.” (See
Holzer et al. (1998), p. 98.)

                                                              7
promotion as the dependent variable, in particular the employer’s answer to whether or not the most
recently hired worker is expected to be promoted within the next five years (regardless of whether a
promotion was received by the survey date). The MCSUI data also contain a number of variables
measuring wages and the wage growth attached to promotions. Four variables pertain to the wages of the
most recently hired worker: starting wage, current wage at the time of the survey, wage the employee is
expected to receive if promoted, and highest wage an employee in this position (the one into which the
most recent worker was hired) could attain without a promotion.10 The reported time frames for these
wage questions were either hourly, weekly, monthly, or annually, and we converted all responses to
hourly wages measured in 1990 dollars, deflated using the CPI-UX. The second part of our analysis uses
three dependent variables that we construct from these four wage questions, as explained in the next
section.


                                                     III. METHODS
        Our analysis consists of two main parts. In the first part, we estimate probit models for the
probability of promotion. In addition, we report results for the probability of expected promotion, though
we consider the results regarding received promotions to be of greater interest since they reflect actual,
observed outcomes as opposed to subjective expectations about the future. Our goal here is to analyze the
extent to which a) reported productivity and b) observable characteristics (i.e. occupation and type of
firm) account for any observed gender difference in promotions, when controlling for other measured
worker characteristics. We thus report how the gender effect in models of promotion probability changes
across a variety of specifications. We begin with a baseline specification that includes as explanatory
variables only sex, race, age and age squared, tenure and tenure squared, and educational attainment. We
then consider four extensions of the baseline: a) adding only job-specific worker performance ratings, b)
adding performance ratings and occupation controls, c) adding performance ratings and firm
characteristics (including industry controls), d) adding performance ratings, occupation controls and firm
characteristics. The second part of our analysis concerns wage growth since entering the establishment
(focusing on the impact of promotion), potential within-job wage growth in the absence of a promotion,
and the expected wage growth attached to expected promotions. Finally, we test one possible source of
gender discrimination in promotions by using information on the gender of the most recently hired
worker’s immediate supervisor. We explain our methods in more detail in the following subsections.



10
  The questions are as follows: “What is the actual starting wage/salary?”; “What is his/her current wage/salary?”; “What is
the highest wage or salary that any employee in this position could expect to be paid without promotion?”; “If promoted, what
would this employee’s wage or salary be?”

                                                              8
         We acknowledge that some of the variables we use as controls in our analyses might be considered
endogenous, and in particular might be affected by differences in employers’ treatment of equally
qualified men and women. We have already considered this issue for the performance appraisal variables.
Another example would be tenure, the amount of time that has elapsed between the hiring date and the
survey date, which could reflect gender differences in involuntary terminations, ceteris paribus, or be
influenced by worker responses to perceived differences in treatment at the firm. Also, gender differences
in occupations or firm types could be due in part to gender discrimination. As noted above, to the extent
such variables are influenced by labor market discrimination, controlling for them could downward bias
our estimate of discrimination—the unexplained gender gap in promotions. At the same time the
unexplained gap may in part be due to the impact of unmeasured characteristics related to the productivity
or preferences of men and women; an example would be differences between men and women in their
preferences for various types of work or for degrees of authority within an organization. In this case, our
estimate of discrimination could be biased upward. These considerations suggest caution in interpreting
the unexplained gender gap in promotion as an estimate of discrimination.


3.1 Probability of Promotion
         We estimate probit models for the probabilities of promotion (and expected promotion), focusing
on how the gender coefficient changes across specifications that include various combinations of the
following control variables: age (and age squared), race, tenure (and tenure squared), educational
attainment, job-specific performance ratings, occupation and industry controls, establishment size,
number of sites of operation, for-profit status, percentage of workers covered by collective bargaining
agreement, and whether establishment is a franchise. These variables are defined in Table 1.11
         Specification 1 includes only the baseline controls (age, age squared, tenure, tenure squared, race,
and educational attainment). As we shall see in the next section, a statistically significant gender gap in
promotion rates (favoring men) is found in the baseline model and also unconditionally. A potential
explanation for the lower promotion rate of women is that the gender difference reflects productivity
differences between men and women. While the baseline specification includes the productivity-proxies
like education and tenure generally used in analyses of this kind, an attractive and unique feature of the
MCSUI is that it includes job-specific worker performance ratings. Specification 2 adds these
performance ratings to the baseline controls from Specification 1. We then address “location-based”

11
  One relevant variable that is not contained in the MCSUI is the worker’s employment experience prior to entering the firm.
While we do not observe this variable, we do control for tenure with the firm. More importantly, we control for the worker’s
job-specific performance in addition to educational attainment. Since prior work experience would be included in a promotion
equation mainly to capture a worker’s skills and ability, it might be argued that it is unnecessary when a direct measure of pre-
promotion performance is available.

                                                                9
explanations for gender differences in promotions. To more precisely identify the role of gender
differences in employment by occupation versus firm, in Specification 3 we first add only occupation
controls along with performance ratings to the baseline model; in Specification 4 we then add only firm
characteristics to the baseline and (reported) worker productivity controls. Finally, in Specification 5 we
include baseline controls, performance ratings, occupation controls and firm characteristics.
       As noted above, we also repeat the analyses described above using “expected promotion” as a
dependent variable. We are inclined to put less weight on these results since they relate to expectations
regarding promotion, which may or may not be realized. However, they do provide interesting
supplementary information, especially in light of the focus in the data set on recently hired workers.

3.2 Analysis of Wages
       We consider three dependent variables pertaining to wages, derived from the four wage variables
described in the previous section: wage growth since entering the firm; within-job wage growth attainable
in the starting position without a promotion; and expected wage growth attached to expected promotion.
We estimate OLS regressions for each of our three dependent variables, using the entire set of controls.
Our wage dependent variables are defined as follows:


   1. wage growth since entering the firm       ln(current wage) – ln(starting wage)
   2. within-job wage growth attainable in the starting position without a promotion         ln(highest wage
       attainable in starting position without a promotion) – ln(starting wage)
   3. expected wage growth attached to expected promotion          ln(expected wage the worker will receive
       if promoted from the starting position) – ln(current wage)


       In the regression for the first of these dependent variables, of principal interest is the coefficient on
the dummy variable indicating whether the worker has already received a promotion by the survey date.
This parameter provides information about the average additional wage growth associated with having
been promoted as compared with not having been promoted. A potential problem with this interpretation
is that, obviously, individuals who have been promoted may differ from those with similar measured
characteristics who have not been promoted. If they are, for example, a positively selected group, they
may have earned more than otherwise similar individual even if they had not received a promotion.
Unfortunately, we lack a variable that could identify a simultaneous model of promotions and wage
determination. While we acknowledge that it may not be possible to give a causal interpretation to the
coefficient on a promotion indicator in an OLS wage regression, the estimated return to promotion does



                                                      10
yield interesting descriptive information, which is at least suggestive of the extent of gender differences in
returns to promotion.12
        The second of these dependent variables, potential within-job wage growth, is interesting because
the consequences of not getting promoted may differ between men and women. For example, one
possibility is that higher promotion rates for men are counterbalanced by higher rates of anticipated
within-job wage growth for women. It is therefore important to consider expected wage growth in the
absence of promotions in addition to the wage growth attached to received and expected promotions. The
wording of the question pertaining to the “highest wage attainable without a promotion” refers to “any
employee in this position” rather than to the specific individual. On the one hand, a positive feature of
this wording is that this information is available for all workers, whether or not they have been promoted.
On the other hand, a potential measurement problem is that it is not necessarily the case that the focal
worker (i.e., the most recent hire) would have achieved the indicated wage. So, for example, suppose the
most recent hire is female and that the establishment engages in wage discrimination against women. The
highest wage that this worker could receive in her starting position is unobserved in the data, and the
answer the respondent reports as the highest wage attainable in that position could pertain to the
maximum a male could expect to receive in the same position. In light of this issue, the results based on
this dependent variable should be interpreted cautiously. If it is true that the “highest wage attainable” in
the position is more likely to be defined by what a male could attain than by what a female could attain,
this would cause us to underestimate gender differences in compensation.
        We define the third dependent variable, expected wage increase attached to expected promotion,
only for those workers for whom a promotion is expected, estimating the model only for these workers.13
For this regression, we also report a specification that includes the promotion dummy on the right-hand-
side as a control.
        A theoretical model based on “sticky floors” was proposed in recent work by Booth, Francesconi,
and Frank (2003). The term “sticky floors” refers to the situation in which women are promoted as often
as men but receive lower wage gains attached to promotion. In firms with formal wage scales, women
remain stuck to the lower wage levels on the wage scale of their new, higher job grade following

12
   Another issue is that the data do not indicate how many promotions the worker has received since being hired. So if some
workers have been promoted more than once since the starting date, the estimated promotion effect will overestimate the
average wage increase associated with a single promotion. However, since the sample is one of recent hires, only nine percent
of whom have been promoted by the survey date, we think this is unlikely to be a serious problem; few of these workers will
have had time to be promoted more than once since the hiring date.
13
   If we also include those workers for which a future promotion was not expected but an actual promotion had already been
received -- defining the “wage change attached to promotion” as the log-difference between the current (post-promotion) wage
and the starting (pre-promotion) wage – we add only 8 observations to the male regression and 9 observations to the female
regression, and the results are virtually unchanged.


                                                             11
promotion. This can arise either due to women’s inferior market alternatives or to less favorable
responses on the part of their employer to bids for their services from outside employers. The authors
find evidence consistent with their model’s main predictions, using panel data spanning the years 1991-
1995 from the British Household Panel Survey. Since we also address wage increases attached to
promotion in our study, we will also evaluate the “sticky floors” hypothesis on our sample of promotion
decisions for recent hires in establishments in four American metropolitan areas.


3.3 Gender Discrimination Arising from Employer Prejudice
        In both the promotion analysis and the wage analysis, the set of control variables is extensive and
includes job-specific performance ratings to capture (reported) worker productivity in a more detailed
way than is possible with the usual controls for educational attainment. This raises the question of how
gender differences in promotions or wage growth should be interpreted. One conventional interpretation
is that the residual gender gap is due to discrimination. However, as noted above, in this as in other
similar analyses, such differences in promotions (or wage growth) could reflect unobserved differences
between men and women that are correlated with promotions. While our data do not allow us to
decompose the unexplained promotion difference into the part due to discrimination and the part due to
unobserved heterogeneity, some indirect evidence allows us to speculate about the nature of the gender
discrimination that might be present in promotion decisions.
        The MCSUI data contain information allowing us to investigate the possibility of gender
discrimination based on personal prejudice on the part of the employer. We observe the gender of the
most recently hired worker’s immediate supervisor, who likely exerts strong influence on this worker’s
promotion prospects if not determining them entirely. We define the following dummy variable:


Male Supervisor: dummy equaling one if the most recently hired worker’s immediate supervisor
                      in the starting job is male, and zero otherwise


We include this variable and its interaction with the Male dummy variable in the probit models for
promotion and expected promotion. Taste-based discrimination against women (such that male
supervisors tend to underpromote women relative to men) would imply a negative coefficient on Male
Supervisor, and a positive coefficient on (Male × Male Supervisor).14 In our wage models (which are



14
  Note that the key expectation would be a positive coefficient on (Male × Male Supervisor) since the main effect of Male
Supervisor could be influenced by the propensity of male versus female supervisors to promote in general. So for example, if
male supervisors tend to be present in work settings where positions have longer job ladders associated with them, both males

                                                             12
estimated separately for men and women) we include the Male Supervisor dummy as a control and report
its coefficient. Widespread discrimination based on personal prejudice on the part of the employer should
imply a negative and statistically significant coefficient when this dummy is included in the equations for
women.15
         Of course, the foregoing assumes that female supervisors do not discriminate against their female
subordinates in promotion decisions and wage decisions. A theory that is at odds with this assumption is
the “queen bee syndrome”, as defined by Staines, Tavris, and Jayaratne (1973). According to this
syndrome, women who are individually successful in male-dominated environments and attain positions
of high status are more likely to endorse gender stereotypes. That is, they tend to view the women they
supervise as competitors and possess negative attitudes towards them, making them more likely to
discriminate against these female subordinates. However, the empirical analysis in (Terborg et al. 1977)
suggests that women with higher education levels hold the most favorable attitudes toward female
managers. If one’s level in a promotional hierarchy is an increasing function of education, then these
results are in conflict with the queen bee syndrome. From the perspective of our analysis, if females as
well as males discriminate against females, then women’s adverse promotion or wage outcomes may not
be associated with supervisor gender, but this finding would not necessarily imply that there was no
employer discrimination against women. Moreover, it is worth emphasizing that this exercise is only
pertinent to taste-based theories of discrimination in which the prejudicial views are held by the employer,
and not to prejudice by customers or co-workers or due to statistical discrimination.


                                              IV. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
         Summary statistics for all variables in our analysis are displayed in Table 2 for the subsamples of
males and females. The fraction of males in the sample is 48 percent. This is significantly lower than the
fraction of males in the working population. But recall that the survey is a random sample of recent hires
(one per establishment), not a random sample of workers. Given this sampling scheme, if we consider the
gender of the most recently hired worker it is not surprising that this worker is roughly equally likely to be
a male as a female. The fact that the fraction of female workers is higher in our sample than in the
working population does not present problems for our analysis, since our goal in this paper is to compare
differences in employer behavior towards women and men in a sample of new hires spanning many
establishments.


and females might have higher promotion rates when they have a male supervisor. However, in the presence of gender
discrimination, the interaction of male and male supervisor is expected to be positive.
15
   We again note that, considering the preceding footnote, the stronger prediction would be that the coefficient on male
supervisor be larger in the male than in the female equations.

                                                              13
         The first row of Table 2 reveals that, unconditionally, promotion rates are higher for men than for
women. The fraction of received promotions is relatively small for both sexes (10.6 percent for men and
7.6 percent for women) because in a sample of recent hires most workers will not have been with the firm
long enough to have received a promotion. Nonetheless, the gender difference of 3.0 percentage points is
large in relative magnitude (39.5 percent) and statistically significant. As seen in the second row, rates of
expected promotion are also higher for men than for women, and the fraction of expected promotions is
relatively high for both sexes (68.8 percent for men and 63.1 percent for women); recall that the relevant
question concerns the expectation of promotion within the relatively long window of the “next five
years.” And, the gender difference of 5.7 percentage points, while also statistically significant, is smaller
in relative magnitude (9.0 percent). With respect to wage growth since starting the job, potential for
within-job wage growth in the absence of promotion, and the expected wage growth attached to expected
promotions, the means are slightly higher for men, but the differences are not statistically significant.16
         The male and female subsamples are similar in average age and tenure with the firm. Men are
more likely to have less than a high school degree and women are more likely to have some college; the
fraction with a college degree or more is similar for men and women. With regard to race and ethnicity,
the female workers are more likely than the males to be white and less likely to be Hispanic or “other
nonwhite”. The average performance of the most recently hired worker in the starting position is
somewhat higher for women than for men, as is the average performance of the typical worker in that
position. A potential explanation for the latter result is that establishments for which the most recent hire
is female may be more likely to hire women, so that the “typical worker” in the relevant position is likely
also to be female. As suggested in our sample and noted earlier in Neumark (1999), females appear to
have higher job performance on average than do males.
         Focusing on the gender differences in means that are statistically significant, men are more highly
represented than women in the following occupational groups: “Scientists, Engineers, Doctors, and
Lawyers” (by 6 percentage points), “Craft, Construction, and Transportation” (by 16 percentage points),
“Production Workers and Laborers” (by 11.5 percentage points), and women are more highly represented
than men in “Teachers, Librarians, Counselors” (by 8 percentage points) and in “Administrative Support
Occupations, Including Clerical” (by 26 percentage points). Across industries, men are more highly
represented in mining and construction (by 2 percentage points) and manufacturing (by 13 percentage
points), while women are more highly represented in finance (by 5 percentage points) and services (by 19

16
   Wage levels, as opposed to wage growth, are higher for men than for women. The average hourly starting wage was $9.87
for men in our main estimation sample and $9.31 for women, though the difference is statistically insignificant (t = 0.82). The
average hourly current wage (as of the survey date) was $10.42 for men and $9.56 for women, with the difference in means
statistically significant only at the 10 percent level on a one-tailed test (t = 1.31). All wages are deflated to 1990 dollars using
the CPI-UX.

                                                                 14
percentage points). The only other firm characteristic with a noteworthy gender difference is for-profit
status (86.9% for men and 73.7% for women).


4.1 Probability of Promotion
         We next ask whether the gender difference in promotion rates observed in the first row of Table 2
persists after controlling for worker and firm characteristics, as well as how it changes across different
specifications of control variables. As seen in our baseline specification of the promotion probit (Column
1 of Table 3), the difference in the predicted probability of promotion between men and women
(evaluating the other covariates at their means) is 2.8 percentage points, virtually the same as the
unconditional gender difference in promotion rates in the first row of Table 2.17 As seen in Column 2 of
Table 3, in the presence of controls for job-specific worker performance ratings the gender effect actually
increases slightly to 3.1 percentage points, remaining significant at the five percent level. This result casts
some doubt on the hypothesis that women’s lower promotion rates in the baseline model is due to lower
reported female productivity.
         Another potential explanation for the gender difference in promotions is differences in the types of
jobs held by women versus men. If women are more heavily concentrated in occupations with lower
promotion rates, this could potentially account for the gender differences in promotions. In this event,
adding controls for occupation would reduce the magnitude of the gender effect. As seen in Column 3,
the gender effect decreases only modestly to 2.5 percentage points and remains statistically significant at
the ten percent level. A hypothesis test that the coefficient of Male is the same between columns 2 and 3
cannot be rejected (t = 0.71).
         It is also possible that the gender differences pertain to firm characteristics; we have particularly
noted for-profit status as a potentially important gender difference in employment by firm. Comparing
columns 2 and 4, we see that the gender effect decreases to 2.5 percentage points in the presence of for-
profit status and other firm characteristics, and it remains significant at the five percent level. However, a
hypothesis test that the coefficient of Male is the same between columns 2 and 4 cannot be rejected (t =
0.71). Finally, if both occupation controls and firm characteristics are included, a comparison of columns
2 and 5 reveals that the gender effect decreases to 2.2 percentage points, achieving significance at the ten
percent level. However, a test of the hypothesis that the Male coefficient is the same between columns 2



17
  As in the recent papers by Booth, Francesconi, and Frank (2003) and Giuliano, Levine, and Leonard (2005), our analysis
pools men and women in a single equation. We have also considered separate promotion equations for men and women, and
these results are available upon request. The gender effects of interest that are found by estimating separate promotion models
for men and women are qualitatively similar to those we present here.

                                                              15
and 5 cannot be rejected (t = 0.87). In summary, neither the job-specific performance ratings nor the
occupation controls and firm characteristics change the estimated gender gap in promotions very much.
        We also repeated the analysis using “expected promotion” as a dependent variable, though we
note that employer views on expected promotion may reflect expectations about differentials in quits and
family leave by sex, particularly in this relatively young sample of recent hires. Results for probability of
expected promotion are displayed in Table 4. Panel A of Table 4 reports results from models that include
the same configurations of explanatory variables as in Table 3. Panel B is the same, except that it also
includes a control for whether the most recent hire had already been promoted by the survey date, since
whether or not a future promotion is anticipated may plausibly be affected by whether or not one has
already been received. We note, however, that if the gender difference in promotions received as of the
survey date reflects discrimination, this is held constant in our model of expected promotion that includes
received promotions as a control. In any case, the pattern of results in both panels of Table 4 is similar.
The probability of expected promotion is roughly four to five percentage points higher for males than for
females, in both the baseline specification and the specification that adds worker performance ratings. In
Panel A, these results are statistically significant at the ten percent level, and that is also the case in Panel
B if a one-tailed test is used as the criterion for significance. While the absolute gender difference is
larger than was the case for actual promotions, the ceteris paribus gender difference is considerably
smaller relative to the mean. Moreover, unlike our results for actual promotion, in both panels the
inclusion of either occupation controls or firm characteristics shrinks the gender gap in expected
promotions and renders it statistically insignificant. Thus, there seems to be more support for location-
based explanations for the gender gap in expected promotions than there was in Table 3 for received
promotions.18
        Across all specifications in Table 4 the coefficient on the received promotion dummy was
positive, statistically significant, and large in magnitude. Other things equal, workers who have already
received a promotion by the survey date are more likely (by more than 25 percentage points) to have a
promotion expected within the next five years. One potential explanation for this is unmeasured worker
characteristics such as ability. We think this explanation is unlikely, however, since the magnitude of the
effect remains virtually unchanged when worker performance ratings are added to the baseline
specification. If unobserved worker ability is the driving force, and if the job-specific performance
ratings at least partially capture worker ability (which seems a reasonable assumption), then the
magnitude of the coefficient on received promotion should clearly decrease when performance controls


18
  As in our analysis of received promotions, we also considered separate equations for men and women in the analysis of
expected promotions. Our results on the gender effect of interest were qualitatively similar to those we report here.

                                                             16
are added to the model. An alternative explanation for the finding is that there are unobserved firm and
job characteristics, such as detailed industry and occupation, that are correlated with promotions. This
too, however, seems unlikely. If the promotion coefficient is picking up unobserved detailed industry and
occupation variables, then the magnitude of the promotion coefficient should change when our (coarser)
occupation and industry controls are included in the specification, since the detailed categories are likely
correlated with their coarser aggregates. In fact, the promotion coefficient is relatively insensitive to the
inclusion of occupation controls or firm characteristics. Another potential explanation is the commonly-
observed workplace practice of offering promotion “fast tracks.” Fast tracks in promotions mean that
workers who have been promoted quickly in the past are likely to be promoted quickly again in the future,
even controlling for performance. A number of theoretical models yield this prediction (Bernhardt 1995;
Prendergast 1992; Meyer 1991).19


4.2 Analysis of Wages
         Columns 1 and 3 of Table 5 display regression results for the dependent variable “wage growth
since entering the establishment.”20 Of principal interest is the coefficient on the promotion dummy
variable which suggests that, for both women and men, promotions are associated with average wage
increases of about seven to eight percent over the starting wage. The Oaxaca (1973) decompositions in
the last row of the table indicate that, regardless of whether the male or female weights are used, there is
19
  Another interpretation of the positive coefficient on received promotions is that some establishments are experiencing and
expecting growth, so promotion rates will be higher in the past and future. To address this, following DeVaro and Samuelson
(2005) we construct a measure of the monthly net change in employment for each establishment. The survey asks the
respondent employer what the net change in the establishment’s total number of employees has been since the start of 1992 (or
1993 for a small subset of observations collected by Kirschenman, Moss, and Tilly (KMT) towards the end of the data
collection effort). Using the interview dates (which range from 6/8/1992 to 3/15/1995), for each observation we compute a
variable called “months” measuring the number of months that elapsed between the start of 1992 (or 1993 for the KMT
observations) and the survey date, using the day of the month to compute fractional months. Since no interview dates were
recorded for the KMT observations, for these we set the survey dates to 3/15/1995, the midpoint of the data collection period
for these observations. We then define a monthly net change measure as follows:

Net change = (net change since start of 1992) / (establishment size × months)

When this variable is included as a control to the specifications in Table 4, Panel B, the coefficient on received promotions
remains positive and statistically significant in all cases and roughly the same in magnitude. This suggests that the positive
relationship between received and expected promotions reflects more than just differences in monthly employment growth
rates across establishments.
20
  The subsamples in this table are smaller than in the promotion analysis of Table 3, due to missing values in the wage
variables. Since the primary goal in this paper is to study gender differences in promotion rates, our preferred set of estimates
for promotion probabilities are those reported in Table 3 that use all available observations. However, we also checked to see
how our main results would change when the models for promotions were estimated on the smaller subsample from the wage
analysis. Results are in Appendix Table A2 (descriptive statistics for this smaller subsample are also reported in Appendix
Table A1). Given the reduction in the sample size, the gender effects in Table A2 are estimated with lower precision than in
Table 3 and sometimes fail to achieve statistical significance at conventional levels. Nonetheless, the Z-statistics always
exceed one. Furthermore, the magnitude of the effect ranges from 2.0 to 2.6 percentage points, which closely matches what we
found in Table 3.

                                                               17
little difference between women and men in the wage growth experienced since the starting date.21 An
interesting result is that worker and firm characteristics matter for female wage growth but not male wage
growth. Focusing on results that achieve statistical significant at the ten percent level, female wage
growth is negatively associated with both tenure and the percentage of employees covered by a collective
bargaining agreement, and positively associated with Hispanic or other non-white status (relative to
whites), job-specific performance, and number of sites of operation. Of these factors, only tenure has a
statistically significant association (positive in sign) with male wage growth.22
        Columns 2 and 4 of Table 5 display regression results for the dependent variable “within-job wage
growth without a promotion.” The Oaxaca decompositions in the last row of the table indicate that when
male weights are used the difference favors women whereas when the female weights are used the
difference favors men. These relatively small differences on the order of one percentage point parallel the
unconditional results from Table 2, which revealed essentially no gender difference in within-job wage
growth. While the conditional results in columns 2 and 4 of Table 5 also suggest no substantial gender
difference, recall that they may underestimate the gap favoring men, since, as explained above, the
dependent variable is based on a question about the highest wage that any employee in this position
[meaning the starting position of the most recent hire] could expect to attain without a promotion. The
results in columns 2 and 4 of Table 5 should therefore be interpreted with caution.
        Table 6 displays the regression results for the dependent variable “expected wage growth attached
to expected promotions” that we estimate only on the subsample of workers for whom a promotion is
expected.23 Columns 2 and 4 are the same as columns 1 and 3, respectively, except for the inclusion of a
dummy indicating whether a promotion has already been received. The main result is that when the
promotion dummy is excluded from the regression, we find a small difference favoring women when the
male weights are used and a small difference favoring men when the female weights are used, though in
both cases these differences are well below one percentage point. When the regression controls for
received promotions, the Oaxaca decompositions using either set of weights reveal differences favoring
men (0.3 percentage points using male weights and 1.7 percentage points using female weights). Relative
to the mean wage change attached to expected promotions, which is 25 percent, these gender differences
range from a 0.5 percent change favoring women (when the promotion dummy is excluded and male

21
   As noted above, wage levels, as opposed to wage growth, are higher for men than for women, although not always
significantly so.
22
   Another approach for investigating gender differences in the wage growth attached to promotion is to focus only on the
subsample of promoted workers. Though the sample size is small (N = 149), a regression of wage growth on a gender dummy
and the full set of controls for the sample of promoted workers yields an estimated coefficient of
-0.044 on the Male dummy, with a standard error of (0.044).
23
   We could not take an analogous approach for received promotions (that is, estimating a model of the wage increase in the
subsample of promoted workers) since the subsample of received promotions is too small.

                                                            18
weights are used) to a 6.7 percent change favoring men (controlling for received promotions and using
female weights). The midpoint of this range is near the unconditional difference in means of 2.9
percentage points found in Table 2. An interesting point is that establishment size is statistically
significant in these regressions but in none of our earlier models. Given that most labor market outcomes
vary by size it is interesting that the probabilities of promotion and expected promotion, as well as wage
growth since entering the firm, and within-job wage growth without a promotion appear not to be
associated with establishment size. For both men and women, establishment size is negatively associated
with the expected wage growth attached to expected promotions.
       To summarize the wage analysis, our main finding is that promotions yield roughly similar wage
increases for men and women. We interpret this as descriptively showing that the returns (in terms of
higher wages) to promotion are the same or similar for women versus men. A causal interpretation cannot
be attached to the promotion coefficient, since, as discussed above, a selection effect might be operating
whereby unobserved characteristics (for example, unobserved components of worker ability) determine
both promotions and the wage increases attached to expected promotions. The selection bias is likely to
cause us to understate the extent to which wage increases attached to promotion are higher for men than
women. For example, if discrimination against women means that men are promoted farther down in the
skill distribution than women, then promoted women are of higher average quality than promoted men.
Thus, our finding of no observed gender difference in wage returns from promotion would actually imply
a lower return for women than men of equal quality. Similarly, we find little consistent evidence of
gender differences in the expected wage change attached to expected promotions; our results suggest no
meaningful difference if male weights are used and a modest difference favoring men if female weights
are used.
       The fact that the wage growth accompany promotion is not smaller for women than men is not
consistent with the “sticky floors” model proposed by Booth, Francesconi, and Frank (2003) and tested
using data from the British Household Panel Survey. Whereas they found roughly the same promotion
rates for men and women but lower wage increases from promotion for women, we find that women are
promoted less frequently than men but that the wage increases attached to promotion are roughly
comparable for both sexes (as did Olson and Becker 1983 and McCue 1996).


A Test of the Consistency of the Observed Gender Differences With Employer Discrimination
       To address taste-based models of gender discrimination we now turn our attention to the gender of
the most recent hire’s immediate supervisor in the starting position, recalling that Male Supervisor is a
dummy variable equaling one if the most recently hired worker’s immediate supervisor in the starting


                                                     19
position was male, and zero otherwise. There is a large gender difference in the likelihood of having a
male supervisor. Seventy-eight percent of recently-hired men have a male supervisor versus only forty-
one percent of women.24 This large, unconditional gender difference in the likelihood of having a male
supervisor likely reflects underlying differences in representation of women across sectors.
        Table 7 displays the results from incorporating supervisor’s gender into our models of promotion,
expected promotion, and wage growth. In each case we present results from our most fully specified
model, including, in addition to the baseline controls, performance measures, occupational dummies and
firm characteristics. In the models for the probabilities of promotion and expected promotion, taste-based
discrimination (whereby male supervisors tend to underpromote women relative to men) would imply a
negative coefficient on Male Supervisor, and a positive coefficient on the interaction of Male and Male
Supervisor. The results do not support this; whether the dependent variable is received promotions or
expected promotions, the coefficients of interest frequently have the wrong sign and in all cases are far
from statistically significant at conventional levels. In the lower panel of Table 7 we report the
coefficients on Male Supervisor in the various wage growth models, which are estimated separately for
men and women. In each model, the coefficient on Male Supervisor is statistically insignificant, casting
doubt on the notion of gender discrimination based on male supervisor prejudice, although an alternative
interpretation is that female supervisors also discriminate against their female subordinates in determining
promotions and wages.
        Giuliano, Levine, and Leonard (2005) discuss an interpretation of these coefficients in the context
of the theory of social roles (Eagly 1987). Social role theory argues that certain social roles (which
generally coincide with social status norms) are expected of individuals by society based on the particular
groups to which they belong. When workplace relationships deviate from the expected social roles (for
example, when a female supervises a male), both supervisors and workers can become uncomfortable
(Kanter 1977, Eagly 1987, as cited in Giuliano, Levine, and Leonard 2005).25 Though in the present
context the relevant “role breaking” relationship would be a female supervising a male, Giuliano, Levine

24
   Using data from the NLSY for workers aged 17 to 25, Rothstein (1997) found that in 1982 the fraction of men with a male
supervisor was 0.91 and the fraction of women with a male supervisor was 0.53. The decline for both women and men in the
likelihood of having a male supervisor is consistent with the increasing participation rate for women during the 1980s. Future
users of this variable in the MCSUI employer survey obtained from the ICPSR data archive should make note of a labeling
error in the raw data. The variable containing the supervisor’s gender is called “c35” in the codebook and equals 1 if the
supervisor is female and 5 if male. The text labels attached to these observations are reversed, however, with “male” being
assigned to females and “female” assigned to males. To avoid an error, the text labels should be ignored and only the
underlying numerical codes (1 = female, 5 = male) should be used. We are grateful to Harry Holzer for his help in identifying
this problem.
25
   As noted in Reskin and Bielby 2005 (p. 78), “Qualitative research suggests the possibility that men in predominantly female
jobs advance more quickly than their female co-workers because their supervisors are uncomfortable with men doing
customarily female jobs (Williams, 1992). However, the advancement gap between the sexes stems in part from sex
composition of jobs, according to quantitative analyses showing that men in predominantly female jobs are promoted more
slowly than their counterparts in mixed-sex or predominantly male jobs (Budig, 2002).”

                                                              20
and Leonard 2005 consider other possible role breaking relationships, such as young supervisors of older
workers or non-white supervisors of white workers.
         The discomfort experienced by both parties to a role breaking relationship can lead to two
different types of outcomes. On the one hand, given that males belong to traditionally higher-status
groups, a male worker supervised by a female is more likely to resent and disrespect the female manager
than he would a male manager, and this might result in less desirable outcomes for the male worker (e.g.
lower rates of promotion or expected promotion, or lower wage growth attached to promotions). In the
context of our estimated models, this would imply that the sum of the Male Supervisor coefficient and the
Male × Male Supervisor coefficient was negative (so that male workers fare worse under a female
supervisor than under a male supervisor). On the other hand, traditionally lower-status workers who find
themselves in supervisory roles might defer to traditionally higher-status workers, refraining from
exercising authority over them. This might lead to better outcomes for males supervised by females (such
as higher rates of promotion or expected promotion, and higher wage increases attached to promotion). In
the context of our estimated models, this would imply that the sum of the coefficients on Male and Male ×
Male Supervisor is positive (so that male workers fare better under a female supervisor than under a male
supervisor). Since either or both of these possibilities could be present in the data and the reactions to role
breaking relationships could differ across establishments, social role theory does not offer a clear
prediction on the signs of our coefficients in Table 7.
         A potential concern discussed above is that a discriminating employer might give female workers
lower performance ratings than similar male workers would receive. This could mask gender
discrimination in promotions because men and women with equal performance reported by the supervisor
received the same treatment (with respect to promotion and wages), while in fact women would have to
be more productive than men to receive the same performance rating. To investigate this possibility, we
checked for a relationship between the subjective performance rating and the gender of the immediate
supervisor. If discrimination in performance evaluations were widespread in our sample, we would
expect to see that women with male supervisors would have lower scores, on average, than women with
female supervisors. In fact this is not the case.26 However, we note that, as mentioned earlier, this result
does not preclude the possibility of gender discrimination on the part of both male and female supervisors,


26
  A regression of the performance rating on Male, Male supervisor, and Male × Male supervisor (as well as the controls for
worker characteristics, occupation, industry, and firm characteristics) yields a Male coefficient of -0.007 (t = 0.45), a Male
supervisor coefficient of 0.009 (t = 0.64), and a Male × Male supervisor coefficient of -0.001 (t = 0.04). Since these estimates
are far from statistically significant, this provides some evidence that the performance rating likely means the same thing for
women as for men, at least under the assumption that male supervisors potentially discriminate against women and female
supervisors do not.


                                                               21
or arising from the prejudices of customers or co-workers (as opposed to supervisors), or due to statistical
discrimination.
       Using data from a large U.S. retail employer, the recent study by Giuliano, Levine, and Leonard
(2005) found that when the worker and immediate supervisor are opposite genders, the promotion rate for
workers is 8 to 11 percent lower. Female managers promoted employees at a higher rate than male
managers and, as mentioned, no overall gender difference in promotion rates was found in that firm. In
contrast, in our analysis having a male supervisor does not have a statistically significant effect on
promotion rates. While we are measuring an average effect across many firms, it is certainly possible that
within a particular firm (as found by Giuliano, Levine, and Leonard) gender discordances in worker-
supervisor pairs are associated with lower rates of promotion.


                                                 V. CONCLUSIONS
       To conclude, it is useful to compare our main findings to those of the existing literature. We
restrict our attention to the relatively few studies that have considered both promotions and the wage
changes attached to these promotions. Our main finding is that rates of promotion are higher for men than
for women, adjusting for included variables. The magnitude of this effect ranges from 2.2 to 3.1
percentage points (relative to a mean promotion rate of about 9.0 percent) across different specifications.
It is reduced slightly (but not statistically significantly) by the presence of occupation controls, or industry
and firm characteristics, or both occupation and firm/industry simultaneously. We also find relatively
little gender difference in wage changes with or without promotions, or perhaps a slight edge to men. Our
overall conclusion therefore matches Olson and Becker (1983) and McCue (1996), both of which found
lower promotion rates for women than for men, but wage increases attached to promotions that were
comparable for the two groups. Our results on promotion probabilities also match the findings of Cobb-
Clark (2001), although that study found a wage change favoring women whereas we found relatively little
gender difference in wage growth. Our findings on promotion probability contradict those of Gerhart and
Milkovich (1989) and Hersch and Viscusi (1996), since both of those studies found higher promotion
rates for women. Gerhart and Milkovich (like us) found comparable wage increases attached to
promotions, while Hersch and Viscusi found a difference favoring men.




                                                      22
                                           REFERENCES
Acosta, Pablo. 2005. “Promotions, State Dependence and Intrafirm Job Mobility: Insiders
Versus New Hires.” Working paper, University of Illinois.

Arrow, Kenneth.1973. “The Theory of Discrimination”.In: Discrimination in Labor Markets, edited by
O.A. Ashenfelter and A. Rees, pp. 3-33. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Bamberger, Peter, Michael Admati-Dvir, and Gedaliahu Harel.1995. “Gender-Based Wage and
Promotion Discrimination in Israeli High-Technology Firms: Do Unions Make a Difference?” Academy
of Management Journal 38, no.6:1744-1761.

Barnett, William P., James N. Baron, and Toby E. Stuart. 2000. “Avenues of Attainment:
Occupational Demography and Organizational Careers in the California Civil Service.” American Journal
of Sociology 106, no.1:88-144.

Bartol, Kathryn M. 1999. “Gender Influences on Performance Evaluations.” in Handbook of Gender and
Work, edited by Gary N. Powell, Chapter 10, pp. 165-178. Thousand Oaks, Calif: Sage.

Becker, Gary S. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.

Becker, Gary S. 1985. “Human Capital, Effort, and the Sexual Division of Labor.” Journal of Labor
Economics 3 (January, suppl.):33-58.

Bernhardt, Dan. 1995. “Strategic Promotion and Compensation,” The Review of Economic Studies 62,
no.2 (April):315-339.

Blau, Francine D., Marianne A. Ferber, and Anne E. Winkler. 2006. The Economics of Women, Men,
and Work. 5th ed.

Booth, Alison L., Marco Francesconi, and Jeff Frank. 2003. “A Sticky Floors Model of Promotion, Pay,
and Gender.” European Economic Review, 47:295-322.

Budig, Michelle J. 2002. “Male Advantage and the Gender Composition of Jobs: Who Rides
the Glass Escalator?” Social Problems 49, no. 2:258-277.

Cabral, Robert, Marianne A. Ferber, and Carole Green. 1981. “Men and Women in
Fiduciary Institutions: A Study of Sex Differences in Career Development,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 63 (November):573-580.

Cannings, Kathy. 1988. “Managerial Promotion: The Effects of Socialization,
Specialization, and Gender.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 42 (October):77-88.

Cobb-Clark, Deborah A. 2001. “Getting Ahead: The Determinants of and Payoffs to Internal
Promotion for Young U.S. Men and Women.” In Solomon W. Polachek, ed., Worker Wellbeing in a
Changing Labor Market, Research in Labor Economics 20:339-372.

DeVaro, Jed, and Dana Samuelson. 2005. “Promotions and Incentives in Nonprofit and For-profit
Organizations” Working paper, Cornell University.


                                                  23
DiPrete, Thomas. 1989. The Bureaucratic Labor Market. New York: Plenum Press.

Eagly, Alice H. Sex Differences in Social Behavior: A Social Role Interpretation. Hillsdale,
NJ:Earlbaum, 1987.

Eagly, Alice H. and Steven J. Karau. 2002. “Role Congruity Theory of Prejudice Toward Female
Leaders,” Psychological Review 109, no. 3 (July):573-598.

Eberts, Randall W., and Joe A. Stone. 1985. “Male-Female Differences in Promotions: EEO in
Public Education,” Journal of Human Resources 20, no. 4 (Fall):504-21.

England, Paula, and George Farkas. 1994. “Economic and Sociological Views of Industries,
Firms, and Jobs” In Industries, Firms, and Jobs, edited by George Farkas and Paula England, pp 331-346.
New York: Plenum Press.

Gerhart, Barry A., and George T. Milkovich. 1989. “Salaries, Salary Growth, and
Promotions of Men and Women in a Large, Private Firm” In Pay Equity: Empirical Inquiries, edited by
Robert T. Michael, Heidi I. Hartmann, and Brigid O’Farrell, pp.23-43. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.

Giulano, Laura, David I. Levine, and Jonathan Leonard. 2005. “Do Race, Gender, and Age
Differences Affect Manager-Employee Relations? An Analysis of Quits, Dismissals, and Promotions at a
Large Retail Firm.” Working paper. Center for Responsible Business, Umiversity of California,
Berkeley.

Granovetter, Mark. 1994. “The Sociological and Economic Approaches to Labor Market
Analysis: A Social Structural View” In Industries, Firms, and Jobs, edited by George Farkas and Paula
England, pp. 187-216 New York: Plenum Press.

Hartmann, Heidi I. 1987. “Internal Labor Markets and Gender: A Case Study of Promotion.” in Gender in
the Workplace, edited by Clair Brown and Joseph Pechman, pp 59-92 Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution.

Hersch, John and W. Kip Viscusi. 1996. “Gender Differences in Promotions and Wages,”
Industrial Relations, Vol. 35, no. 4 (October):461-72.

Holzer, Harry J. 1996. “What Employers Want: Job Prospects for Less-Educated Workers”,
Russell Sage Foundation Publications.

Holzer, Harry, Joleen Kirschenman, Philip Moss, and Chris Tilly. 1998. Multi-City Study of Urban
Inequality, 1992-1994: [Atlanta, Boston, Detroit, and Los Angeles] Employer Telephone Survey
Codebook, ICPSR 2535 (Oct.).

Kanter, Rosabeth Moss. 1977. Men and Women of the Corporation. New York : Basic Books.


Lazear, Edward P., and Sherwin Rosen. 1990. “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Job
Ladders,” Journal of Labor Economics 8, no. 1:106-123.


                                                   24
Lewis, Gregory B. 1986. “Gender and Promotions: Promotion Chances of White Men and Women in
Federal White-Collar Employment.” Journal of Human Resources 21, no.3 (Summer): 406-419.

McCue, Kristin. 1996. “Promotions and Wage Growth” Journal of Labor Economics 14, no. 2 (Apr):175-
209.

Meyer, Margaret. 1991. “Learning from Coarse Information: Biased Contests and Career
Profiles”, Review of Economic Studies 58: 15-42.

Neumark, David. 1999. “Wage Differentials by Race and Sex: The Roles of Taste Discrimination and
Labor Market Information.” Industrial Relations, Vol. 38, no. 3 (July):414-45.

Oaxaca, Ronald. 1973. “Male-Female Wage Differences in Urban Labor Markets,”
International Economic Review 14, no. 3 (October): 693-709.

Olson, Craig A., and Brian E. Becker. 1983. “Sex Discrimination in the Promotion
Process.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 36, no. 4 (July): 624-641.

Paulin, Elizabeth A., and Jennifer M. Mellor. 1996. “Gender, Race, and Promotions within a
Private-Sector Firm.” Industrial Relations 35, no. 2: 276-295.

Pekkarinen, Tuomas, and Juhana Vartiainen. 2004. “Gender Differences in job Assignment and
Promotion on a Complexity Ladder of Jobs.” IZA Discussion paper, no. 1184 (June).

Petersen, Trond, and Itzhak Saporta. 2004. ``The Opportunity Structure for Discrimination.”
American Journal of Sociology 109, no.4: 852-901.

Phelps, Edmund S. 1972. “The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism”, American Economic
Review 62, no.4: 659-661.

Powell, Gary N., and D. Anthony Butterfield. 1994. “Investigating the ‘Glass Ceiling’
Phenomenon: An Empirical Study of Actual Promotions to Top Management,” Academy of Management
Journal 37, no.1: 68-86.

Prendergast, C. 1992. “Career Development and Specific Human Capital Collection”, Journal
of the Japanese and International Economies 6, no.3:207-227.

Ransom, Michael, and Ronald L. Oaxaca. 2005. “Intrafirm Mobility and Sex Differences in Pay,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 58, no.2 (January): 219-37.

Ranson, Gillian, and William Joseph Reeves. 1996. “Gender, Earnings, and Proportions of
Women: Lessons from a High-Tech Occupation,” Gender and Society 10, no. 2 (April):168-184.

Reskin, Barbara F., and Denise D. Bielby. 2005. “A Sociological Perspective on Gender and Career
Outcomes.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19, no. 1 (Winter):71-86.

Rosenfeld, Rachel A. 1992. “Job Mobility and Career Processes.” Annual Review of Sociology
18:39-61.



                                                   25
Rothstein, Donna S. 1997. “Supervisor Gender and Labor Market Outcomes”, in Gender and Family
Issues in the Workplace, edited by Francine D. Blau and Ronald G. Ehrenberg. Russell Sage.

Sabatier, Mareva, and Myriam Carrere. “Do Female Researchers Face a Glass Ceiling in
France? A Hazard Model of Promotions.” Working paper, Universite de Savoie, (2005).

Spilerman, Seymour, and Trond Petersen. 1999. “Organizational Structure, Determinants of
Promotion, and Gender Differences in Attainment.” Social Science Research 28, no.2 (June):203-227.

Spurr, Stephen J. 1990. “Sex Discrimination in the Legal Profession: A Study of Promotion,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 43, no. 4 (April):406-417.

Staines, G., Tavris, C., and Jayaratne, TE. “The Queen Bee Syndrome.” in The Female Experience edited
by C. Tavris,. Del Mar, California: CRM Books, 1973: ???.

Steinpreis, R.E., K. A. Anders, and D. Ritzke. 1999. “The Impact of Gender on the Review of the
Curricula Vitae of Job Applicants and Tenure Candidates: A National Empirical Study,” Sex Roles 41,
no. 7-8 (October): 509-528.

Stewart, Lea P., and William B. Gudykunst. 1982. “Differential Factors Influencing the
Hierarchical Level and Number of Promotions of Males and Females Within an Organization,” Academy
of Management Journal 25, no.3 (September): 586-597.

Terborg, James R., Lawrence H. Peters, Daniel R. Ilgen, and Frank Smith. 1977. “Organizational and
Personal Correlates of Attitudes Toward Women As Managers.” Academy of Management Journal 20,
no. 1 (March):89-100.

Tsui, A.S., and B.A. Gutek. 1984. “A Role Set Analysis of Gender Differences in Performance,
Affective Relationships, and Career Success of Industrial Middle Managers.” Academy of Management
Journal 27, no.3:619-635.

Valian, Virginia. 1998. Why So Slow? The Advancement of Women. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Williams, Christine. 1992. “The Glass Escalator: Hidden Advantages for Men in the Female
Professions.” Social Problems. 39, no. 3:253-267.

Winter-Ebmer, Rudolf, and Josef Zweimuller. 1997. “Unequal Assignment and Unequal Promotion in Job
Ladders,” Journal of Labor Economics 15, no. 1, Part 1:43-71.

Wright, Erik Olin, Janeen Baxter, and Gunn Elisabeth Birkelund. 1995. “The Gender Gap in
Workplace Authority: A Cross-National Study,” American Sociological Review 60, no. 3 (June): 407-
435.




                                                  26
                                    Table 1: Variable Definitions

     Group                  Name                              Definition and comments
                                              Length of time worker has been with firm, measured in
                           Tenure
                                              weeks in the survey and converted to years
                       Tenure squared
                            Age               Age as of the survey date and measured in years
                        Age squared
                           Black              Dummy equaling one if worker is black
                          Hispanic            Dummy equaling one if worker is Hispanic
Baseline Controls                             Dummy equaling one if worker is neither black, white,
                      Other non-white
                                              nor Hispanic
                       Less than high
                          school*
                                              Dummy equaling one if highest education level is a high
                         High school
                                              school degree (omitted category)
                       More than high         Dummy equaling one if worker has more than HS degree
                           school             but less than a college degree
                      College degree or       Dummy equaling one if worker has a college degree or
                            more              more
  Job-Specific                                “On a scale of 0-100 where 50 is average and 100 is the
                                              best score, how would you rate this employee’s
    Worker          Performance of most
                                              performance in this job?” (the job into which the worker
                    recent hire in starting
  Performance                                 was hired)
                              job
    Ratings




                                                 27
          Group                        Name                               Definition and comments
                                                             Includes     Executive,     Administrative,    and
                                  1. Managerial
                                                             managerial Occupations
                                                             Includes, Engineers, Surveyors and Architects;
                             2. Scientists, Engineers,       Natural Scientists and Mathematicians; Social
                                Doctors, Lawyers             Scientists, Religious Workers, Lawyers; Health
                                                             Diagnosing and Treating Practitioners
                             3. Teachers, Librarians,        Also includes Writers, Artists, Entertainers, and
                                     Counselors              Athletes
                               4. RNs, Pharmacists,          Also includes Therapists and Physicians’
                                   and Dieticians            Assistants
                               5. Technologists and          Both “Health” and “Non-health”
  Occupation Controls
                                    Technicians
           (10):             6. Marketing and Sales          Includes    Executive,      Administrative,       and
                                    Occupations              managerial Occupations
                                 7. Administrative
                              Support Occupations,                           (omitted category)
                                 including Clerical
                             8. Service Occupations
                                                             Includes Mechanics and Repairers; Construction
                              9. Craft, Construction,
                                                             and Extractive Occupations; Precision Production
                                and Transportation
                                                             Occupations; Transportation and Material Moving
                                   Occupations
                                                             Occupations
                             10. Production Workers          Includes Handlers, Equipment Cleaners, Helpers
                                  and Laborers               and Laborers
                                   For-profit:               Dummy equaling one if establishment is for-profit
                                                             Dummy equaling one if establishment is a
                                     Franchise:
                                                             franchise
  Firm Characteristics           Number of sites             Number of sites of operation for the firm
                                Establishment size
   (including Industry                                       Percentage of workers at establishment covered by
                                       Union:
        Controls):                                           collective bargaining agreement
                                                             Services, manufacturing (omitted category), retail
                                                             trade, wholesale trade, finance, transportation,
                               Industry controls (8):
                                                             construction and mining, public administration


*This category includes 35 workers who completed only the eighth grade, 160 who attended some high school and 8 who
completed a GED.




                                                        28
                                     Table 2: Weighted Means and Standard Errors

                                                           Male         Female     Difference
Dependent Variables
                                                           0.106          0.076      0.030*
Promotion since hired
                                                          (0.014)        (0.011)     (0.017)
                                                           0.688          0.631      0.057*
Expected promotion in next 5 years
                                                          (0.023)        (0.024)     (0.033)
                                                           0.049          0.041       0.009
Wage growth since entering establishment1
                                                          (0.006)        (0.007)     (0.009)
                                                           0.296          0.295       0.002
Within-job wage growth without promotion1
                                                          (0.016)        (0.014)     (0.021)
Expected wage growth attached to expected                  0.266          0.237       0.029
promotions2                                               (0.023)        (0.021)     (0.031)
Worker Characteristics
                                                           6.494          6.847       -0.353
Tenure (in weeks)
                                                          (0.553)        (0.485)     (0.735)
                                                            31.0           30.7       0.252
Age
                                                          (0.435)        (0.398)     (0.590)
                                                           0.590          0.688     -0.098**
White
                                                          (0.026)        (0.020)     (0.033)
                                                           0.169          0.151       0.018
Black
                                                          (0.017)        (0.014)     (0.022)
                                                           0.163          0.112      0.051**
Hispanic
                                                          (0.020)        (0.013)     (0.024)
                                                           0.078          0.049      0.029*
Other non-white
                                                          (0.013)        (0.010)     (0.016)
                                                          78.123         79.888      -1.765*
Performance of most recent hire in starting job (0-100)
                                                          (0.838)        (0.612)     (1.037)
                                                          74.833         77.404     -2.571**
Performance of typical worker in that job (0-100)
                                                          (0.789)        (0.556)     (0.965)
                                                           0.065          0.037      0.028**
Less than a high school degree
                                                          (0.008)        (0.007)     (0.011)
                                                           0.385          0.336       0.049
High school degree
                                                          (0.024)        (0.020)     (0.031)
                                                           0.252          0.316     -0.064**
More than a high school degree
                                                          (0.019)        (0.022)     (0.029)
                                                           0.298          0.312       -0.013
College degree or more
                                                          (0.032)        (0.027)     (0.041)
Occupations

                                                           0.094          0.132       -0.038
Managerial
                                                          (0.021)        (0.023)     (0.031)
                                                           0.082          0.023      0.059**
Scientists, Engineers, Doctors, Lawyers
                                                          (0.028)        (0.007)     (0.028)
                                                           0.033          0.110     -0.077**
Teachers, Librarians, Counselors
                                                          (0.009)        (0.023)     (0.024)
                                                           0.013          0.022       -0.009
RNs, Pharmacists, and Dieticians
                                                          (0.011)        (0.006)     (0.012)
                                                           0.042          0.037       0.005
Technologists and Technicians
                                                          (0.008)        (0.010)     (0.012)
                                                           0.156          0.131       0.025
Marketing and Sales Occupations
                                                          (0.017)        (0.012)     (0.021)



                                                          29
                                                                              Male                 Female      Difference
                                                                              0.135                  0.398      -0.264**
Administrative Support Occupations, Including Clerical
                                                                             (0.017)                (0.022)      (0.028)
                                                                              0.109                  0.085        0.024
Service Occupations
                                                                             (0.012)                (0.011)      (0.017)
                                                                              0.189                  0.029       0.159**
Craft, Construction, and Transportation Occupations
                                                                             (0.017)                (0.006)      (0.018)
                                                                              0.147                  0.032       0.115**
Production Workers and Laborers
                                                                             (0.013)                (0.007)      (0.015)
Firm Characteristics

                                                                              0.869                  0.737       0.132**
For-profit status
                                                                             (0.020)                (0.024)       (0.031)
                                                                              0.068                  0.074         -0.005
Franchise
                                                                             (0.010)                (0.013)       (0.017)
                                                                             68.778                 66.122         2.656
Number of sites
                                                                            (17.099)               (11.585)      (20.647)
                                                                           1175.282                253.120       922.142
Establishment size
                                                                           (924.607)               (26.123)     (924.683)
                                                                             17.052                 14.501         2.551
Union (% covered)
                                                                             (2.191)                (2.033)       (2.988)
Industries
                                                                              0.030                  0.012       0.019**
Mining and Construction
                                                                             (0.007)                (0.003)      (0.008)
                                                                              0.271                  0.137       0.134**
Manufacturing
                                                                             (0.020)                (0.014)      (0.025)
                                                                              0.058                  0.044        0.014
Transportation
                                                                             (0.012)                (0.011)      (0.017)
                                                                              0.107                  0.072        0.035
Wholesale Trade
                                                                             (0.020)                (0.014)      (0.025)
                                                                              0.179                  0.148        0.031
Retail Trade
                                                                             (0.019)                (0.016)      (0.025)
                                                                              0.036                  0.089      -0.053**
Finance
                                                                             (0.007)                (0.011)      (0.014)
                                                                              0.298                  0.485      -0.187**
Services
                                                                             (0.028)                (0.024)      (0.037)
                                                                              0.016                  0.012        0.004
Public Administration
                                                                             (0.006)                (0.005)      (0.008)
Number of Observations                                                          820                   887
Notes: Statistical significance of the difference in means between males and females is denoted by * for the
10% level and ** for the 5% level.
1
  Calculated on the subsample for which wage change data are available (N = 628 for men, N = 654 for women)
as in the analysis of Table 3, columns 1 and 3.
2
  Calculated on the subsample for which a promotion is expected and wage data are available
(N = 405 for men, N = 400 for women) as in the analysis of Table 4.




                                                                           30
                                                     Table 3: Probability of Promotion

                                                      (1)                    (2)                   (3)                  (4)                   (5)
                                                     0.028                  0.031                 0.025               0.025                 0.022
 Male
                                                   (2.21)**               (2.47)**               (1.80)*            (2.25)**               (1.75)*
                                                     0.044                  0.044                 0.042               0.048                 0.046
 Black
                                                    (1.78)*                (1.84)*               (1.88)*            (2.09)**              (2.13)**
                                                     0.015                  0.019                 0.019               0.028                 0.028
 Hispanic
                                                     (0.74)                 (0.95)                (0.95)              (1.36)                (1.40)
                                                     0.098                  0.090                 0.087               0.078                 0.077
 Other non-white
                                                    (1.75)*                (1.76)*               (1.91)*             (1.88)*              (2.02)**
                                                    -0.230                 -0.239                -0.319              -0.174                -0.222
 Age
                                                     (0.59)                 (0.67)                (0.93)              (0.55)                (0.71)
                                                     0.347                  0.337                 0.415               0.274                 0.306
 Age squared
                                                     (0.65)                 (0.70)                (0.90)              (0.63)                (0.72)
                                                     0.357                  0.332                 0.322               0.287                 0.284
 Tenure
                                                   (6.75)**               (6.64)**              (6.72)**            (6.24)**              (6.32)**
                                                    -0.126                 -0.118                -0.113              -0.102                -0.099
 Tenure squared
                                                   (4.16)**               (4.10)**                (3.99)            (4.01)**              (3.94)**
                                                    -0.041                 -0.039                -0.040              -0.034                -0.036
 Less than a high school degree
                                                   (2.84)**               (2.99)**              (3.35)**            (3.11)**              (3.39)**
                                                     0.004                  0.001                 0.002               0.001                 0.001
 More than a high school degree
                                                     (0.26)                 (0.10)                (0.13)              (0.11)                (0.09)
                                                    -0.063                 -0.064                -0.065              -0.058                -0.060
 College degree or more
                                                   (4.55)**               (5.05)**              (4.44)**            (4.70)**              (4.31)**
 Performance of most recent hire                                            0.208                 0.210               0.191                 0.195
                                                     •
 in starting job (divided by 100)                                         (4.43)**              (4.65)**            (4.38)**              (4.61)**
 Performance of typical worker in                                          -0.061                -0.061              -0.050                -0.055
                                                     •
 that job (divided by 100)                                                  (1.41)                (1.47)              (1.28)                (1.45)
 Firm Characteristics
                                                                                                                      0.037                 0.036
 For-profit status                                   •                        •                     •
                                                                                                                    (3.41)**              (3.16)**
                                                                                                                      0.006                 0.005
 Franchise                                           •                        •                     •
                                                                                                                      (0.27)                (0.21)
 Number of sites (divided by                                                                                          0.004                 0.003
                                                     •                        •                     •
 1000)                                                                                                                (0.42)                (0.32)
 Establishment size (divided by                                                                                      -0.006                -0.005
                                                     •                        •                     •
 1000)                                                                                                                (1.13)                (0.88)
                                                                                                                     -0.031                -0.033
 Union (divided by 100)                              •                        •                     •
                                                                                                                     (1.78)*               (1.93)*

 Occupation Controls                                 •                        •                     10                    •                   10
 Industry Controls                                   •                        •                     •                    8                    8
 Number of Observations                                                                          1826
Note: Entries are probability derivatives evaluated at the means of all variables for continuous variables. For discrete independent variables, cell entries
measure the change in predicted probabilities when the dummy independent variable increases from 0 to 1. Z-statistics are in parentheses. * and ** denote
statistical significance at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.




                                                                            31
                                               Table 4: Probability of Expected Promotion
             Panel A                                    (1)                     (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)
                                                      0.054                   0.053                0.039               0.032                0.033
 Male                                                (1.67)*                 (1.69)*               (1.12)              (1.05)               (0.99)
 Promoted already                                      •                        •                     •                   •                 •

             Panel B
                                                     0.045                    0.044                 0.034               0.023                0.028
 Male                                               (1.39)                   (1.39)                 (0.98)             (0.76)               (0.84)
                                                     0.288                    0.279                 0.274               0.258                0.254
 Promoted already                                  (9.48)**                  (8.80)**              (8.38)**            (8.58)**             (8.43)**

 Occupation Controls                                   •                         •                    10                   •                 10
 Industry Controls                                     •                         •                     •                  8                   8
 Number of Observations                                                                             1711
Note: Both probits contain the same configurations of control variables as in Table 2. Cell entries are probability derivatives evaluated
at the means of all variables for continuous variables. For discrete independent variables, cell entries measure the change in predicted
probabilities when the dummy independent variable increases from 0 to 1. Z-statistics are in parentheses. * and ** denote statistical
significance at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.




                                                                              32
        Table 5: Wage Changes From Promotions and Within-Job Wage Growth Without Promotions
                                            Males                                 Females
                                                         Within-Job Wage             Within-Job Wage
                                Wage Growth                              Wage Growth
                                                             Growth                       Growth
Worker Characteristics
                                   0.094*                     0.027         0.181**       -0.036
Tenure (in years)
                                   (1.92)                     (0.30)         (2.52)       (0.39)
                                   -0.016                     -0.002       -0.143**       -0.023
Tenure2
                                   (0.42)                     (0.04)         (4.51)       (0.45)
                                   0.484                      1.036          0.750*       -0.223
Age (divided by 100)
                                   (1.30)                     (1.40)         (1.79)       (0.30)
                                   -0.577                     -1.582         -0.916       0.229
Age2
                                   (1.12)                     (1.64)         (1.58)       (0.23)
                                   0.016                      0.028           0.009       -0.034
Black
                                   (0.90)                     (0.74)         (0.61)       (1.41)
                                   0.007                      -0.027        0.042**       0.042
Hispanic
                                   (0.50)                     (0.95)         (2.65)       (1.60)
                                   -0.034                     -0.023        0.057**       -0.003
Other non-white
                                   (1.46)                     (0.50)         (2.13)       (0.08)
Performance of most recent
                                   0.054                     -0.428**      0.115**        0.069
hire in starting job (divided
                                   (1.35)                      (4.08)       (3.61)        (1.18)
by 100)
Performance of typical
                                   -0.041                     0.121         0.009        -0.191**
worker in that job (divided
                                   (0.87)                     (1.03)        (0.20)        (2.21)
by 100)
Less than high school              0.009                      0.010         -0.009        -0.036
degree                             (0.48)                     (0.26)        (0.45)        (0.72)
More than high school              -0.008                     -0.015         0.007        0.008
degree                             (0.50)                     (0.42)        (0.55)        (0.40)
                                   0.006                      -0.022        -0.029        -0.019
College degree or more
                                   (0.25)                     (0.52)        (1.45)        (0.61)
                                  0.083**                                  0.068**
Promoted already                                                   •                           •
                                   (2.80)                                   (2.45)




                                                    33
                                                                    Males                                   Females
                                                                                   Within-Job Wage             Within-Job Wage
                                                Wage Growth                                        Wage Growth
                                                                                       Growth                       Growth
Firm Characteristics
                                                      0.010                                 0.035                 -0.006    0.037
For-profit status
                                                      (0.46)                                (0.95)                 (0.30)   (1.26)
                                                      0.046                                 0.046                  0.020    0.055
Franchise
                                                      (1.61)                                (1.00)                 (0.84)   (1.27)
Number of sites (divided by                           0.011                                 0.054                 0.015*    0.008
1000)                                                 (1.29)                                (1.29)                 (1.78)   (0.60)
Establishment size (divided                           0.002                                -0.0005                 0.007    0.012
by 1000)                                              (0.56)                                (0.08)                 (0.72)   (0.87)
                                                      -0.011                                -0.031               -0.028**   0.048
Union (divided by 100)
                                                      (0.81)                                (1.02)                 (2.03)   (0.93)
                                                        10                                    10
Occupation Controls                                                                                                10        10
                                                          8                                    8                    8         8
Industry Controls
Number of
                                                        628                                  628                   654       654
Observations
R2                                                      0.16                                 0.18                  0.19     0.13
Oaxaca Decomposition
(measured in                                          -0.388                               -1.355                 0.681     3.074
percentage points)
  Note: t-statistics are in parentheses. * and ** indicate significance at the 10% and 5% level, respectively.




                                                                              34
                              Table 6: Expected Wage Growth Attached to Expected Promotions
                                                    Males                            Females
                                                       Expected Wage                   Expected Wage Growth
                                        Expected Wage                    Expected Wage
                                                      Growth Controlling                   Controlling for
                                            Growth                           Growth
                                                         for Promotion                        Promotion
                                                  Worker Characteristics
                                               0.074        0.387**            -0.143           -0.082
          Tenure (in years)
                                               (0.45)        (2.45)            (0.68)           (0.39)
                                             -0.355**      -0.527**             0.133            0.133
              Tenure2
                                               (2.08)        (3.15)            (0.77)           (0.78)
                                               1.192         1.234              1.530            1.636
       Age (divided by 100)
                                               (1.48)        (1.62)            (1.44)           (1.55)
                                               -1.672       -1.688*           -2.518*          -2.677*
                Age2
                                               (1.63)        (1.74)            (1.71)           (1.83)
                                               -0.041        -0.046           -0.064*          -0.056*
               Black
                                               (1.10)        (1.21)            (1.93)           (1.71)
                                               0.007         0.007              0.020            0.021
              Hispanic
                                               (0.22)        (0.23)            (0.61)           (0.62)
                                             -0.156**      -0.136**            -0.038           -0.036
          Other non-white
                                               (2.99)        (3.02)            (0.75)           (0.70)
 Performance of most recent hire in            -0.125        -0.086             0.116            0.138
     starting job (divided by 100)             (0.94)        (0.69)            (1.14)           (1.35)
Performance of typical worker in that          -0.179        -0.193            -0.115           -0.104
          job (divided by 100)                 (1.47)        (1.61)            (0.54)           (0.49)
                                               0.025         0.026             -0.093           -0.096
    Less than high school degree
                                               (0.44)        (0.45)            (1.33)           (1.36)
                                              -0.058*       -0.059*          -0.065**          -0.060*
   More than high school degree
                                               (1.71)        (1.81)            (2.07)           (1.95)
                                             -0.094**      -0.121**             0.028            0.023
      College degree or more
                                               (2.12)        (3.10)            (0.41)           (0.33)
                                                           -0.194**                           -0.113**
        Promotion received               •                               •
                                                             (5.35)                             (3.70)




                                                           35
                                                       Males                             Females
                                                           Expected Wage                   Expected Wage Growth
                                           Expected Wage                     Expected Wage
                                                          Growth Controlling                   Controlling for
                                               Growth                            Growth
                                                            for Promotion                         Promotion
                                                      Firm Characteristics
                                                   0.009                        0.011                         -0.003        0.004
          For-profit status
                                                  (0.22)                        (0.24)                        (0.06)       (0.08)
                                                   0.063                        0.067                        -0.097*      -0.100*
             Franchise
                                                  (1.05)                        (1.13)                        (1.69)       (1.76)
                                                   0.008                        0.010                       -0.055**     -0.057**
 Number of sites (divided by 1000)
                                                   (0.55)                       (0.64)                        (2.59)       (2.65)
                                                 -0.016**                     -0.018**                      -0.043**     -0.043**
Establishment size (divided by 1000)
                                                  (2.03)                        (2.19)                        (3.56)       (3.56)
                                                  -0.020                       -0.051                         -0.007       -0.006
      Union (divided by 100)
                                                  (0.54)                        (1.33)                        (0.14)       (0.13)
                                                     10                           10
     Occupation Controls                                                                                        10         10
                                                      8                             8                            8          8
       Industry Controls
   Number of Observations                            405                         405                           400         400
             R2                                     0.19                         0.24                          0.19        0.20
   Oaxaca Decomposition
   (measured in percentage                         -0.147                       0.296                         0.652       1.681
           points)
          Note: t-statistics are in parentheses. * and ** indicate significance at the 10% and 5% level, respectively.




                                                                               36
       Table 7: Effect of Supervisor Gender on Promotion Probabilities and Wage Growth
                                                              Probability of Promotion and Expected Promotion
                                                                                                      Expected
                                                             Promotions       Expected Promotions
                                                                                                     Promotions*
Worker Characteristics
                                                                   0.249                              -0.001                            -0.015
Male
                                                                   (1.25)                             (0.01)                            (0.09)
                                                                   0.095                              0.044                              0.047
Male Supervisor
                                                                   (0.61)                             (0.36)                             (0.38)
                                                                   -0.099                             0.122                              0.124
Interaction of Male and Male Supervisor
                                                                   (0.41)                             (0.62)                             (0.62)

Number of Observations                                              1772                               1667                              1667

                                                                            Males                                            Females
                                                                             0.037                                             -0.019
Table 3, Within-job Wage Growth                                              (1.08)                                             (0.77)
                                                                            N = 626                                            N = 661
                                                                             0.038                                             -0.017
Table 4, Expected Wage Growth                                                (1.31)                                             (0.48)
                                                                            N = 395                                            N = 397
                                                                             0.044                                             -0.021
Table 4, Expected Wage Growth
                                                                             (1.54)                                             (0.59)
Controlling for Promotion
                                                                            N = 395                                            N = 397
Note: Z and t statistics are in parentheses. * and ** indicate significance at the 10% and 5% level, respectively. The first three rows of cell
entries are probit coefficients of the three worker characteristic variables (Male, Male Supervisor, and the interaction of the two) on the
probability of promotion or expected promotion. The second three rows of cell entries are OLS slope coefficients of the variable Male
Supervisor (the gender of the most recently hired worker’s supervisor in the starting position) on actual or expected wage growth when this
variable is added to the most controlled specifications in Tables 2, 3, and 4. The latter are done separately for both male and female workers,
with the results appearing in separate columns.
*
 This specification includes a dummy indicator for received promotions as a control variable.




                                                                     37
                                                      APPENDIX

                  Table A1: Weighted Means and Standard Errors (Wage Subsample)

                                                                 Male   Female    Difference
Dependent Variables
                                                               0.113     0.077      0.036*
Promotion since hired
                                                              (0.017)   (0.013)     (0.022)
                                                               0.742     0.717       0.025
Expected promotion in next 5 years
                                                              (0.026)   (0.027)     (0.037)
                                                               0.051     0.040       0.011
Wage change since entering establishment
                                                              (0.007)   (0.007)     (0.010)
                                                               0.302     0.291       0.011
Within-job wage growth without promotion
                                                              (0.017)   (0.014)     (0.022)
Expected wage growth attached to expected                      0.266     0.237       0.029
promotions                                                    (0.023)   (0.021)     (0.031)
Worker Characteristics
                                                               6.438     6.130       0.307
Tenure
                                                              (0.722)   (0.574)     (0.922)
                                                                30.7      30.2       0.551
Age
                                                              (0.497)   (0.475)     (0.688)
                                                               0.552     0.656     -0.104**
White
                                                              (0.031)   (0.025)     (0.040)
                                                               0.169     0.172       -0.004
Black
                                                              (0.019)   (0.018)     (0.026)
                                                               0.196     0.109      0.087**
Hispanic
                                                              (0.026)   (0.015)     (0.030)
                                                               0.083     0.062       0.021
Other non-white
                                                              (0.017)   (0.013)     (0.021)
Performance of most recent hire in starting job (0-           77.914    78.830       -0.917
100)                                                          (0.924)   (0.729)     (1.176)
                                                              74.412    76.229       -1.817
Performance of typical worker in that job (0-100)
                                                              (0.964)   (0.582)     (1.125)
                                                               0.066     0.035      0.031**
Less than a high school degree
                                                              (0.010)   (0.007)     (0.012)
                                                               0.434     0.331      0.103**
High school degree
                                                              (0.030)   (0.023)     (0.038)
                                                               0.253     0.310      -0.057*
More than a high school degree
                                                              (0.023)   (0.024)     (0.033)
                                                               0.247     0.324       -0.076
College degree or more
                                                              (0.037)   (0.032)     (0.049)
Occupations

                                                               0.098     0.107       -0.009
Managerial
                                                              (0.027)   (0.021)     (0.034)
                                                               0.063     0.026       0.037
Scientists, Engineers, Doctors, Lawyers
                                                              (0.031)   (0.009)     (0.032)
                                                               0.036     0.115     -0.079**
Teachers, Librarians, Counselors
                                                              (0.011)   (0.029)     (0.031)
                                                               0.017     0.026       -0.009
RNs, Pharmacists, and Dieticians
                                                              (0.015)   (0.009)     (0.017)
                                                               0.048     0.041       0.007
Technologists and Technicians
                                                              (0.010)   (0.014)     (0.017)


                                                         38
                                                                              Male                       Female      Difference
                                                                              0.121                        0.132        -0.011
Marketing and Sales Occupations
                                                                             (0.017)                      (0.015)      (0.023)
Administrative Support Occupations, Including                                 0.132                        0.408      -0.276**
Clerical                                                                     (0.018)                      (0.026)      (0.032)
                                                                              0.121                        0.078       0.043**
Service Occupations
                                                                             (0.016)                      (0.012)      (0.019)
                                                                              0.206                        0.035       0.171**
Craft, Construction, and Transportation Occupations
                                                                             (0.021)                      (0.008)      (0.022)
                                                                              0.159                        0.031       0.127**
Production Workers and Laborers
                                                                             (0.016)                      (0.007)      (0.018)
Firm Characteristics

                                                                              0.849                        0.737      0.112**
For-profit status
                                                                             (0.027)                      (0.030)      (0.040)
                                                                              0.065                        0.069        -0.005
Franchise
                                                                             (0.012)                      (0.011)      (0.016)
                                                                             77.219                       65.045       12.175
Number of sites
                                                                            (23.860)                     (14.928)     (28.133)
                                                                            289.505                      301.387      -11.882
Establishment size
                                                                            (85.314)                     (34.476)     (91.977)
                                                                             18.430                       13.528        4.902
Union (% covered)
                                                                             (2.750)                      (2.422)      (3.662)
Industries
                                                                              0.024                        0.016        0.008
Mining and Construction
                                                                             (0.006)                      (0.005)      (0.008)
                                                                              0.313                        0.150       0.163**
Manufacturing
                                                                             (0.026)                      (0.016)      (0.031)
                                                                              0.045                        0.043        0.002
Transportation
                                                                             (0.010)                      (0.010)      (0.014)
                                                                              0.085                        0.057        0.028
Wholesale Trade
                                                                             (0.015)                      (0.013)      (0.020)
                                                                              0.170                        0.138        0.032
Retail Trade
                                                                             (0.020)                      (0.015)      (0.025)
                                                                              0.037                        0.097      -0.061**
Finance
                                                                             (0.008)                      (0.013)      (0.015)
                                                                              0.301                        0.497      -0.196**
Services
                                                                             (0.035)                      (0.029)      (0.045)
                                                                              0.020                        0.013        0.005
Public Administration
                                                                             (0.009)                      (0.005)      (0.009)
Number of Observations                                                         628                             654
Note: Statistical significance of the difference in means between males and females is denoted by * for the
10% level and ** for the 5% level. Means are computed on the subsamples from the analyses in Table 4, except
for the variable “Expected Wage Growth Attached to Expected Promotions” (this one is calculated on the
subsample for which a promotion is expected and wage data are available [N = 405 for men, N = 400 for women]
as in the analysis of Table 5).




                                                                   39
                                 Table A2: Probability of Promotion (Wage Subsample)
                                                                       (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                    (5)
                                                                    0.026                0.026              0.021               0.024              0.020
Male
                                                                    (1.64)              (1.77)*             (1.21)             (1.80)*             (1.32)
                                                                    0.026                0.027              0.024               0.032              0.027
Black
                                                                    (0.97)               (1.05)             (1.02)              (1.26)             (1.21)
                                                                    0.006                0.009              0.011               0.016              0.015
Hispanic
                                                                    (0.29)               (0.45)             (0.50)              (0.77)             (0.75)
                                                                    0.101                0.094              0.092               0.079              0.081
Other non-white
                                                                    (1.52)               (1.57)            (1.73)*             (1.75)*            (1.87)*
                                                                    -0.181              -0.180             -0.198              -0.197             -0.175
Age
                                                                    (0.38)               (0.43)             (0.47)              (0.51)             (0.45)
                                                                    0.317                0.278              0.291               0.321              0.281
Age squared
                                                                    (0.48)               (0.49)             (0.52)              (0.61)             (0.53)
                                                                    0.406                0.370              0.366               0.323              0.325
Tenure
                                                                   (5.83)**            (5.70)**           (5.97)**            (5.45)**           (5.71)**
                                                                    -0.141              -0.126             -0.122              -0.111             -0.109
Tenure squared
                                                                   (3.61)**            (3.56)**           (3.60)**            (3.36)**           (3.42)**
                                                                    -0.029              -0.025             -0.028              -0.023             -0.024
Less than a high school degree
                                                                    (1.28)               (1.23)             (1.47)              (1.27)             (1.41)
                                                                    0.018                0.016              0.016               0.017              0.019
More than a high school degree
                                                                    (1.00)               (0.95)             (0.91)              (1.14)             (1.16)
                                                                    -0.060              -0.061             -0.060              -0.057             -0.057
College degree or more
                                                                   (3.53)**            (4.09)**           (3.29)**            (4.13)**           (3.58)**
Performance of most recent hire in starting job                                          0.240              0.245               0.221              0.231
                                                                         •
(divided by 100)                                                                       (4.37)**           (4.57)**            (4.40)**           (4.69)**
Performance of typical worker in that job                                               -0.091             -0.090              -0.083             -0.087
                                                                         •
(divided by 100)                                                                        (1.70)*            (1.69)*             (1.67)*            (1.76)*
Firm Characteristics
                                                                                                                               0.029              0.027
For-profit status                                                        •                   •                  •
                                                                                                                              (2.09)**           (2.07)**
                                                                                                                               -0.003             -0.005
Franchise                                                                •                   •                  •
                                                                                                                               (0.14)             (0.24)
                                                                                                                               0.006              0.006
Number of sites (divided by 1000)                                        •                   •                  •
                                                                                                                               (0.60)             (0.58)
                                                                                                                               -0.005             -0.004
Establishment size (divided by 1000)                                     •                   •                  •
                                                                                                                               (0.96)             (0.71)
                                                                                                                               -0.048             -0.049
Union (divided by 100)                                                   •                   •                  •
                                                                                                                              (2.43)**           (2.49)**

Occupation Controls                                                      •                   •                10                   •                    10
Industry Controls                                                        •                   •                 •                  8                      8
Number of Observations                                                                                      1282
Note: Entries are probability derivatives evaluated at the means of all variables for continuous variables. For discrete independent variables, cell
entries measure the change in predicted probabilities when the dummy independent variable increases from 0 to 1. Z-statistics are in parentheses.
* and ** denote statistical significance at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively. This table differs from Table 2 only in that it is estimated using a
smaller subsample (corresponding to our wage growth analyses in Table 4).




                                                                        40
