NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF INNOVATION
IN THE KNOWLEDGE DRIVEN ECONOMY
Bronwyn H. Hall
Jacques Mairesse
Working Paper 12320
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12320
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Bronwyn H. Hall and Jacques Mairesse. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Empirical Studies of Innovation in the Knowledge Driven Economy
Bronwyn H. Hall and Jacques Mairesse
NBER Working Paper No. 12320
June 2006
JEL No. O3, M2
ABSTRACT
This introduction to a special issue of EINT surveys a collection of ten papers that study various
aspects of innovation and knowledge management and their impact on performance at the firm level
for a number of countries. These studies have been conducted using data drawn from innovation
surveys combined with data from a number of other sources. The issue illustrates the value of these
surveys in improving our understanding of innovation in firms and raises a number of questions for
future work in this area.
Bronwyn H. Hall
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California-Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@econ.berkeley.edu
Jacques Mairesse
INSEE, CREST
15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
FRANCE
and NBER
mairesse@ensae.fr

EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF INNOVATION
IN THE KNOWLEDGE DRIVEN ECONOMY
Introduction
Bronwyn H. Hall and Jacques Mairesse

During the past decade a number of countries in Europe and elsewhere have
implemented enterprise-based surveys of innovative activity in an effort to broaden our
collective understanding of the knowledge production and diffusion processes beyond
what can be learned from the long-established analyses that mainly use R&D
expenditures and patent counts as indicators of the input and output of innovation. The
ten studies collected in this special issue all make use of the data collected in such
surveys, in many cases combined with a variety of other data sources, to give a richer
picture of innovative activity at the firm level and of the ways in which knowledge is
generated and transmitted within and between firms.3

These papers fall naturally into two groups. The first group presents five papers
applying a model of the R&D, innovation, and productivity interrelations at the firm
level, more or less similar to that of Crepon, Duguet, and Mairesse (1998) paper
(henceforth CDM) for France, to countries as different as Chile, Sweden, China and the
Netherlands, and to a comparison of seven European countries. The second group

3

This paper is the introduction to a special issue of Economics of Innovation and New Technology. Most

of the papers in the volume were first presented at a conference organized by Almas Heshmati and Hans
Lööf in Stockholm, Sweden, in January 2001, and have since been substantially revised. A Table of
Contents for the volume is given at the end of the paper.

2

consists of a number of studies that concern more directly various aspects of firm
knowledge management. We discuss each of these two groups of papers in the next two
sections of the introduction.

ECONOMETRIC MODELS OF R&D, INNOVATION AND PRODUCTIVITY
In an influential article, Griliches (1979) laid out a framework for the analysis of
innovation and productivity growth in the form of a flow chart that showed the path by
which investment in research generated knowledge and the outputs and indicators of
that knowledge. In Figure 1, we reproduce an elaboration of this figure from CDM, an
elaboration that explicitly incorporates the elements used in the first group of papers in
this special issue. The square boxes denote measurable quantities and the oval boxes
unmeasured concepts for which we usually only have rather coarse proxies. Note the
central roles played by the unobservable “knowledge” capital and innovation output in
this graph. Various links in the structure exhibited by this figure have been studied by
many researchers in the past.

The CDM paper accomplished three things with respect to understanding the channels
linking investment in knowledge to productivity growth. The first was to pull together
the important but largely separated lines of empirical research that had evolved since
Griliches’ original conception into an encompassing model that had a structure similar
to his original conception. The strands were studies of the determinants of R&D
investment, patent or innovation production functions, and production function
estimation using R&D (or occasionally innovation or patents) as an input. The second
contribution was to make use of the new information provided by the European
Community Innovation Surveys, in particular the share of sales of innovative products,

3

as an alternative, possibly more appropriate, measure of innovation output than patents.
These surveys also contained a number of potentially useful and interesting qualitative
indicators on the innovation activities of firms such as the sources of innovation and
whether the firm was more strongly influenced by technological changes or user
demand.

The final contribution of the CDM paper was the development of an explicit modelling
framework, in order to use appropriate estimation methods in the presence of sample
selectivity (due to the firm’s choice of whether or not to undertake R&D), potential
endogeneity of some of the right-hand side variables, and the partially qualitative nature
of some of the dependent variables (binary or categorical). In performing these three
tasks, the paper set up a relatively simple framework on which others could build,
varying or improving the economic specification, data used, and econometric
identification and estimation. The several papers in the first part of this volume have
tried to do just this, in a number of different ways and to varying degrees.

The closest to the original CDM approach is that by Jose Miguel Benavente, who used
data from Chile and obtained results that were somewhat different from CDM while
using a model that is almost identical to the original. We will briefly outline the model
used by Benavente, as it can serve as a basis for discussion of all the papers in the first
group. There are three basic equations set up in a recursive manner, one that explains
research investment (R&D per worker), a second that explains innovation (proxied by
innovative sales) using R&D intensity, and a third that translates innovation into
productivity differences (measured as valued added per worker). In some of the other
papers patents were available and are used instead of or in addition to innovative sales.

4

Note that this recursive setup contains no feedback from productivity to innovative
activities, although we might expect such a feedback to exist, either for Schumpeterian
reasons or because of omitted variations in individual firm skills.

Econometrically there are three issues in estimating this kind of model: first, R&D is
undertaken by only a subset of the firms, so consistent estimation requires using a
generalized Tobit model that allows for correlation of the level of R&D with the
decision to undertake R&D. Second, innovation sales is measured as a share of sales,
bounded between 0 and 1, so that it is convenient to model it with a logit transform to
make it normally distributed.4 Finally, there are the usual endogeneity problems due to
the presence of R&D and innovation sales on the right-hand side of some of the
equations. As in CDM, the method of estimation in Benavente is asymptotic least
squares (where the first and second moments of the data are treated as sufficient
statistics for the underlying probability distribution), a consistent but not efficient
estimator. As instruments for R&D in the innovation sales equation, he uses the firm’s
market share and diversification; the instruments for innovation sales in the productivity
equation are simply the determinants of R&D. Demand pull and technology push
indicators are controlled for in both R&D and innovation equations, and industry and
size in all three equations.

Benavente finds that larger firms and firms with higher market shares in their industry
have higher R&D intensities and that larger firms have a higher percentage of
innovative sales. These findings are familiar from other countries, and confirm the

4

In some cases the responses to this question are categories such as <10%, 10%-25%, and so forth. In

these cases the appropriate model is an ordered probit model of some kind.

5

Schumpeterian view of innovation as an activity undertaken by larger monopolistic
firms. But contrary to the findings in several of the other papers, he also finds that R&D
did not contribute to innovative sales nor do innovative sales contribute to productivity
for these Chilean firms (once size, capital per worker, industry and demand
pull/technology push is controlled for). This may perhaps be a reflection of the very
differing circumstances in a developing Latin American economy as compared to
Western Europe. In particular it may be more important to specify the dynamic linkages
between R&D, innovation and productivity in a developing economy than a developed
one, for which it is more likely that the cross-sectional estimates of a CDM type model
can reflect long-run relations.

The paper by Gary Jefferson, Bai Huamao, Guan Xiaojing, and Yu Xiaoyun adds an
equation for profitability as well as productivity to the model used by Benavente and
estimates it on 20,000 large and medium-sized Chinese firms. As in the previous case,
controls for size, industry, and the nature of ownership (private, foreign, or government)
are included in all equations. Industry concentration (rather than the market share of the
particular firm), lagged firm profitability, and lagged R&D intensity are used as
instruments for R&D intensity in the new product sales equation. There are no
additional instruments for new product sales except for the firm’s age.

Unlike Benavente, Jefferson et al find that controlling for industry eliminates the
relationship between R&D intensity and size or concentration. This may be because
they have included lagged R&D intensity in their equation, which will tend to reduce
the explanatory power of any other variables due to the widely observed persistence of
R&D (Hall, Griliches, and Hausman 1986). In the case of Chinese firms, R&D intensity

6

does influence new product sales, although it exhibits decreasing returns that are related
to foreign ownership of the firms. In addition innovative sales is associated with greater
productivity and profitability, especially in larger state-owned firms and local
government collectives, suggesting that innovation can make a big difference in this
sector, which is viewed as having an increasingly declining share of output. Jefferson et
al go on to compute the total returns to R&D, finding that they are 3 to 4 times that for
ordinary investment in Chinese firms.

The paper by Hans Lööf and Almas Heshmati applies a version of the CDM model to
Swedish data for the mid-1990s on both manufacturing and service firms. Because they
matched the results of the CIS survey for Sweden to business register data, they are able
to explore the sensitivity of their results to a number of different changes in
specification and variables. In particular, they use a number of variables to measure the
success of innovative output: value added per employee, sales per employee, profit
before and after depreciation, all in logarithmic levels and growth rates, and the sales
margin, in levels. An important difference between their paper and those described
earlier is that their measure of innovation input is more comprehensive than R&D
expenditure, as it includes spending on non-R&D based innovation activities, the
purchase of outside services, machinery, and equipment for innovation activities,
industrial design expense related to producing new products, education directly related
to innovation activities, and some marketing expense. They are also able to include a
number of variables describing the human capital of the employees, the sources of
knowledge available to the firm, their strategies toward cooperation with outside
partners, and the innovation obstacles they face as instruments.

7

The results of their analysis show that selection bias is less important for these Swedish
data than it was for the original CDM study, but that simultaneity between innovation
output and input produces a downward bias on the innovation coefficient in the
productivity (sales or value added) equation. Like many previous researchers, they find
that the likelihood of innovating rises with firm size and capital intensity in both
manufacturing and services. However they find that after controlling for industry and
obstacles to innovation investment, innovation intensity is not constant but falls
significantly with size. The productivity of such investment in terms of innovative sales
also suggests diminishing returns, with an elasticity of about one half. An interesting
result is that for service firms, but not for manufacturing firms, the productivity of
innovation investments is positively related to the interaction with scientific research via
access to journals and professional conferences. Finally, for Swedish firms, both in
manufacturing and in services, the elasticity of productivity with respect to the share of
innovation sales is very similar to that previously obtained by CDM, around 0.1. That
is, when the share of innovative sales goes up ten per cent, value added increases one
per cent, other things equal, while sales and profits show larger increases of about two
per cent.

As in the base model of Lööf and Heshmati, the usual implementation of the CDM
model measures the final output of innovation as value added per worker deflated by a
broad economy level or industry level deflator, in essence assuming that innovation is
cost-reducing rather than demand-shifting.5 George Van Leeuwen and Luuk Klomp

5

This is not true in actual implementation, since value added is seldom deflated by a firm-specific

deflator, implying that the demand-shifting effect of innovation is also included in the variable.
Nevertheless, the usual interpretation of the coefficients of the standard model implicitly assumes no

8

depart from this specification to estimate a model that explicitly incorporates the
demand-shifting effects of innovative output by using revenue (sales) per worker as the
productivity measure and including a term for process R&D as well as innovative sales
on the right-hand side. They apply this model to data on approximately 3000 Dutch
firms drawn from the second CIS, and estimate it using methods that control for
selectivity into the sample. They find that using revenue per worker as the productivity
measure yields better results than value added per worker, and that the return to
innovation investment is sensitive to the technological environment in which firms
operate. They also find that the estimation method matters, with a complete structural
model in the style of CDM being preferred.

The paper by Pierre Mohnen, Jacques Mairesse, and Marcel Dagenais illustrates the
idea of an accounting framework for innovation, using micro-aggregated firm data for
seven countries from the European Community Innovation surveys and measuring
innovation intensity as the share of innovative sales due to improved or new products.
They define “innovativity” as that part of innovation intensity which is not explained by
a model that incorporates the usual predictive variables such as firm size, R&D
intensity, and industry. That is, “innovativity” is the residual from an innovation
production function, corresponding to the idea of productivity in standard production
analysis. They find that they are more able to predict firm innovation propensity and
intensity in the high-tech sectors than in the low tech-sectors, and that there are
important differences in innovativity across countries, Italy and Germany appearing to
be respectively the least and the most innovative countries. This paper represents an

market power for the firm on the demand side. See Klette and Griliches (1996), Griliches and Mairesse
(1984, 1998) and Mairesse and Jaumandreu (2005) for further discussion of this model.

9

initial foray into this kind of measurement and the concluding remarks of the paper
make suggestions for further work.

EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
It is probably safe to say that empirical study of knowledge management at the firm
level is still in its infancy, partly because of lack of the kind of detailed data or even
measurement concepts to describe the object of study (Foray and Gault 2003). The
studies in this special issue represent some preliminary investigations into the subject.
They are based on a variety of surveys recently conducted in a number of countries
(specifically Finland, Denmark, and France for the papers presented here) which have
attempted to obtain information about the knowledge management practices and
knowledge networking behaviour of individual manufacturing and service firms. For a
study that explores the impact of these practices on productivity, see Kremp and
Mairesse (2003).

The term knowledge management is used to refer to the practices, implicit or explicit,
used by a firm to acquire new knowledge, and to rearrange and diffuse existing
knowledge within the firm. It also includes strategies that are intended either to prevent
the firm’s own knowledge from “leaking” out or to encourage the diffusion of its
knowledge to partner firms and others from whom the firm might benefit in reciprocal
knowledge exchange. Although knowledge management is not identical to innovation,
the two are often viewed as closely connected, in the sense that innovation can be
viewed as the production of new knowledge, implying that firms which innovate will
also be those that are more concerned with the management of the knowledge thus
produced. This particular idea is strongly supported by a number of the correlations

10

reported in this special issue, such as those between the use of knowledge management
and the size, R&D intensity, and sector of the firm.

Why is knowledge management of concern to economists and others who study
innovation by business firms? Knowledge related to a firm’s products and processes,
both current and future, can be thought of as an asset, which therefore should be
managed strategically to obtain the highest possible returns, as in the case of other
assets of the firm such as its plant and equipment, or brand names. The traditional asset
management questions are when, how much, and what to invest (in), when to stop
investing in a particular asset, and when to divest or sell an asset off. To these
traditional questions, knowledge management adds others that arise from the particular
properties of knowledge: 1) the fact that it is often embedded in employees; 2) its partial
public good nature; and 3) the frequent difficulty of buying it in the market. We discuss
each of these ideas in turn.

Much of the knowledge created by a firm’s activities is embedded to some extent in the
human capital of its employees, who acquire it consciously as a part of their duties or
unconsciously along with the other activities they perform. This fact has several
implications for knowledge management: first, human resource management (HRM)
practices will become quite important because current employees are not simply
interchangeable with those outside the firm. Second, protecting firm rather than
employee ownership of such knowledge may require active management of the
transformation of tacit forms of knowledge (that in the heads of employees) to codified
forms that can be transmitted to other employees (Cowan, David, and Foray 2000).
Third, an important aspect of knowledge management within the firm is clearly the

11

“absorptive capacity” identified by Cohen and Levinthal (1989) as the ability of the firm
to acquire and make use of the results of others’ R&D activities; this ability is again
strongly related to the human capital of a firm’s employees.

These employee-related aspects of knowledge management are highlighted in two
papers in this volume. Anker Lund Vinding’s paper examines the role of the human
capital of a firm’s employees in determining absorptive capacity, using survey results
from 1500 Danish firms in manufacturing and services in the mid-1990s. He confirms
that firms with a greater share of share of highly educated employees are more likely to
introduce products or processes new to the world (to innovate), and also that the use of
modern human resource management (HRM) practices and the development of closer
relationships with both vertically related firms and external knowledge institutions is
positively related to innovation and negatively to imitation. Here innovation is defined
as the introduction of products or processes new to Denmark or to the world, whereas
imitation is an introduction that is merely new to the firm. The argument is that
education, HRM practices, and external links are signs of higher absorptive capacity and
that this in turn improves the firm’s innovative performance. Although the links are
tenuous, the results are suggestive.

Using a survey of French firms conducted by the Service des Etudes et Statistiques
Industrielles (SESSI) in 1997, Francis Munier explores the use of codified procedures
for a variety of knowledge creating and product development activities, finding that
they are relatively more common in analyzing client relationships and product
satisfaction, and relatively less common for the management of R&D and the
acquisition of technical information, both external and internal. Codification is only

12

very weakly related to the technological intensity of the firm’s sector and somewhat
more strongly related to firm size, suggesting that it becomes more important as
employee functions become more specialized and interactions among them are more
likely not to be face-to-face. Thus it does not appear from this survey evidence that
technological orientation itself generates greater codification of procedures within the
firm.

The public good nature of knowledge, which implies that it is both non-rival and nonexcludable (at least not easily excludable), means that knowledge managers must
consider both the positive and negative aspects of diffusing the knowledge created by
their firm. Benefits flow to the firm from monitoring the discoveries and new products
of other firms, but at the same time, there are costs associated with too rapid diffusion
of one’s own discoveries, for example, due to competition from imitators. How firms
manage this problem is the subject of Stéphane Lhuillery’s paper in this volume, which
uses the previously mentioned SESSI survey along with the French versions of the
Community Innovation Surveys and R&D data collected during the 1990s. Lhuillery
correlates a number of qualitative measures of knowledge disclosure or leakage with
firm characteristics, and finds that knowledge disclosure is more common among large,
R&D intensive firms in high technology sectors, and that it is correlated with patenting
by the same firms, which may provide a modicum of protection from imitation arising
from disclosure. He also finds that firm innovative performance is higher when the firm
has a policy of permitting the diffusion of non-confidential technologies via publication
or other means, controlling for R&D intensity and sector.

13

A final aspect of the conduct of R&D and innovative activity is that it is difficult to
purchase needed inputs “off the shelf,” or even to identify at the outset exactly which
inputs will be needed. That is, many modern technologically complex products require a
greater variety of inputs than can be produced by a single firm, even if it is large. This is
especially true of “network” industries such as mobile telephony, where the products
must work together in order to enhance consumer demand for them. The solution
adopted by most firms in technologically intense sectors is to form R&D alliances and
joint ventures with firms that specialize in complementary technologies, but this in turn
requires considerable knowledge management effort, both of the alliance itself and in
order to minimize unwanted spillovers and acquire the necessary technological
knowledge for production. Several papers in this volume (those by Munier, Leiponen,
and Lhuillery) look at the relationship between alliance participation and knowledge
management strategies.

Munier’s evidence on this topic confirms the previous not very surprising findings in
the literature that participation in R&D alliances is more likely if a firm is large or in a
high technology sector. He then goes on to present evidence that codification of
procedures associated with joint R&D activity is no more likely than for other activities,
and in fact somewhat less likely than for the management of client relationships. This is
perhaps somewhat unexpected given the prior discussion of the employee-specific
nature of tacit knowledge, but may reflect the speed and uncertainty under which such
alliances are conducted. When technology is rapidly changing and developing, it may
not be productive to spend a great deal of time codifying what has been learned. In
addition, Lhuillery presents evidence that firms participating in R&D alliances are more

14

likely to allow external knowledge disclosure by their engineers, implying generally
more openness to the outside and perhaps a need to transfer tacit knowledge.

Aija Leiponen’s paper focuses on a different aspect of knowledge management: how to
structure contracts with customers when the product itself is knowledge. She uses a
survey of approximately 200 Finnish business service (industrial design, advertising,
engineering, management consulting, and R&D services) firms that was conducted in
2000 and argues that these firms need to align the control rights in their contracts with
the nature of their knowledge base, which is characterized by their service and learning
strategies. She finds that firms providing expert skills that are not R&D-intensive and
which report learning incrementally are less likely to retain the control rights to their
output, whereas if they provide package solutions, or are more R&D and training
intensive, they are more likely to retain control rights. She suggests that this is because
control rights are less valuable when the knowledge being provided is tacit and nonreplicable (as in the case of expert services).

Most of the papers discussed in this section focus on a descriptive analysis of the
relationship

between

various

knowledge

management

techniques

and

firm

characteristics. Lhuillery and Vinding also provide some preliminary indications on the
relationship between knowledge management and innovative performance. On the other
hand, Duguet’s paper centers on a traditional measure of performance, total factor
productivity, and examines the contribution of innovation and spillovers to this
measure. He provides interesting evidence that innovative firms can be characterized as
belonging to one of two different regimes: radical innovators rely strongly on firm-level
spillovers, including the licensing of patents and formal internal research while

15

incremental innovators rely mostly on the adoption of new equipment goods
accompanied by their own informal research. Analyzing the two groups of firms
separately, he finds that only radical innovators contribute significantly to TFP growth.

CONCLUDING DISCUSSION
This brief tour of the papers in our special issue has attempted to give some indication
of the richness of the data and analysis to be found within them – the reader is
encouraged to refer to the papers themselves for a much fuller discussion of their
methods and results. Looking at the collection as a whole, however, several conclusions
can be drawn. First, considerable progress has been made in modelling and the use of
appropriate econometric estimation methods using the innovation survey data,
following the path laid out by CDM. Second, it is clear that many of the most
interesting results are obtained when researchers are able to combine the survey data
with census-type information on the accounting data for the firms. Such matching
enables the measurement of final outcomes in the form of profitability and productivity,
rather than merely the intermediate step of product and process innovation. Third, many
aspects of innovation and knowledge diffusion are not well captured by our
conventional quantitative measures such as R&D spending, patents, and productivity,
and surveys such as the Community Innovation Surveys can contribute a great deal to
our understanding of the innovative process.

In looking over the results and questions raised in these papers, we would have several
recommendations for future work in this area. The first would be to draw the link
between the Knowledge Management practices of the firms studied in the second group
of papers with the CDM framework for the structural analysis of the path from R&D

16

and innovation to firm productivity and profitability used in the first group. Some steps
in this direction have been taken by Duguet, among others, but much more work can be
done in this area. For example, to what extent does the use of good HRM practices or
the nature of knowledge disclosure to others actually increase the innovative capacity of
a firm, and to what extent are these factors simply signs of successful management in
the same way that innovation is? That is, what are the feedback loops and what policy
levers will be effective if we wish to increase innovative activity among firms? Much of
what we have learned already from this collection of papers is suggestive of correlation,
but causality is a more elusive goal.

To answer these kinds of questions it will be necessary to have survey data that can be
matched to accounting data, and that is comparable across country and over time.6 In
particular it would be desirable to construct panels of firms that have been resurveyed at
different time periods. This would allow better control for the problems of unobserved
heterogeneity such as “good management,” although naturally it would bring with it the
usual problem of exacerbated measurement error, perhaps increased to some extent due
to the qualitative nature of some of the data. Nevertheless, this seems to us a useful goal
to pursue.

In addition to data comparability across time and country, we would also argue that
comparability in specification and method is an area where progress could be made.

6

In this regard it might be helpful and informative if the largest innovative economy, the United States,

had a survey that was comparable to the ones analyzed here. Although some private efforts exist (Levin et
al 1987; Cohen et al 2000), there does not yet exist a broad-based government administered innovation
survey in that country.

17

There is an understandable (and even desirable) tendency for each group of researchers
to “go its own way” in analyzing these data in order to focus on a specific question of
interest to them. But this sometimes sacrifices our ability to learn from the comparisons
across studies and countries. To choose an example from the papers collected here, does
innovation really contribute little to Chilean productivity and a great deal to Chinese
productivity or are the differences in results due to the considerable difference in the
specification of the models used for the two countries? Or, what exactly are the
differences between using R&D spending to measure innovative investments and using
a broader measure? To answer these kinds of questions, a great deal of attention needs
to be paid to the precise specification and estimation methods used to ensure that the
same ones are applied to data from different countries. We hope that some future
researchers will be inspired by these papers to explore more thoroughly the crosscountry comparison of the firm-level innovative process using a common framework, as
is done in the Mohnen et al. paper.

18

References
Cohen, W. M. and Levinthal, D. A. (1989) Innovation and Learning, The Two Faces of
R&D. Economic Journal, 99, 569-96.
Cohen, W. M., R. R. Nelson and J. P. Walsh (2000) “Protecting Their Intellectual
Assets: Appropriability Conditions and Why Firms Patent or Not?,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 7552.
Cowan, R., P. A. David, and D. Foray (2000) The Explicit Economics of Knowledge
Codification and Tacitness. Industrial and Corporate Change, 9 (2), 211-253.
Crepon, B., E. Duguet, and J. Mairesse (1998) Research, Innovation, and Productivity,
An Econometric Analysis at the Firm Level. Economics of Innovation and New
Technology, 7 (3), 115-156.
Foray, D., and F. Gault (2003) Measuring Knowledge Management. Paris: OECD.
Griliches, Z. (1979) Issues in Assessing the Contribution of R&D to Productivity
Growth. Bell Journal of Economics, 10, 92-116.
Griliches, Z. and J. Mairesse (1998) Production Functions: The Search for
Identification. in Econometrics and Economic Theory in the 20th Century, The Ragnar
Frisch Centennial Symposium, S. Ström (ed.), Cambridge University Press, pp. 169203. Reprinted in Z. Griliches, Practising Econometrics, Essays in Method and
Application, Edward Elgar, 1998, pp. 383-411.
Griliches, Z. and J. Mairesse (1984) Productivity and Research Development at the
Firm Level” pp. 271-297, in Research and Development, Patents and Productivity,
Griliches ed., Chicago University Press. Reprinted in Z. Griliches, R&D and
Productivity, The Econometric Evidence, Chicago University Press, 1998, pp. 100-133.
Hall, B. H., Z. Griliches and J. A. Hausman (1986) Patents and R&D, Is There a Lag?.
International Economic Review, 27, 265-283.

19

Klette, T. J., and Z. Griliches (1996) The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators
When Output Prices are Unobserved and Endogenous. Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 11, 343-361.
Kremp, E., and J. Mairesse (2003) Knowledge Management, Innovation and
Productivity, A Firm Level Exploration Based on French Manufacturing CIS3 Data. In
D. Foray and F. Gault (eds.), Measuring Knowledge Management. Paris: OECD.
Levin, R. C., A. K. Klevorick, R. R. Nelson and S. G. Winter (1987) “Appropriating the
Returns from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 3, 783-832.
Mairesse J. and Jaumandreu J. (2005) “Panel-data Estimates of the Production Function
and the Revenue Function: What Difference Does it Make?” Scandinavian Journal of
Economics 107(4): 651-672.

20

Figure 1
Innovation and Productivity

Diversification
Market share

Demand pull
Technology push

R&D and other
innovation investments

Firm size
and industry

Knowledge
firm-level capital created
by innovation investment

Patents
Innovation output

Productivity

21

Innovative sales

Physical capital
Worker skills

Table 1: Part I
Authors
Benavente

Title
The Role of Research and
Innovation in Promoting
Productivity in Chile

Country
Chile

Years Sample
1995-98 488 Chilean plants

Dep Var
R&D intensity
Share innovative sales
Labor productivity

Indep Var
size,mkt share, diversification
size, R&D
size, innovation, capital intensity

Methodology
ALS with
selectivity and
simultaneity

Loof and
Heshmati

On the Relationship between
Innovation and Performance:
A Sensitivity Analysis

Sweden

1996-98 ~3000 service and
manufacturing firms;
1300 in innovation
sample

R&D intensity

size, capital intensity, human
capital;competition; factors
hampering innovation
size, R&D, capital intensity, mkt
growth; knowledge sources, Mills
ratio
size, innovation sales per worker,
capital intensity, human capital,
innovation type

Generalized
Tobit
3SLS

Innovative sales per
worker
Labor productivity

Jefferson,
R&D Performance in Chinese
Huamao,
Industry
Xiaojing, and
Xiaoyun

China

1997-99 20,000 large & medium- R&D intensity
sized manufacturing
firms; ~5000 in balanced
R&D panel
Share new product sales
TFP
profitability

van Leeuwen On the Contribution of
and Klomp
Innovation to Multi-factor
Productivity Growth
Mohnen,
Innovativeness: A
Mairesse,
Comparison across Seven
and Dagenais European Countries

Netherlands

Seven
European
countries

1994-96 ~3000 firms

1992

Innovation intensity
R&D intensity
Value added
Growth in VA

CIS1 micro-aggregated Being innovative
data. ~8000 firms; ~5700
in innovation sample
Innovation intensity

22

size, concentration, lag profits,
IV
industry, ownership type, lag R&D
intensity
R&D intensity, R&D-size interaction,
firm age, industry, ownership
size, innovative sales share, capital,
materials, industry, ownership
size, innovative sales share, capital,
industry, ownership
size, market share, tech. push,
demand pull, science

OLS, 3SLS
with and
without
selectivity

size, industry, ownership type,
continuous R&D,cooperative R&D,
R&D intensity, proximity to basic
research, perceived competition

Generalized
Tobit

Table 1: Part II
Authors
Duguet

Title
Innovation height spillovers
and TFP growth at the firm
level: Evidence from French
Manufacturing

Country
France

Years Sample
Dep Var
1986-90 ~4000 innovating
Innovation height
manufacturing firms from (no/incremental/radical);
CIS I
TFP growth

Leiponen

Organization of Knowledge
Exchange: An Empirical
Study of Knowledge Intensive
Business Service
Relationships

Finland

L'Huillery

Voluntary Technological
Disclosure as and Efficient
Knowledge Management
Device: An Empirical Study

France

Munier

Firm Size, Technological
Intensity of sector and
Relational Competencies to
Innovate: French Industrial
Innovating Firms

France

Vinding

Absorptive Capacity and
Innovative Performance: A
Human Capital Approach

Denmark

2000

Methodology
logit/GMM

two step
(IV)/GMM

probit,
2000 business service
Control rights allocated to size; labor productivity, age, group
firms; sample used = 167 customer
firm; product is package, product is ordered probit
(0-3 or 0-1)
expert, independent product; whether
IP possible, R&D intensity, learning,
collaboration, training investments

1986-90; Manufacturing firms from
1997
CIS I; PACE; Innovation
competency survey;
R&D survey, CIS II for
non-innovating firms.
Sample = ~3500 firms
(1500 innovative)
1997

Indep Var
sales, market share, diversification,
C4, tech push, demand pull, R&D,
patents, external R&D, type of
goods;
type of innovation, industry, lag TFP
inst = demand pull, tech push, ind.
Dummies, innovation inputs, R&D

size, R&D intensity; French or
D(some tech transfer)
D(comm with other firms) foreign group; D(R&D), industry;
D(auth to comm with other R&D collaboration variables
firms)
D(perm to comm with
other firms)
D(patents)

3175 manufacturing
Competencies:
firms from CIS II Survey Tech K spillovers (nonmkt)
Consumer demand
R&D coop/public
Financial competency
marketing competency

size, tech intensity of sector; share of OLS; means
tacit knowledge in a competency

innovative capacity of firm education, avg work experience,
1993-95 1500 firms from
(0-3)
HRM practices, external relations
manufacuring/services
(suppliers, knowledge inst.), sector,
survey of org. & tech
size, computerization, subsidiary
change 1993-95 merged
to register data 1990-97

23

Probit for
innovative
firms;
bivariate
probit for
comm &
patents

ordered probit

SPECIAL ISSUE FOR EINT
EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF INNOVATION
IN THE KNOWLEDGE DRIVEN ECONOMY
Guest editors: Bronwyn H. Hall and Jacques Mairesse

Table of Contents
Empirical studies of innovation in the knowledge driven economy: An introduction
Bronwyn H. Hall (University of California at Berkeley, University of Maastricht, and
NBER) and Jacques Mairesse (CREST-ENSAE, UNU-MERIT, and NBER)
PART 1- Econometric models of R&D, Innovation and Productivity
The role of research and innovation in promoting productivity in Chile
Jose Miguel Benavente (Universidad de Santiago, Chile)
Knowledge capital and heterogeneity in firm performance. A sensitivity analysis
Hans Lööf and Almas Heshmati (Royal Institute of Technology and the United Nations
University)
R&D performance in Chinese industry
Gary H. Jefferson (Graduate School of International Economics and Finance, Brandeis
University); Bai Huamao (Graduate School of International Economics and Finance,
Brandeis University); Guan Xiaojing (Department of Population, Social, and
Technology Statistics, National Bureau of Statistics, China) and Yu Xiaoyun
(Department of Industrial and Transportation Statistics, National Bureau of Statistics,
China)
On the contribution of innovation to multi-factor productivity
George van Leeuven (CPB Netherlands’ Bureau for Economic Policy) and Luuk Klomp
(Ministry of Economic Affairs, The Netherlands)
Innovativity: A comparison across seven European countries
Jacques Mairesse (CREST-INSEE and NBER), Pierre Mohnen (MERIT, Maastricht
University and CIRANO)) and Marcel Dagenais (Université de Montréal and CIRANO)
PART II- EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF KNOWLEDGE TRANSMISSION
WITHIN AND BETWEEN FIRMS
Innovation height, spillovers and TFP growth at the firm level: Evidence from
French manufacturing for company performance
Emmanuel Duguet (Université de Bretagne Occidentale and Eurequa, Université de
Paris 1)
24

Organization of knowledge exchange: An empirical study of knowledge-intensive
business service relationships
Aija Leiponen (Cornell University)
Voluntary technological disclosure as an efficient knowledge management device:
An empirical study
Stéphane Lhuillery (Université Paris Nord)
Size of firms and relational competencies: Evidence from French industrial firms
Francis Munier (BETA, UMR CNRS, Strasbourg, France)
Absorptive capacity and innovative performance: A human capital approach
Anker Lund Vinding (Business auc, Aalborg, Denmark)

25

