NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE LABOR MARKET IMPACT
OF INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION: CANADA, MEXICO, AND
THE UNITED STATES
Abdurrahman Aydemir
George J. Borjas
Working Paper 12327
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12327
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006

We are grateful to Richard Freeman, Daniel Hamermesh, Lawrence Katz, Stephen Trejo, and three
anonymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions on a previous draft. This paper represents the
views of the authors and does not necessarily reflect the opinion of any institution with which the authors
are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Abdurraham Aydemir and George J. Borjas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

A Comparative Analysis of the Labor Market Impact of International Migration: Canada,
Mexico, and the United States
Abdurrahman Aydemir and George J. Borjas
NBER Working Paper No. 12327
June 2006
JEL No. J31, J61
ABSTRACT

Using data drawn from the Canadian, Mexican, and U.S. Censuses, we find a numerically
comparable and statistically significant inverse relation between immigrant-induced shifts in labor
supply and wages in each of the three countries: A 10 percent labor supply shift is associated with
a 3 to 4 percent opposite-signed change in wages. Despite the similarity in the wage response, the
impact of migration on the wage structure differs significantly across countries. International
migration narrowed wage inequality in Canada; increased it in the United States; and reduced the
relative wage of workers at the bottom of the skill distribution in Mexico.
Abdurrahman Aydemir
Family and Labour Studies Division
24th Floor, Coats Building
Tunney’s Pasture
Statistics Canada
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0T6
CANADA
abdurrahman.aydemir@statcan.ca

George J. Borjas
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
gborjas@harvard.edu

1
A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE LABOR MARKET IMPACT OF
INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION: CANADA, MEXICO, AND THE UNITED STATES
Abdurrahman Aydemir and George J. Borjas*
1. Introduction
There has been a resurgence of large-scale international migration throughout much of
the world in recent decades. Nearly 3 percent of the world’s population now lives in a country
where they were not born (United Nations, 2002). These population flows rekindled the debate
over the social and economic consequences of international migration, and motivated many
economists to develop and estimate models designed to measure this impact.
The North American experience with international migration—particularly in Canada, the
United States, and Mexico—stands in unique contrast to that of the rest of the world. First,
Canada has long imported workers to augment its workforce. As a result, the foreign-born share
in the Canadian population is higher than in most developed countries. Second, the United States
receives the largest immigrant influx (in absolute size) of any country in the world. Finally, the
emigration of Mexicans, almost exclusively to the United States, has drained the Mexican
economy of a large fraction of its workforce in a relatively short time.
The textbook model of a competitive labor market has clear and unambiguous
implications about how wages and employment opportunities in a particular country should
adjust to these labor supply shifts, at least in the short run. In particular, immigration should
lower the wage of competing workers.

*

We are grateful to Richard Freeman, Daniel Hamermesh, Lawrence Katz, Stephen Trejo, and three
anonymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions on a previous draft. This paper represents the views of
the authors and does not necessarily reflect the opinion of any institution with which the authors are affiliated.

2
Despite the common-sense intuition behind this theoretical prediction, the economics
literature has—at least until recently—found it difficult to document the inverse relation between
immigrant-induced supply shifts and wages. Because immigrants typically cluster in a small
number of cities in most receiving countries, much of the literature estimates the labor market
impact of immigration by comparing conditions across localities in the country. These studies
typically calculate the correlation between measures of immigrant penetration in local labor
markets and measures of economic outcomes, such as wages (see Altonji and Card, 1991, Borjas,
1987, Card, 1991, 2001, and Grossman, 1982, for the United States; and Roy, 1997, for Canada).
The sign of this “spatial correlation” is interpreted as indicating the direction in which immigrant
supply shifts affect wages; a negative correlation would suggest that immigrant-induced
increases in labor supply lower wages. Although there is a lot of dispersion across studies, there
is a tendency towards finding a near-zero spatial correlation. This weak correlation leads to the
inference that immigration has little impact on wages in the receiving country.
Borjas, Freeman, and Katz (1997) challenged this interpretation by arguing that the
spatial correlation may not capture the economic impact of immigration if native workers
respond by moving their labor or capital to localities seemingly less affected by the immigrant
supply shock. Borjas (2003) used the insight that the labor market impact of immigration may be
measurable only at the national level to examine how the wages of U.S. workers in particular
skill groups—defined in terms of educational attainment and years of work experience—were
related to the immigrant supply shocks affecting those groups. The national labor market
evidence indicated that wage growth was strongly and inversely related to immigrant-induced
supply increases. This evidence, based on the study of wage trends in the United States over four
decades, is consistent with the implications of the textbook model of a competitive market.

3
This paper examines if the Borjas (2003) methodological framework provides a useful
approach for investigating the labor market impact of immigration outside the U.S. context.1 We
use the same methodology and sample design to analyze the impact of international migration in
Canada, Mexico, and the United States. The joint application of the framework to these three
countries is interesting for a number of reasons. First, although both Canada and the United
States admit large numbers of immigrants, their different immigration policies generate
immigrant populations that differ greatly in their skill mix. In Canada, immigration has
disproportionately increased the number of high-skill workers. In the United States, immigration
has disproportionately increased the number of low-skill workers. As a result, different groups of
native workers are likely to be affected by the immigrant supply shifts in the two countries.
Second, the study of the Mexican experience should provide a mirror-image of the
economic impact of migration flows. Between 1980 and 2000, immigration increased the number
of working men by 13.2 percent in Canada and 11.1 percent in the United States. In contrast,
Mexico experienced a 14.6 percent reduction in the size of its potential male workforce. Mishra
(2005) and Hanson (2006) examine the impact of emigration on Mexican wages and find a
significant positive correlation between Mexican wages and emigration.2 Our analysis confirms
the existence of this basic correlation and extends the existing work. We show that the Mexican
data—like the corresponding data for Canada and the United States—can be fruitfully analyzed

1

We learned of two related studies after completing the initial draft of this paper. Bonin (2005) finds that
supply shifts in Germany lower wages in the national German labor market, but by less than in the Borjas study. The
last section of Bohn and Sanders (2005) applies the Borjas framework to the Canadian context. Using the smaller
Public Use Microdata Files, they find weaker effects than those reported here (which are based on the entire Census
files maintained by Statistics Canada). Aydemir and Borjas (2005) show that sampling error in measures of the
immigrant supply shock calculated in small samples leads to substantial attenuation bias in estimates of the wage
impact of immigration.
2 Mishra’s (2005) study is closely related to the descriptive analysis presented in Section 5 because that
study is itself an application of the Borjas framework to the Mexican context. Hanson (2005) concludes that the
Mexican wage structure shifted most favorably in those Mexican states with the largest emigration rates.

4
using a structural model of factor demand that leads to roughly similar estimates of the
elasticities of substitution. Despite this similarity, the link between the Mexican wage structure
and emigration is not what one expects—namely, an increase in the relative wage of the low-skill
workforce that forms the bulk of Mexican migration to the United States. Because Mexican
emigration rates are relatively lower for workers at the bottom of the skill distribution,
international migration may have actually reduced the relative wage of low-skill workers.
Finally, because our study analyzes similar data across the three countries (drawn from
microdata samples of each country’s national census) and imposes the same theoretical structure
on these data, the paper reports the results of a relatively rare methodological experiment. In
short, we attempt to determine if the insights implied by the laws of supply and demand lead to
roughly similar qualitative and quantitative responses in the labor markets, despite the different
nature of the supply shocks, institutions, and economic conditions in the three countries.
We find that there is a numerically sizable and statistically significant inverse relation
between labor supply shifts and wages in all three countries. Even though the average wage
response of international migration in each of the countries is relatively similar—a 10 percent
labor supply shift is associated with a 3 to 4 percent opposite-signed change in wages—
international migration plays a drastically different role in the evolution of each country’s wage
structure. In Canada, international migration narrowed wage inequality. In the United States,
international migration increased wage inequality. In Mexico, international migration increased
the relative wages of workers in the middle of the skill distribution, but lowered the relative
wages of workers at the bottom of the distribution. Paradoxically, despite the large-scale
migration of low-skill workers from Mexico to the United States, the wage of low-skill workers
remaining in Mexico may have fallen slightly.

5

2. International Differences in Immigration Policies
The impetus for the resurgence of large-scale immigration to the United States came from
the 1965 Amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act. Before 1965, immigration was
guided by the national-origins quota system. This scheme restricted the number of immigrants,
allocated visas across countries based on the national origin mix of the U.S. population in 1920,
and partly used skills to allocate visas among applicants from a given country. Along with
subsequent minor legislation, the 1965 Amendments repealed the national-origins quota system,
set a higher numerical limit for immigration and enshrined a new objective, the reunification of
families, for allocating entry visas among the many applicants.
There has also been a substantial increase in illegal immigration. It is estimated that 10.3
million illegal aliens resided in the United States in March 2005, with 5.9 million being of
Mexican origin (Passel, 2005). Further, the size of the illegal population has been growing very
rapidly in recent years, by around 700 thousand illegal immigrants annually since 2000.
The increasing importance of family preferences in the awarding of entry visas,
combined with the increasing number of low-skill illegal immigrants, resulted in a substantial
shift in the skill composition of the foreign-born workforce: Low-skill workers became a
disproportionately larger share of that workforce.
As in the United States, Canadian immigration policy until the early 1960s was based on
a national-origin preference system that limited the entry of some national origin groups while
facilitating the entry of others. Canada moved away from this scheme in 1962 and replaced it
with a system that emphasized the skills of visa applicants. In 1967 Canada introduced the point
system that aimed explicitly at selecting immigrants with desirable skills. The point system

6
awards points to visa applicants who have particular socioeconomic characteristics (e.g., more
schooling and fluent English or French language skills), and then sets a “passing grade” that
determines the subset of visa applicants who qualify for a visa.
For the most part, immigrants who entered Canada after 1970 were admitted under one of
four categories: 1) family class migrants, covering immediate family members; 2) nominated
relatives, covering close relatives; 3) independent migrants, covering various subcategories of
skilled workers as well as entrepreneurs and investors; and (4) refugees. Individuals applying
under the categories of nominated relatives or independent migrants are subject to the points test.
Another important difference between the United States and Canada is the latter’s explicit
tie of the level of immigration to the macroeconomic environment, increasing the level during
economic booms and reducing it during recessions. These adjustments often were accomplished
by lowering the number of immigrants admitted under the independent migrants class. However,
the tap-on, tap-off policy was abandoned in the early 1990s, and there have been relatively high
immigration levels since. Because of these adjustments, the share of immigrants belonging to
each of the categories has fluctuated significantly over time. The share of independent migrants
rose from 21 percent in 1984 to 59 percent in 2000 (Citizenship and Immigration Canada, 2001),
and over three quarters of those admitted in this category were skilled workers.
Mexico is a major source country for international migrants. The 2000 Mexican Census
asked families to name the location of any relatives who had migrated abroad between 1995 and
2000, and 97 percent of these families reported the United States as the relatives’ destination
(Caponi, 2004). The 2000 U.S. Census enumerated 9.2 million Mexican-born persons (or 29.5
percent of all foreign-born persons in the United States). In 2000, the Mexican population stood
at 100.3 million, suggesting an emigration rate of 8.4 percent.

7
There are no restrictions preventing Mexicans from leaving Mexico—except for those
imposed by U.S. immigration policy and border patrol enforcement. Mexican immigrants
constituted the largest component of legal immigration to the United States in recent decades. In
the 1990s, the United States admitted 9.1 million legal immigrants, with 24.8 percent originating
in Mexico (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2004). As noted above, Mexicans also make
up a disproportionately large share of the illegal immigrant population in the United States.
Recent studies by Chiquiar and Hanson (2005) and Ibarraran and Lubotsky (2006)
examine how the skill composition of Mexican immigrants in the United States compares to that
of Mexicans who remained in Mexico. The vast majority of Mexican emigrants are high school
dropouts (63 percent of Mexican working men enumerated in the 2000 U.S. Census have less
than 12 years of schooling). Chiquiar and Hanson (2005) point out, however, that the emigration
rate is higher for Mexicans who are high school graduates than for high school dropouts.
The changes in immigration policies in Canada and the United States—and the
increasingly powerful pull of the U.S. labor market to large segments of the Mexican
workforce—have important implications for the trends in international migration in the three
countries. Using data described in the next section, Figure 1 shows the trend in the immigrant or
emigrant share in the male workforce (i.e., the fraction of the workforce aged 18-64 that is
foreign-born in Canada or the United States, or the fraction of the workforce that emigrated from
Mexico). The immigrant share in Canada was relatively stable over the past 30 years, hovering at
around 20 percent (except for a slight dip in the 1980s). The immigrant share in the United States
declined from 1960 to 1970, but increased significantly since. In 1970, less than 5 percent of the
male workforce was foreign-born; by 2000, the immigrant share was almost 15 percent. Finally,

8
the emigrant share in Mexico has increased dramatically. In 1970, the emigration rate of male
workers was under 3 percent. By 2000, the emigration rate had risen to 16 percent.

3. Methodological Framework and Data
The potential problems associated with the spatial correlation approach are now well
understood. Natives (and pre-existing immigrants) may respond to the adverse wage impact of
immigration on local labor markets by moving their labor or capital to other cities (Borjas, 2006;
Card, 2001; Filer, 1992; and Frey, 1995). These regional flows diffuse the impact of immigration
across all regions, suggesting that the impact of immigration cannot be measured by comparing
economic conditions across localities and may only be measurable at a national level.3
Borjas (2003) proposed a new methodology that identifies the labor market impact of
immigration at the national level. We use this framework to estimate and compare the impact of
international migration in three national labor markets: Canada, Mexico, and the United States.
We define the skill groups that make up a national labor market in terms of education and labor
market experience. This definition, of course, implicitly assumes that workers with the same
level of schooling but with different levels of experience are imperfect substitutes in production
(Card and Lemieux, 2001; Welch, 1979). We then use the time-variation in the share of
immigrants within each skill group to identify the impact of immigration on the wage structure.
The data used in the study comes from microdata Census files for Canada, the United
States, and Mexico. Our study of the Canadian labor market uses all available microdata files
from the Canadian Census (1971, 1981, 1986, 1991, 1996, and 2001). Each of these files

3 In addition, immigrants may not be randomly distributed across localities. If immigrants cluster in highwage cities, there would be a spurious positive correlation between immigration and wages. Employers also respond

9
represents a 20 percent sample of the Canadian population (except for the 1971 file, which
represents a 33.3 percent sample). In the U.S. context, we use the 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990 and
2000 Integrated Public Use Microdata Sample (IPUMS) of the decennial Census. The 1960 file
represents a 1 percent sample of the U.S. population, the 1970 file represents a 3 percent sample,
and the 1980 through 2000 files represent a 5 percent sample. Finally, our study of the Mexican
labor market uses the 1960, 1970, 1990 and 2000 IPUMS of the Mexican censuses (the primary
documents for the 1980 census were destroyed by an earthquake). The 1960 file represents a 1.5
percent sample of the Mexican population; the 1970 file represents a 1 percent sample; the 1990
file represents a 10 percent sample; and the 2000 file represents a 10.6 percent sample. Unless
otherwise indicated, the empirical analysis is restricted to men aged 18 to 64 who participate in
the civilian labor force. The appendix describes the construction of the sample extracts in detail.
Our study of the U.S. data uses the convention of defining an immigrant as someone who
is either a noncitizen or a naturalized U.S. citizen. In the Canadian context, we define an
immigrant as someone who reports being a “landed immigrant” (i.e., a person who has been
granted the right to live in Canada permanently by immigration authorities), and is either a
noncitizen or a naturalized Canadian citizen.4 Finally, although the Mexican census does not
provide a count of the number of emigrants, almost all Mexican emigrants chose the United
States as their destination. Hence a count of the number of Mexican emigrants can be obtained
from the U.S. Census (abstracting from the undercount problem in that Census). More precisely,

by changing the factor mix (Lewis, 2005). The shift in the factor mix, however, would presumably be induced by the
changing relative price of labor, so that the wage impact of immigration should be observed at least in the short run.
4

The Canadian Censuses include non-permanent residents since 1991. This group includes those residing
in Canada on an employment authorization, a student authorization, a Minister’s permit, or who were refugee
claimants at the time of Census (and family members living with them). Non-permanent residents account for less
than 1 percent of the samples used in this study since 1991, and are included in the immigrant counts for those years.

10
the number of emigrants from Mexico at a particular point in time is given by the number of
Mexican-born persons enumerated by the corresponding U.S. Census.
We define skill groups in terms of educational attainment and years of labor market
experience. To analyze the Canadian trends, we classify workers into five distinct education
groups using the detailed information on the type of degree available in the Canadian census.
The five education groups are: (1) workers who are high school dropouts; (2) workers who have
either a high school or a vocational degree; (3) workers who have a high school and vocational
degree or have a post-secondary certificate or diploma below the bachelor’s degree; (4) workers
who have a bachelor’s degree; and (5) workers who have a post-graduate degree.
Our analysis of the U.S. data uses five education groups that roughly correspond to the
Canadian categories: (1) high school dropouts (workers who have less than 12 years of
completed schooling); (2) high school graduates (workers who have exactly twelve years of
schooling); (3) workers who have some college (thirteen to fifteen years of schooling); (4)
college graduates (workers who have exactly sixteen years of schooling); and (5) workers with
post-graduate education (workers who have more than 16 years of schooling).5
The Mexican schooling system differs greatly from that of Canada or the United States.
Students get a primary-level degree after 6 years of education, a lower-secondary degree after 9
years, and a secondary level degree after 12 years. There are, therefore, spikes in the educational
distribution at these termination points. The bulk of Mexican working men are “high school
dropouts”—in the sense that they did not have a secondary level degree—in the period under

5

In Canada, “college” typically refers to 2-year post-secondary institutions that grant a certificate or
diploma below Bachelor’s level. Throughout the text, however, we use the term “college graduate” to refer to
Bachelor’s degree holders in all three countries that we study.

11
study (94.9 percent in 1970 and 73.4 percent in 2000).6 We use five education groups in Mexico
to capture key features of the Mexican system: (1) high school dropouts with 0 to 8 years of
schooling (i.e., workers who have less than a lower secondary education); (2) high school
dropouts with 9 to 11 years of schooling (i.e., workers who have completed a lower secondary
education); (3) high school graduates (i.e., workers who have completed a secondary education,
either in a general or technical track); (4) workers with some college (i.e., workers who report
completing a general track secondary education and also attending some college, or workers who
completed a technical track secondary education and obtained a post-secondary technical
degree); and (5) college graduates (i.e., workers who completed a university education).7 Finally,
because we rely on the U.S. Census to enumerate Mexican emigrants, we define five
corresponding education groups in the U.S. data, based on their years of completed schooling.8
We group workers into a years-of-experience cohort by using potential experience,
roughly defined by Age – Years of Education – 6. The Canadian Census reports the number of
years that a worker attended grade school, post-secondary education below university, and
university. By adding these variables, we can calculate the total years of schooling. The U.S. and
Mexican Censuses do not report the number of years of school attended in such detail. We
assume that age of entry into these labor markets is 17 for high school dropouts, 19 for high
school graduates, 21 for persons with some college, 23 for college graduates, and 25 for persons

6

The mandatory level of schooling in Mexico was 6 years until 1992 and 9 years hence. Therefore,
Mexican workers with less than 12 years of schooling are not “dropouts” in the sense meant in Canada or the United
States. For convenience, we use “high school dropouts” to denote workers who have not completed high school.
7

In 2000, 45.0 percent of male workers in Mexico were high school dropouts with 0 to 8 years of
schooling, 28.4 percent were high school dropouts with 9-11 years, 11.2 percent were high school graduates, 3.9
percent had some college, and 11.6 percent were college graduates.
8 The education groups used to classify Mexican emigrants are: 0-8 years of schooling, 9-11 years, 12
years, 13-15 years, and at least 16 years.

12
with post-graduate degrees.9 The analysis is restricted to persons who have between 1 and 40
years of experience. Workers are aggregated into five-year experience intervals (i.e., 1 to 5 years
of experience, 5 to 10 years, and so on) to capture the notion that workers who have roughly
similar experience are more likely to affect each other’s labor market opportunities than workers
who do not.
The skill cells corresponding to educational attainment (s), experience (x) , and calendar
year (t) define a skill group at a point in time for a given national labor market (for convenience,
we omit the index indicating the country).10 Define the immigrant supply shock by:

(1)

psxt =

M sxt
,
( M sxt + N sxt )

where, in the case of Canada and the United States, Msxt gives the total number of immigrants in
the particular skill group; and Nsxt gives the total number of native workers in that group. The
variable psxt then gives the immigrant share (i.e., the fraction of the relevant workforce that is
foreign-born). In the Mexican context, Msxt gives the number of emigrants belonging to a
particular skill group (as enumerated by the U.S. Census); and Nsxt represents the number who

9 This approximation is probably much more appropriate for workers in the United States than in Mexico,
particularly for the least educated workers. We experimented with alternative assumptions (e.g., high school
dropouts enter the labor market at age 15) and the results are similar to those reported below.
10 The classification of immigrants and natives with the same schooling and experience into the same skill
groups may generate misclassification biases. It is well known that employers in receiving countries typically attach
different values to schooling or experience acquired before and after immigration. Borjas (2003) reports a number of
sensitivity tests (such as rescaling the value of experience obtained abroad to calculate the “effective” experience of
a foreign-born worker) and concludes that the U.S. estimates are not very sensitive to alternative classifications. We
conducted a similar sensitivity analysis for Canada and found similar results. In Section 6 below, we specifically
examine the hypothesis that immigrants and natives are perfect substitutes in Canada and the United States and find
that we cannot reject the null hypothesis of perfect substitution in either country.

13
remained in Mexico. The variable psxt then gives the emigrant share (i.e., the fraction of workers
in a particular skill group who have left the country).

4. Trends in International Migration by Skill

We first show the trends in immigration and emigration across education groups for each
of the three countries. Figure 2 illustrates the education-specific trends in the immigrant/emigrant
shares. In Canada, the immigrant share among workers with at most a high school degree was
either constant or declined slightly, while the immigrant share among workers with some college
declined substantially. At the same time, the immigrant share among workers who have at least a
college degree increased rapidly. The immigrant share among college graduates rose from 21.4
to 26.7 percent between 1986 and 2001, and the immigrant share among workers with a postgraduate degree rose from 32.5 to 38.2 percent. This shift towards a high-skill immigrant influx
was precisely the goal of the point system.
The U.S. experience stands in striking contrast. Although the immigrant share among
highly educated workers (particularly among workers with a post-graduate education) increased,
the increase was much more rapid among workers who are high school dropouts. As recently as
1980, only 10.9 percent of the high school dropout workforce was foreign-born. By 2000, 40.9
percent were foreign-born. In contrast, the immigrant share among college graduates was 7.3
percent in 1980 and rose to 13.4 percent in 2000, while the immigrant share among post-graduate
degree holders was 9.0 percent in 1980 and rose to 17.1 percent in 2000.
The bottom panel of the figure shows that the emigration rate for Mexicans is larger for
workers in the middle of the education distribution (i.e., for workers who are either high school
graduates or have some college). Mexico, however, has relatively few workers with this

14
“middle” level of education. As a result, even though the emigration rate for high school
dropouts is relatively low, there is a sizable numerical outflow of low-skill workers. Moreover,
the emigration rate of Mexican high school dropouts, particularly of the least-educated high
school dropouts, has risen rapidly, from 8.6 to 16.0 percent between 1990 and 2000. Finally,
Mexicans with a college degree have the lowest emigration rate (5.3 percent in 2000).
The merging of Mexican and U.S. Census data to calculate emigration rates raises two
problems. First, the potential undercount of Mexican immigrants in the U.S. Census suggests that
Mexican emigration rates are underestimated, particularly for low-skill workers. We discuss how
the undercount biases the estimated wage impact of immigration below.
Second, we assumed that the education of Mexicans now residing in the United States is
the educational attainment that would have been observed had these workers remained in
Mexico. This assumption does not create a problem for Mexicans who migrated as adults
because only a very small number of these adults get additional schooling in the United States
(6.9 percent of Mexicans who migrated between the ages of 15-24 during the 1990s were
enrolled in school in 2000). However, the assumption may be less plausible for Mexicans who
migrated as children and we may be assigning too much education to these workers. It turns out,
however, that only 20.6 percent of the Mexicans in our 2000 U.S. Census sample migrated
before age 14.11 We will show below that our results are not sensitive to alternative assumptions
about the educational attainment of this subsample of workers.

11

Although the potential misplacement of the “child immigrants” into more skilled groups could
potentially explain the large emigration rates of Mexican workers in the middle of the skill distribution, the
“adjusted” rates are still lower for high school dropouts. Suppose we assign all child immigrants from Mexico the
educational distribution of comparably aged Mexicans who did not emigrate. In 2000, this counterfactual increases
the emigration rate of high school dropouts with 0-8 years of schooling from 16.0 to 17.6 percent, and decreases the
emigration rate of high school graduates from 29.7 to 25.7 percent.

15
There also exist differences in the age structure of international migrants in the three
countries, and the nature of these differences changes over time. Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the
trends for Canada and the United States, respectively.12 In general, the recent immigrant influx to
the United States tends to most increase the supply of younger workers, while the influx in
Canada tends to most increase the supply of older workers. In 2001, the immigrant share among
the youngest college-educated Canadians was around 20 percent. In contrast, over 30 percent of
Canadian workers who are college graduates and have at least 30 years of experience were
foreign-born. In the United States, the immigrant share among younger college graduates
hovered around 12 percent, while the immigrant share among their older counterparts was 7
percent. The Canadian workers who are most likely to be adversely affected by immigration
seem to be a mirror image of the American workers who are most vulnerable to immigrantinduced supply shifts. In the United States, the targeted natives seem to be younger, low-skill
workers. In Canada, they seem to be older, high-skill workers.
Figure 5 shows the trends in Mexican emigration rates. There has been a significant
change in the age distribution of low-skill emigrants. Before 1990, emigration rates for low-skill
workers were either relatively constant across experience categories or tended to be higher for
older workers. By 2000, the emigration rates of high school dropouts exhibit an inverse-U shape:
emigration rates tend to be largest for high school dropouts with 15 to 25 years of experience.
The supply shifts illustrated in Figures 3-5 form the key independent variable in our
analysis. We wish to determine the link between these supply shifts and the evolution of wages
in each country. The earnings data are drawn from the respective Censuses. We restrict our
calculation of mean log earnings for each skill group (i.e., each s, x, t cell in each country) to

12

To avoid clutter, we only show the trend lines for selected Census years.

16
workers who, in addition to the restrictions listed earlier, are not enrolled in school and report
valid earnings information. Our sample extract includes both salaried and self-employed
workers. In the case of the Canadian and U.S. censuses, the earnings data refer to annual
earnings in the year prior to the Census. We use these data to construct measures of mean log
annual earnings and mean log weekly earnings for each cell. The Mexican census reports the
worker’s monthly earnings. All earnings are deflated to constant dollars (1999 for the United
States and 2000 for Canada and Mexico).
Figure 6 plots the time series of the wage gap between college graduates and high school
dropouts for both young (6 to 10 years of experience) and older (31 to 35 years of experience)
workers, as well as the wage gap between college graduates and high school graduates.13 The
relative wage of young high-educated workers rose in both Canada and the United States after
1980, but the trends differ for older workers: the relative wage of older college graduates rose in
the United States, but fell in Canada. It is curious that the workforce of older, high-skill workers
is the one that was hit hardest by immigrant-induced supply shifts in Canada. Although the
different evolution of the wage structure in the two countries has received a great deal of
attention, the factors generating these differences are still not well understood (Beaudry and
Green, 2000; Boudarbat, Lemieux, and Riddell, 2003; and Card and Lemieux, 2001).
The trends in the relative wage of high skill workers in Mexico bear little resemblance to
either the Canadian or U.S. trends. The relative wage of Mexican high-skill men fell
substantially before 1990, before rising slowly in the 1990s. The remainder of this paper attempts
to determine if the cross-country differences in the evolution of relative wages can be partly
understood in terms of the immigration-induced supply shifts experienced by each country.

17

5. Descriptive Results

Let ysxt denote the mean value of a particular labor market outcome for men who have
education s, experience x, and are observed at time t. We calculate ysxt using the sample of
native-born men in our study of the Canadian and U.S labor markets, and the sample of
Mexicans residing in Mexico (i.e., the “stayers”) in our study of the Mexican labor market. The
empirical analysis reported in this section stacks these data across skill groups and calendar years
and estimates the following regression model separately by country:

ysxt = θ psxt + S + X + T + (S × X) + (S × T) + (X × T) + ξsxt,

(2)

where S is a vector of fixed effects indicating the group’s educational attainment; X is a vector of
fixed effects indicating the group’s work experience; and T is a vector of fixed effects indicating
the time period. The linear fixed effects in equation (2) control for differences in labor market
outcomes across schooling groups, experience groups, and over time. The interactions (S × T)
and (X × T) allow for the impact of education and experience to change over time, and the
inclusion of the interaction (S × X) implies that the labor market impact of labor supply shocks is
identified using time-variation within education-experience cells. All regressions are weighted
by the number of observations used to calculate the dependent variable ysxt.14 The standard errors
are clustered by education-experience cells to adjust for possible serial correlation.

13

To simplify the presentation, Figure 6 pools together all persons with at least a college diploma in
Canada and the United States and pools together all high school dropouts in Mexico.
14

We normalized the sum of weights to equal 1 in each cross-section in the Canadian and U.S. regressions
to prevent the later censuses from contributing more to the results simply because population increased over time. In

18
The dependent variables used in our study of labor market outcomes in Canada and the
United States include the mean of log earned annual income and log earned weekly income, as
well as the fraction of weeks worked (defined as weeks worked in the calendar year prior to the
Census divided by 52 in a sample of all persons, including nonworkers). The Mexican census
provides limited information on labor market outcomes. We use the log of earned monthly
income.15 Because of differences in the coding of work status across survey years in the Mexican
census, we use the labor force participation rate of the skill group as a dependent variable.16
Table 1 reports the estimates of the adjustment coefficient θ. Row 1 presents the results
for Canada. Consider initially the case when the dependent variable is the log weekly earnings of
native Canadian workers. The coefficient is -0.507, with a standard error of 0.202. It is easier to
interpret this coefficient by converting it to an elasticity that gives the percent change in wages
associated with a percent change in labor supply. Let msxt = Msxt/Nsxt, or the immigrant-induced
percentage increase in the labor supply of group (s, x, t). We define the “wage elasticity” as:

∂ log wsxt
θ
.
=
(1+ msxt )2
∂msxt

(3)

Mexico, however, the pre-1990 Census represents roughly a 1 percent random sample, while the 1990 and 2000
Census represent a 10.0 percent random sample (the 1970 Mexican census has 483,000 observations and the 2000
census has 10.1 million observations). Because the pre-1990 cell means may be measured with error, we use the
actual sample size as the weight in all Mexican regressions. We also estimated unweighted specifications of the
regression models. The weighted and unweighted coefficients are similar for Canada and the United States, as well
as in Mexico for the post-1990 period.
15

The monthly income variable in the 1970 Mexican census includes earned and unearned income.

16 The 1960 Mexican census does not provide detailed information on a person’s work status. Hence our
analysis of labor force participation rates uses only the 1970-2000 surveys.

19
By 2000, immigration had increased the number of workers in the Canadian labor market by
25.8 percent. Equation (3) implies that the wage elasticity—evaluated at the mean value of the
immigrant supply increase—can be obtained by multiplying θ by approximately 0.63. The wage
elasticity for weekly earnings is then -0.32 (or -0.507 × 0.63). Put differently, a 10 percent
immigrant-induced increase in the number of workers in a particular skill group reduces the
wage of that group by 3.2 percent.17
The other coefficients reported in the first row of Table 1 indicate that immigration has a
slightly more negative impact on the annual earnings of native Canadian workers, implying that
immigration reduces their labor supply. In fact, the coefficient in the fraction of weeks worked
regression is negative and significant. An immigrant-induced 10 percent increase in labor supply
reduces annual earnings by 3.9 percent and the fraction of time worked by 1.5 percentage points.
Row 2 of Table 1 reports the corresponding estimates for the United States. The
estimated coefficient in the log weekly earnings regression is -0.489, with a standard error of
0.223. A test of equality for the adjustment coefficient in the log weekly earnings regression
estimated in Canada and the United States would obviously not reject the hypothesis that the two
coefficients are equal. By 2000, immigration had increased the number of male workers in the
U.S. labor market by 17.2 percent. Equation (3) implies that the wage elasticity can be estimated
by multiplying the coefficient θ by 0.73. The wage elasticity in the U.S. is then equal to -0.36,
essentially the same numerical response as in Canada. The data also indicate that annual earnings
are more sensitive to immigration in the United States than in Canada, mainly because the labor
supply of native workers in the United States is more sensitive to immigration (although the

17

The regression model in (2) uses the immigrant share, p, rather than the relative number of immigrants,
m, as the regressor because the labor market outcomes used in this paper tend to be nonlinearly related to m, and p is
approximately a linear function of log m.

20
hypothesis that the coefficients in the log annual earnings regressions are equal cannot be
rejected). An immigrant-induced 10 percent increase in supply reduces the fraction of time
worked by 2.5 percentage points, and reduces annual earnings by 6.2 percent.
Finally, row 3 of the table reports the results for Mexico. Our evidence confirms Mishra’s
(2005) finding of a positive correlation between the log monthly earnings of Mexican workers in
a particular skill group and the emigration rate of that group. The coefficient is +0.798 (0.443).
By 2000, the large-scale emigration of workers from Mexico had reduced the size of the
Mexican workforce by 19.1 percent, implying that the wage elasticity is obtained by multiplying
the adjustment coefficient times 0.70. The implied wage elasticity is +0.559, indicating that a 10percent emigrant-induced reduction in labor supply increases monthly earnings by 5.6 percent.
Given the relatively large standard errors of the adjustment coefficients, the data cannot reject
the hypothesis that the three wage elasticities are equal (in absolute value).
The inter-country comparison of the estimated elasticities is not straightforward because
it is difficult to interpret the Mexican monthly earnings data. First, the earnings data provided by
the 1970 Mexican census (total personal income) is not directly comparable to the data provided
by the other censuses (total earned income). However, the different earnings definitions across
survey years do not substantially bias the adjustment coefficient. The fourth row of Table 1 reestimates the model using only data drawn from the 1990 and 2000 cross-sections, and finds that
the adjustment coefficient is quite similar (0.841 with a standard error of 0.540).
It is also unclear if the elasticity estimated in a monthly earnings regression in Mexico is
more comparable to an elasticity estimated in an annual or weekly earnings regression in the
other countries. Workers were asked to report their earned income, and the census questionnaire
allowed several reporting options. Workers could report weekly, bimonthly, monthly, or annual

21
earnings. The Mexican census bureau then used these responses to construct the publicly
available “monthly earnings” variable.18 Although it is common for many Mexican workers to be
paid by the month, there is also a large seasonal component in employment, particularly in the
rural sector. As a result, variation in the monthly earnings measure may be capturing seasonal
differences in labor supply across workers (making Mexican monthly earnings conceptually
more similar to annual earnings in Canada or the United States). We re-estimated the regression
model using the subsample of urban Mexican workers, a subset of workers unlikely to be
affected by seasonal fluctuations in agricultural demand. Row 5 of Table 1 clearly shows a drop
in the estimate of the Mexican adjustment coefficient to +0.652 (0.419). The wage elasticity
implied by the regression in the urban workers sample is +0.46.
Table 1 also documents that the labor supply of Mexicans who remained behind is
positively affected by the emigration of their compatriots. We estimated equation (2) using the
labor force participation rate of the skill group as the dependent variable. The adjustment
coefficient is positive (though not significant).
Two technical issues are worth emphasizing. First, we assumed that immigrant-induced
supply shifts are exogenous. Income-maximizing behavior on the part of migrants suggests that
the immigration rate is higher when wages at the destination are relatively high, and that the
emigration rate is higher when wages at the source are relatively low. The endogeneity implies
that the negative wage effect of immigration estimated in receiving countries is a lower bound
for the true negative impact, and that the positive wage effect estimated in sending countries is a

18

The description of how monthly earnings were constructed does not seem to be publicly available.

22
lower bound for the true positive impact. In short, endogenous migration flows lead to an
understatement (in absolute value) of the true wage impact of migration.19
Second, the undercount problem in the U.S. Census implies that the Mexican emigration
rates are measured with error. The noise in the variable would attenuate the measured wage
impact of immigration. The undercount, however, may be larger in cells representing workers
with the lowest (unobserved) skills. This correlation would tend to make the adjustment
coefficient more positive. It is impossible, therefore, to sign the direction of the bias.
We conducted a variety of sensitivity tests to determine the robustness of our findings to
major specification changes. Table 2 reports the regression coefficient θ obtained from these
additional specifications using the log of annual earnings and the log of weekly earnings for
Canada and the United States, and the log of monthly earnings for Mexico. For reference
purposes, the first row of the table duplicates the baseline coefficients estimated in Table 1.
As noted earlier, we restrict our study to the sample of working men. The second row of
Table 2 reports the estimated coefficient θ when the measure of the immigrant or emigrant share
psxt uses information on both male and female workers. Despite the likely misclassification of
many women into the various experience categories, the estimated coefficients have roughly the
same numerical values as those reported in the baseline row. Similarly, row 3 shows that our
findings are unaffected even when we calculate the mean log earnings for the cell using the
sample of working men and women.
Row 4 returns to the baseline sample of male workers but reports the labor market impact
of immigration on salaried workers. The exclusion of the self-employed from the analysis in

19

A negative correlation between the wage of low-skill natives in the United States and immigration could
also arise if more recent cohorts of high school dropouts have lower unobserved productivity than earlier cohorts.

23
Canada and the United States leads to roughly similar adjustment coefficients as those reported
in the baseline row. The adjustment coefficient for Mexico, however, falls by about half, and is
less significant. Nevertheless, the use of the salaried sample leads to a remarkable aligning of the
adjustment coefficient across all three countries. The drop in the Mexican coefficient probably
occurs because, as noted earlier, the log of monthly earnings in the Mexican census may contain
an important labor supply component, and this labor supply variation may be substantially
greater among the self-employed.
Our empirical analysis has used a 5-year experience band to aggregate workers into the
various skill groups. As row 5 of Table 2 shows, the estimated coefficients are unaffected when
we exclude workers who have just entered the labor market (i.e., have fewer than 5 years of
experience) or workers who are about to retire (have more than 35 years of experience).
Similarly, row 6 indicates that the results are robust when we use a 10-year experience band (i.e.,
1-10 years of experience, 11-20 years, and so on) to define the skill groups.
The remaining rows of Table 2 show the sensitivity of the results to alternative
definitions of the schooling categories or to the wholesale exclusion of particular schooling
groups. For instance, we have used a five-way educational classification in all three countries.
Row 7 of the table illustrates what happens when we estimate the regressions using only 4
education groups by pooling all college graduates in Canada and the United States, and pooling
all high school dropouts in Mexico. As the table shows, a four-way classification of education
groups in the three countries actually leads to slightly more negative adjustment coefficients in
Canada and the United States, and a much more positive coefficient in Mexico.

The increasing negative selection of this population may have induced U.S. firms to increase their demand for lowskill immigrants. Although this is an interesting hypothesis, it has not been examined in the literature.

24
It is also of interest to determine if the results are driven by a particular education group.
Row 8 illustrates the impact of removing the sample of high school dropouts from the analysis in
the United States and Canada. The results for Canada are not greatly affected, but the results for
the United States become much weaker and are no longer statistically significant. Row 9 reports
an equally interesting exercise when we redefine the high school dropout category to include
only workers who have between 9 and 11 years of schooling. In 2000, only 22.3 percent of
native high school dropouts in the United States had fewer than 8 years of schooling, as
compared to 68.0 percent of foreign-born dropouts. It is unclear that the typical low-skill
immigrant competes in the same labor market as the typical native dropout. To analyze the
sensitivity of our results to this potential mismatch, we excluded from the calculation of both the
cell-specific labor market outcomes and supply shifts any workers who have fewer than 8 years
of school. The high school dropout category, therefore, now includes only workers who have 9 to
11 years of schooling. Row 9 of Table 2 shows that the estimated adjustment coefficients in the
United States are now negative, but have large standard errors.
Row 10 provides a mirror image result for Canada. If we omit all college graduates from
the analysis, the U.S. results are basically unchanged, but the Canadian adjustment coefficients
are near zero. If we only exclude the most highly educated workers from the data (workers with
post-graduate education), row 11 shows that the adjustment coefficients again becomes negative
and close in value to that presented in the baseline row. The lesson, therefore, seems to be that
the negative labor market impact of immigration remains visible as long as we do not remove
from the data almost all of the variation in the immigrant supply shock.
Finally, row 12 shows that the results are unchanged when we adjust the Mexican
emigration rates for the possibility that “child immigrants” would have obtained far less

25
education had they remained in Mexico. In particular, we assign each person who was 14 or
younger at the time of their emigration the educational distribution of comparably aged
Mexicans who remained in Mexico. Table 2 shows that this counterfactual measure of the
Mexican emigration rates barely changes the estimated wage impact of international migration
on Mexican wages.
In sum, a systematic study of wages in three countries greatly affected by immigration
reveals that immigrant-induced labor supply shifts generate opposite-signed changes in the wage,
as predicted by the simplest textbook model of a competitive labor market. Remarkably, these
wage responses seem to be of almost the same magnitude across countries. A 10 percent shift in
supply generates a 3 or 4 percent opposite-signed shift in wages.

6. Structural Estimates

6.1. Theory and Evidence
The descriptive exercise summarized in the previous section reveals an important inverse
correlation between supply shifts and wages. That exercise did not impose any theoretical
structure to estimate the response elasticities. A fuller understanding of the underlying
correlation (and of its implications) requires imposing more structure on the data by specifying
the technology of the aggregate production function and adding the profit-maximization
behavioral assumption. This structural approach makes it possible to estimate not only the effect
of a particular supply shift on the wage of competing workers, but also the cross-effects on the
wage of other workers.20

20 The three-level CES technology presented here slightly generalizes the two-level approach used by
Bowles (1970) and Card and Lemieux (2001).

26
As in Borjas (2003), suppose that the aggregate technology for a national economy at
time t is given by the linear homogeneous production function:

(4)

v 1/ v

v

Qt = (1 − λ Lt ) K t + λ Lt Lt 

,

where Q is output, K is capital, L denotes the aggregate labor input, and v = 1 – 1/σKL, with σKL
being the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor (–∞ < v ≤ 1). The aggregate Lt
incorporates the contributions of workers who differ in both education and experience. Let:

(5)


ρ 
Lt = ∑ θst Lst 
 s


1/ ρ

,

where Lst gives the number of workers with education s at time t, and ρ = 1 – 1/σE, with σE being
the elasticity of substitution across these education aggregates (–∞ < ρ ≤ 1). The θit give
technology parameters that shift the relative productivity of education groups, with Σi θit = 1.
Finally, the supply of workers in each education group is itself given by an aggregation of the
contribution of similarly educated workers with different experience. In particular:

(6)


η 
Lst = ∑ α sxt Lsxt 
 x


1/ η

,

where Lsxt gives the number of workers in education group s and experience group x at time t;
and η = 1 – 1/σX, with σX being the elasticity of substitution across experience classes within an

27
education group (–∞ < η ≤ 1), with Σx αsxt = 1. Note that equation (6) implicitly assumes that
native and immigrant workers with the same education and experience are perfect substitutes in
production. We will test the validity of this assumption below.
The elasticities of substitution σX and σE can be estimated from a two-equation system
using the data on mean wages and immigrant supply shifts summarized in the previous sections.
Profit maximization implies that the wage for skill group (s, x, t) can be written as:

(7)

log wsxt = δt + δ st + δ sxt −

1
log Lsxt ,
σX

where δt = log λLt + (1 – v) log Qt + (v – ρ) log Lt, and is absorbed by period fixed effects; δst =
log θst + (ρ – η) log Lst, and is absorbed by interactions between the education fixed effects and
the period fixed effects; and δsxt = log αsxt. The vector δsxt cannot be absorbed by educationexperience-period fixed effects because there would be as many fixed effects as there are
observations. An identifying assumption is that δsxt can be decomposed into a portion that is
time-invariant plus a random term. This assumption gives a stochastic version of equation (7):

(7′)

log wsxt = δt + δ st + δ sx −

1
log Lsxt + υsxt ,
σX

The vector δsx is now absorbed by interactions between education fixed effects and experience
fixed effects. The regression model in (7′), therefore, identifies the elasticity of substitution
across experience groups.

28
Because the coefficients of the education-experience interactions in (7′) identify log αsx,
the estimates of αsx and σX permit the calculation of Lst, the CES-weighted aggregate for
education group s.21 We can then move up one level in the CES technology, and recover the
elasticity of substitution across education groups. Let log wst be the mean log wage paid to the
average worker in education group s at time t. The marginal productivity condition determining
the wage for this group is:

log wst = δt + log θst −

(8)

1
log Lst .
σE

This equation is closely related to the relative demand function estimated by Katz and Murphy
[1992, p. 69] that examines how the skill wage differential varies with relative supplies in the
United States. Note that σE cannot be identified if the regression included interactions of
education-period fixed effects to absorb the term log θst. There would be as many fixed effects as
there are observations. We initially use the Katz-Murphy identifying assumption that the
technology shifters can be approximated by a linear trend that varies across education groups and
an uncorrelated residual.22 We can then rewrite equation (8) as:

log wst = δt + education-specificlinear trends −

(8′)

21

1
log Lst + ξst .
σE

ˆ ij is an estimated fixed effect coefficient, then αˆ ij = exp(log αˆ ij ) / ∑ j exp(log αˆ ij ), which imposes
If log α

the restriction that the sum of the α’s is 1. This calculation ignores the random time variation in the αsx. We also
estimated the second-stage models using actual employment as the independent variable, rather than the CES
aggregate. The results were very similar to those reported below.

29

Ordinary least squares regressions of equations (7′) and (8′) may lead to biased estimates
of σX and σË because the supply of workers to the various education groups is likely to be
endogenous. We assume that the immigrant or emigrant influx in a particular country provides
the supply shifter that identifies the labor demand function. This instrument is valid if the flow of
international migrants into or out of particular skill groups were independent of the relative
wages offered to the various skill categories. However, the number of international migrants in a
skill group likely responds to shifts in the wage structure. Income-maximizing behavior on the
part of potential immigrants (emigrants) would generate larger (smaller) supplies in those skill
cells that had relatively high (low) wages. This behavioral response builds in a positive
correlation between the number of migrants and wages in a skill group. The IV coefficients,
therefore, understate the negative wage impact of a relative supply increase.
Finally, the empirical implementation of the three-level CES technology described above
does not use any data on the aggregate capital stock, making it difficult to separately identify the
value of σKL. We will discuss below plausible assumptions that can be made about this parameter
to simulate the impact of immigration on the labor market.
The first row of Table 3 reports the estimated σX for Canada, Mexico, and the United
States.23 In the United States, our estimate of 1/σX is 0.321 (with a standard error of 0.120). This
implies an elasticity of substitution across experience groups of around 3. The same regression

22

The Katz-Murphy assumption is based on an analysis of U.S. wages trends and may not hold in other
countries. We address this point in more detail below.
23

The coefficient of the instrument in the reduced-form regression is 0.940 (0.058) in Canada; 0.278
(0.078) in the United States; and 0.240 (0.173) in Mexico. The F-statistic is above the threshold required to reject
the hypothesis that the immigrant influx is a weak instrument (an F-statistic above 10) in Canada and the United
States, but not in Mexico.

30
estimated in Canada yields the much lower estimate for 1/σX of 0.030 (0.015), while the same
regression estimated in Mexico implies that 1/σX equals 0.286 (0.136). The estimate of σX in
Canada, therefore, represents an outlier.
As noted above, the framework imposed an important restriction in the estimation of σX.
In particular, equation (7) does not include any fixed effects to absorb experience-specific
changes in wages over time (the X × T fixed effects). This restriction follows directly from the
identifying assumption that the coefficients αsx were time-invariant. One simple way of relaxing
this assumption is to allow for linear trends, specific to each experience group, that influence the
evolution of wages (see Card and Lemieux, 2001, Table 4). Row 2 of Table 3 includes these
experience-specific trends. The estimated 1/σX now falls within a narrower range for all three
countries: 0.135 (0.037) for Canada; 0.122 (0.038) for the United States; and 0.234 (0.072) for
Mexico. These coefficients imply an elasticity of substitution across experience groups of
between 4 and 8. Note that the estimated coefficients are only a bit lower than those estimated by
Card and Lemieux (2001, Table 4) using a very different conceptual experiment, where the
estimate of 1/σX lies between 0.17 and 0.20 in Canada and the United States.
We use the elasticities of substitution estimated in row 2 to calculate the CES-weighted
aggregates of the workforce for each education group. As noted earlier, we initially assume that
the pattern of demand shifts for the various education groups can be approximated by educationspecific linear trends. Row 3 of Table 3 reports the estimates obtained from this specification.
The IV estimate of the coefficient of the log of the number of workers in a skill group (which
estimates the parameter −1/σE) is negative in the United States (−0.273, with a standard error of

31
0.153), essentially zero in Canada, and very large and negative in Mexico (a coefficient of −2.02,
with a standard error of 1.59).24
Other studies have found that the coefficient estimating the relation between relative
wages of different education groups in Canada and relative supplies is nearly zero when one
assumes a linear trend (Card and Lemieux, 2001, Table 4). Beaudry and Green (2000) conclude
that the Katz-Murphy linear trend assumption does not fit the Canadian data and may not provide
a useful simplification for understanding how relative supplies affect the wage gap across
different education groups in Canada.
In fact, Autor, Katz and Kearny (2004) have recently argued that the linear trend
assumption also fails to capture what happened to the U.S. wage structure after 1992. They
document a 20 percent decline in the secular growth rate of demand for skilled workers during
the 1990s as compared to the growth rate prior to the 1990s. To capture this break in the linear
trend, we included education-specific splines in equation (8) that allow for a change in the
intercept and a change in the slope of the trend in the 1990s. Row 4 of Table 3 shows that the
estimate of 1/σE with this nonlinear trend is 0.327, although it is estimated imprecisely.25 This
point estimate implies that the elasticity of substitution across education groups is 3.1, roughly
twice the size of the Katz-Murphy estimate of 1.4.

24 The coefficient of the instrument in the reduced-form regression is 0.799 (0.117) in Canada; 0.665
(0.184) in the United States; and -0.701 (0.538) in Mexico. The F-statistic is above the threshold required to reject
the hypothesis that the immigrant influx is a weak instrument in Canada and the United States, but not in Mexico.
25 The elasticity of substitution is more precisely estimated by building in the Autor, Katz, and Kearny
(2005) results directly into the calculation. They specify the trend (t) in the United States as β1t + β2dt, where d is a
dummy variable indicating an observation after 1992. Rewrite the trend as β1(1 + dr)t, where r = β2/β1. Autor, Katz,
and Kearny estimate r = −0.2, so that we can redefine the trend variable as increasing at the rate of one per year
between 1960 and 1990, and increasing at the rate of 0.8 per year between 1990 and 2000. The estimate of 1/σE
obtained by this method is 0.347, with a standard error of 0.253.

32
The nature of the nonlinearity in education-specific relative demand shifts in Canada is
not well understood. We again introduce splines to allow for different slopes in the trend
coefficient for each decade (i.e., the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s). In addition, we allow the
trend to have a different intercept in the 1990s, a decade where the Canadian wage structure is
perceived to have changed substantially. The introduction of this nonlinearity leads to an
estimate of 1/σE that is much more similar to that found in the United States. The estimate
reported in row 4 of Table 3 is 0.416 (0.137), implying an elasticity of substitution across
education groups of about 2.4.
The estimated elasticity of substitution across education groups in Mexico is also
sensitive to the assumption made about the trend in relative demand shifts of education groups.
The analysis of the Mexican data, however, requires additional consideration because there are
fewer observations available. The second-stage regression in the Mexican analysis has only 20
observations (4 cross-sections and 5 education groups). The introduction of education-specific
generalized nonlinear trends would almost exhaust all available degrees of freedom. To allow
identification, we instead assume that the structure of relative demand shifts differs mainly
between the workers who are high school dropouts (the bulk of the workforce) and all other
workers. In effect, we save degrees of freedom by restricting the education-specific trends to be
the same for all workers with at least a high school diploma (and allow different trends for each
of the two groups of high school dropouts). We then define education-specific linear trends,
education-specific splines (starting in 1990), and education-specific shifters in the trend (again
beginning in 1990). Row 4 of Table 3 reports the estimated coefficient to be -0.355 (0.099),
implying an elasticity of substitution across education groups of 2.8.

33
Although it is reassuring that the results tend to be more similar across countries once we
carefully consider the identification issues regarding relative shifts in demand, we emphasize that
the estimates should be interpreted with caution. The shape of the trend used to proxy for
changes in relative demand plays a crucial role in the identification of the elasticity of
substitution across education groups, and different assumptions about the trend lead to very
different estimates of this elasticity. Put bluntly, the assumption that must be made about trends
in relative demand shifts in order to estimate σE “may not be innocuous” (Card and Lemieux,
2004, p. 713). Our own experience suggests that the estimated second-stage coefficient (for all
three countries) tends to be more negative once we introduce some nonlinearity in the demand
shocks. The results summarized in Table 3, therefore, are representative of a variety of different
specifications that lead to roughly similar results.
Further, although this framework offers an empirically tractable approach, the CES
specification greatly restricts the types of substitution that can exist among the various factors.
For example, the elasticity of substitution across experience groups takes on the same value even
though the different cohorts of workers vary widely in their experience; the elasticity of
substitution across education groups takes on the same value even though the skill groups vary
widely in their education; and the restrictions on the elasticity of substitution between capital and
labor do not allow for capital-skill complementarity.
Finally, some studies question the assumption that immigrant and native workers are
perfect substitutes within a given skill group (Cortes, 2005; Jaeger, 1996; and Ottaviano and
Peri, 2006). It is easy to show that our definition of skill groups is sufficiently narrow that the
hypothesis of perfect substitution within a skill cell cannot be rejected. To see this, consider the
implied fourth-level CES equation giving the number of workers in each (s, x, t) cell:

34

γ

γ

1/ γ

Lsxt =  ϕ sxt N sxt + (1 − ϕ sxt ) M sxt 

(9)

,

where γ = 1 – 1/σMN, with σMN being the elasticity of substitution between immigrant and native
workers in the same skill group (and –∞ < γ ≤ 1). The marginal productivity conditions imply:

(10)

log

M
M 
wsxt
1
log  sxt  ,
= ρ sxt −
N
σ MN
wsxt
 N sxt 

M
N
where wsxt
and wsxt
give the wage of immigrant and native workers in cell (s, x, t), respectively;

and ρsxt = log [ϕsxt/(1 - ϕsxt)]. An identifying assumption must be made about the vector ρsxt.
Suppose the vector can be approximated by fixed effects indicating a specific educationexperience group, by fixed effects indicating the time period of the observation, and an
uncorrelated error term. The estimated coefficient of the relative supply variable in equation (10)
is +0.016 (0.015) in Canada and +0.005 (0.013) in the United States.26 Although the coefficients
have the wrong sign, the numerical (and statistical) value of the coefficients is effectively zero—
implying that immigrants and natives (within narrowly defined skill groups) are perfect

26

The regressions use weights defined by (nM nN/(nM + nN)), where nM and nN are the number of
observations used to calculate the mean wage of immigrants and natives, respectively. Our conclusion of a very high
elasticity of substitution does not hinge on the identifying assumption made about the vector ρsxt. Suppose that ρsxt
is a constant. We can then simply regress relative wages on relative supplies. The estimate of 1/σMN is 0.030 (0.012)
in Canada and 0.003 (0.006) in the United States. It is worth noting that we were unable to replicate the OttavianoPeri (2006) finding of imperfect substitution in the United States regardless of the identifying restrictions we impose
on the vector ρsxt . Hence our results are much more in line with those of Jaeger (1996), who concludes that
immigrants and natives are perfect substitutes. We cannot estimate the model in the Mexican data because we do not
observe the Mexican earnings of the emigrants.

35
substitutes in both countries. We will maintain the assumption of perfect substitution throughout
the rest of the analysis.

6.2. Simulating the Wage Effects of Immigration
The factor price elasticity giving the impact on the wage of factor y of an increase in the
supply of factor z is defined as:

(11)

ε yz =

d log w y
d log Lz

= γz

Q yz Q
Q y Qz

.

where γz is the share of income accruing to factor z; and Qy = ∂Q/∂Ly, Qz = ∂Q/∂Lz, and Qyz =
∂2Q/∂Ly∂Lz. The 3-level CES structure implies that the own factor price elasticity giving the
wage impact of an increase in the supply of workers with education s and experience x is:

(12)

ε sx , sx = −

 1
1  1
1 γ
1  γ sx
1
+
−  sx + 
−
γ sx ,
 +
σ X  σ X σ E  γ s  σ E σ KL  γ L σ KL

where γsx gives the share of income accruing to group (s, x); γs gives the share of income
accruing to education group s; and γL gives labor’s share of income. The cross factor price
elasticity giving the impact on the wage of group (s, x) of an increase in the supply of group (s, x′
), with x ≠ x′, is

(13)

 1
 1
1 γ
1  γ sx′
1
ε sx , sx′ = 
−  sx′ + 
−
+
γ sx′ .

 σ X σ E  γ s  σ E σ KL  γ L σ KL

36

Finally, the cross factor price elasticity giving the impact on the wage of group (s, x) of an
increase in the supply of group (s′, x′ ), with s ≠ s′ and x′ = (1,. . ., x, . . .8), is

 1
1  γ s′x′
1
ε sx , s′x′ = 
−
+
γ s′x′ .

 σ E σ KL  γ L σ KL

(14)

The factor price elasticities depend on the various elasticities of substitution and factor
shares. We assume that labor’s share of income is 0.62 in Canada, 0.7 in the United States, and
0.67 in Mexico.27 We use the latest cross-section available for each of the three countries to
apportion the assumed aggregate labor share among the various education-experience groups.28
For each country, the simulations use the estimated elasticity of substitution across
experience groups obtained in the generalized specification (row 2 in Table 3), and the estimated
elasticity of substitution across education groups estimated from the nonlinear trend specification
(row 4 in Table 3). The simulations also require an assumption about σKL. We use three
alternative assumptions: 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5. In the U.S. context, Hamermesh (1993, p. 92)
concludes that the aggregate U.S. economy can be reasonably described by a Cobb-Douglas
production function, suggesting σKL equals one. Although σKL is often assumed to be 1.0 in
Canada, some evidence suggests that it may be closer to 0.5 (Perrier, 2005). Finally, Shah (1992)
estimates that σKL is around 0.9 in the Mexican economy.

27

These assumptions are based on the estimates of Autor, Katz, and Krueger (1998) for the United States,
and International Monetary Fund (2004) for Mexico. We used data on total labor compensation and total value
added of the business sector for 1961-2001 to compute the Canadian labor share.
28

We use annual earnings (monthly earnings in the case of Mexico) for men and women to calculate the
fraction of all reported earnings accruing to each education-experience cell.

37
We use the calculated elasticities of factor price to simulate the impact of the flow of
international migrants entering (or leaving) a particular country in the 1980-2000 period. The
marginal productivity condition for a worker in education group s and experience group x can be
written as wsx = D(K, L), where L is a vector giving the number of workers in each educationexperience group. Suppose initially that the capital stock is constant. The short-run impact of
immigration on the log wage of group (s, x) is:

(15)

∆ log wsx =

∑∑ ε
i

sx ,ij

mij ,

j

where msx gives the migrant-induced percent change in labor supply in cell (s, x). Because we are
interested in simulating the impact of the cohort that migrated between 1980 and 2000, our
simulation of the Canadian and U.S. labor markets defines the supply shock as:

(16a)

msx =

M sx ,2000 − M sx ,1980
,
0.5( N sx ,1980 + N sx ,2000 ) + M sx ,1980

so that the baseline population used to calculate the percent increase in labor supply averages out
the size of the native workforce during the 1980-2000 period and treats the pre-existing
immigrant population as part of the “native” stock.
We do not have Mexican census data for 1980. Nevertheless, we can calculate the impact
of the 1980-2000 emigrant flow because our emigration data is drawn from the U.S. Census. We
define the supply shock used in the Mexican simulation as:

38

(16b)

msx =

M sx ,2000 − M sx ,1980
,
0.5( N sx ,1990 + N sx ,2000 ) + ( M sx ,2000 − M sx ,1980 )

where we use the average size of the “stayer” workforce (i.e., Mexicans who remained in
Mexico) over the 1990-2000 period, and we ignore the emigrants who had left Mexico prior to
1980 in calculating the percent change in labor supply attributable to emigration.
Table 4 summarizes the results of the simulation. Consider initially the top panel, which
presents the results for Canada. The first row reports the measure of the supply shock attributable
to the 1980-2000 immigrant influx. This immigrant influx increased labor supply by 13.2
percent. The next three rows report the results of the simulation implied by equation (15), where
the average percent wage change calculated for each education group is obtained by weighting
the predicted impact for each education-experience cell by the income share accruing to that cell.
Regardless of the assumed value of the elasticity of substitution between capital and
labor, the short-run simulation reveals that low-skill workers either lost slightly or gained from
the immigrant influx, while high-skill workers lost substantially. If we assume that σKL is 1.0, the
simulation reveals that the wage of high school dropouts rose by 2.8 percent, the wage of high
school graduates fell by 1.2 percent, and the wage of workers with a post-graduate degree fell by
almost 13 percent.
Of course, over time the capital stock adjusts as investors take advantage of the higherthan-normal rental rate of capital. If the capital stock adjusted completely to the immigrant
influx, the rental rate would return to its pre-existing level. This alternative counterfactual
implies that the long-run impact of immigration on the log wage of group (s, x) is given by:

39
∆ log wsx =

(17)

γK 
K + ∑∑ ε sx ,ij mij ,
σ KL
i
j

where γK is capital’s share of income; and K is the percent change in the capital stock induced
by immigration. The optimal change in the capital stock, K , is given by a weighted average of
the immigrant supply shocks in the various skill groups, where the weights are the income shares
accruing to the various education-experience cells.29 Note that equation (17) differs from
equation (15) only by a positive constant, ( γ k / σ KL ) K . Full capital adjustment mutes the adverse

wage impact of immigration but leaves the relative wage effects unchanged. In fact, because the
aggregate production function in equation (4) has constant returns, immigration induces a
corresponding shift in the capital stock that leaves the capital/labor ratio and the average wage
unchanged (where the average wage is the weighted average of the group-specific wage changes
in (17), weighted by the group’s income share). Moreover, the long-run average effects do not
depend on the value of the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor.30
The possibility that the capital stock is not constant as immigrants enter the country may
be particularly important in the Canadian context, where some visas are granted to independent
migrants under the investor category. These investor-immigrants must make investments in
Canada. An investor makes a prescribed investment of $400,000 payable to the Receiver General
of Canada. These funds are allocated to participating provinces and territories in Canada, which

29

To simplify notation, let ℓ be the subscript indicating the education-experience skill group. The
immigrant-induced change in the capital stock is K = ∑ γ A mA / γ L .
A

30

The long-run simulation assumes that the rental rate of return to capital adjusts back to what it was in the
pre-immigration regime. Other flows of goods and capital may have altered the rate of return to capital in all three
countries. We ignore the existence and impact of these flows.

40
typically use the funds for job creation and economic development. The full amount of the
investment (without interest) is repaid to the investor after approximately five years.
The long-run simulation reported in Table 4 indicates that low-skill workers in Canada
have gained substantially from the country’s pursuit of an immigration policy that encourages
the admission of high-skill workers, while high-skill workers have lost. In particular, the wage of
high school dropouts rose by 7.8 percent, while the wage of workers with at least a college
education fell by 6 to 8 percent. Put differently, immigration increased the wage of high school
dropouts relative to that of college graduates by at least 13 percent.
It is worth emphasizing that the CES technology explicitly assumed that the elasticity of
substitution between capital and labor is the same for all labor groups. This assumption
contradicts the well-established empirical finding of capital-skill complementarity. Allowing for
capital-skill complementarity could have a substantial impact on the Canadian results. The
admission of large numbers of high-skill immigrants in Canada would have induced more capital
accumulation than allowed for by the model, leading to an even greater damping of the adverse
wage effects of immigration for the highly skilled.
As we emphasized earlier, the estimates of the various elasticities of substitution are
extremely sensitive to the assumptions made regarding the trend in the relative demand shifts.
We evaluate the robustness of the simulation results to these assumptions by instead using the
own wage elasticity estimated in the descriptive regressions of Section 5. The regression
coefficients reported in Table 1 (from a generic regression of log weekly earnings on the size of
the immigrant supply shock and various vectors of fixed effects) indicate that the own wage
elasticity in Canada is -0.32. The “non-structural elasticity” row in Table 4 uses this estimate of
the own elasticity and sets all cross-elasticities to zero to simulate the impact of immigration on

41
the Canadian wage structure.31 The non-structural predictions are very similar to those obtained
from the structural model when one assumes that the elasticity of substitution between capital
and labor is around 1.0. Although the structural approach provides a more complete picture of
how supply shocks propagate themselves through the labor market, the implications of the
structural evidence are similar to those of the simpler correlations estimated in Section 5.
It is of interest to compare these predicted wage shifts with what actually happened to the
Canadian wage distribution. The bottom row of the top panel reports the change in the (real) log
weekly wage of each education group between 1980 and 2000. All education groups suffered a
decline in the real wage between 1980 and 2000. It is evident that immigration into Canada
cannot explain the differences in relative wage shifts across education groups. There are clearly

many other factors that affect the Canadian wage structure and that have been essentially
absorbed by the fixed effects included in the regression models. Note, however, that immigration
may be a crucial factor in accounting for the disproportionately large drop in real wages suffered
by workers with post-graduate degrees. Regardless of the assumption made about the elasticity
of substitution, and regardless of whether the simulation is conducted in the short or long run, the
immigrant-induced relative wage drop for this group is larger than the real wage drop that
actually occurred. Immigration, in effect, prevented the real wage of the most educated workers
in Canada from increasing more dramatically, as it did in the United States.
In contrast to the immigrant-induced narrowing of the wage distribution that occurred in
Canada, immigration into the United States widened the wage distribution. The 1980-2000 influx
increased the average size of the workforce by 11.1 percent, but the supply shock was greater for

31

Because cross-elasticities of factor price are typically very small, the assumption that they are zero is not
a gross distortion. In Canada, the cross-elasticity of log weekly wages with respect to shifts in the number of
workers in other skill groups is smaller than 0.05 (in absolute value). This evidence is consistent with the full set of
cross-elasticities reported in Borjas (2003, p. 1367) for the United States.

42
low-skill workers. If the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor is 1.0, the short-run
simulation reveals that immigration lowered the wage of high school dropouts by 7.1 percent, the
wage of workers in the middle of the education distribution by about 2.5 percent, and the wage
of workers with at least a college education by nearly 4 percent. These predictions of the
structural model closely correspond with those predicted by the non-structural wage elasticity
estimated earlier in the paper. In the long run, the simulation indicates a drop of 3.8 percent in
the relative wage of high school dropouts, a 1 percent gain in the relative wage of workers in the
middle of the education distribution, and a slight reduction in the wage of highly educated
workers.
The United States actually experienced a 19.8 percent decline in the real wage of high
school dropouts, an 8.2 percent increase in the real wage of college graduates, and a 20.0 percent
increase in the wage of workers with a post-graduate education. Therefore, immigration cannot
explain the trend in real wages for high-skill workers, but it played an important role in reducing
the real wage of low-skill workers. The short-run simulation implies that immigration accounts
for about 40 percent of the real wage drop for high school dropouts, while the long-run
simulation places the impact of immigration at about 20 percent.
Finally, the Mexican simulation leads to an unexpected conclusion. Even though the
1980-2000 emigrant flow reduced the size of the Mexican workforce by 14.6 percent, and even
though most Mexican immigrants in the United States are high school dropouts, the high school
dropouts remaining in Mexico did not gain much from this exodus and may lose slightly in the
long run! Emigration rates are higher for workers in the middle of the education distribution. As
a result, Mexican “stayers” with medium levels of education experienced a substantial increase
in real wages. If the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor is 1.0, large-scale

43
emigration increased the wage of workers with high school diplomas or some college by over 10
percent in the short run, and increased the wage of high school dropouts by only 4 percent. If the
capital stock fully adjusted, Mexican emigration would increase the wage of workers in the
middle of the education distribution by 5 to 8 percent, but reduce the wage of high school
dropouts by 1 percent. Paradoxically, even though most Mexican immigrants in the United States
are high school dropouts, the skill composition of the outflow ends up lowering the relative wage
of the high school dropouts remaining in Mexico. The explanation of the paradox lies in the fact
that the higher emigration rates of workers with “medium” levels of education makes the skills
provided by the high school dropouts remaining in Mexico relatively more abundant.
It is of interest to compare these predicted wage changes with what actually happened in
the Mexican labor market between 1990 and 2000 (the 1980 wage data is not available).32 The
largest real wage increases occurred for workers with the highest education levels, particularly
for workers with some college, and the smallest wage increase (particularly in the urban sample
that more finely controls for labor supply differences) occurs among high school dropouts.
Because many other factors are at work, it is difficult to isolate the role of emigration in the
evolution of the wage structure. Nevertheless, it is clear that the outflow of very large numbers of
high school dropouts did not increase the relative wage of the low-skill Mexican workforce.

7. Summary

One of the central questions in the economics of immigration concerns the impact of
immigrants on the labor markets of sending and receiving countries. Economic theory suggests

32 The calculation of the actual change in the real wage incorporates the 1000-to-1 Mexican peso
devaluation in 1994 and the 477.8 percent inflation rate reported by the Bank of Mexico. Given the large numbers

44
that, at least in the short run, immigrant-induced shifts in labor supply should lead to oppositesigned changes in the wage of competing workers. This wage response is a crucial parameter not
only in the study of the efficiency and distributional impact of international migration, but also in
the policy debate over how to best regulate the population flows.
This paper uses microdata drawn from the national censuses of Canada, the United
States, and Mexico, and applies the same methodological framework to these data to measure the
impact of international migration on the labor market. Perhaps the most important finding is that
there is a numerically sizable, statistically significant, and roughly comparable inverse relation
between immigrant-induced shifts in labor supply and wages in each of the three countries: A 10
percent labor supply shift is associated with a 3 or 4 percent opposite-signed change in wages.
Despite this similarity, the impact of migration on the wage structure differs significantly
across countries. In Canada, international migration narrowed wage inequality because
immigrants in Canada tend to be disproportionately high-skill. In the United States, international
migration increased wage inequality because immigrants in the United States tend to be
disproportionately low-skill. In Mexico, however, emigration rates are highest in the middle of
the skill distribution and lowest at the extremes. As a result, international migration has greatly
increased relative wages in the middle of the Mexican skill distribution and lowered the relative
wages at the extremes. Paradoxically, the large-scale migration of workers from Mexico reduced
slightly the relative wage of the low-skill workers remaining in that country.
Our study focused exclusively on the cross-country differences in the distributional
impact of international migration. Many questions remain unexamined. It would be interesting to
determine if these international differences in distributional impacts have been accompanied by
involved in these adjustments, the numerical value of the percent change in the real wage should be interpreted with
caution. The change in relative wages across education groups, however, is invariant to the deflators used.

45
sizable differences in the efficiency gains. Further, our analysis ignored the many factors that tie
together the labor markets of the three countries. In theory, the flows of international migrants
across the three countries—there is, after all a sizable population flow not only from Mexico to
the United States, but also from Canada to the United States—should accelerate the process of
income convergence in the North American continent. Moreover, the launching of the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in January 1994 will influence the rate of income
convergence and the size and skill composition of the inter-country population flows. The
inclusion of the key variables that tie together these labor markets would greatly increase our
understanding not only of a central question in the economics of immigration, but also of the
central question in labor economics: how do labor markets work?

46
Appendix: Data
Canada:

The data are drawn from the 1971, 1981, 1986, 1991, 1996 and 2001 Canadian Census
microdata files maintained by Statistics Canada. Each of these confidential data files represents a
20 percent sample of the Canadian population, except for the 1971 file which represents a 33.3
percent sample. Statistics Canada also provides Public Use Microdata Files to Canadian postsecondary institutions and to other researchers. The public use samples represent a much smaller
proportion of the Canadian population (e.g., a 2.7 percent sample in 2001). The analysis is
restricted to men aged 18-64. A person is classified as an immigrant if he reports being a landed
immigrant in the Canadian census, and is either a noncitizen or a naturalized Canadian citizen;
all other persons are classified as natives. Sampling weights are used in all calculations.
Definitions of education and experience: We use the Census variables dgreer indicating

“highest degree, certificate and diploma” and trnucr indicating “trade or non-university
certificate” for the 1981 to 2001 Censuses to classify workers into five education groups: high
school dropouts; workers with either a high school diploma or a vocational degree; workers with
both a high school and vocational degree or a post-secondary certificate or diploma below
Bachelor’s degree; Bachelor’s degree holders; and post-graduate degree holders. The coding of
the relevant variables changes across Censuses. For the 2001 Census these five groups are
identified by i) dgreer=1 or 11; ii) dgreer=2 or (dgreer=3 and trnucr ≠ 5 and trnucr ≠ 7); iii)
dgreer=4 or dgreer=5 or (dgreer=3 and trnucr=5 or 7); iv) dgreer=6; and v) dgreer=7, 8, 9 or

10. The highest degree variable in the 1971 Census only identifies university degree, certificate
and diploma holders (and aggregates all others as “not applicable”). We rely on years of grade
school (highgrad), vocational training (training), and years of post-secondary education below
university (otheredu) to make the 1971 classifications comparable to later Census years. Our
construction of the education categories in 1971 assumes that if a worker does not have a
Bachelor’s degree but has 2 or more years of post-secondary education below university level,
that worker possesses a post-secondary certificate or diploma. We also assume that Canadians
who have eleven or more years of grade school and were born in Newfoundland or Quebec
Provinces are high school graduates. All other Canadian-born and all immigrant men need 12 or
more years of grade school to be considered high school graduates. This assumption recognizes
the existence of different schooling systems across provinces and assumes that a Canadian-born

47
worker’s entire grade school education is completed in the province where they were born.
Canadian censuses also provide detailed information on the number of years an individual
attended grade school (the variable hgradr in the 2000 census), post secondary education below
university (ps_otr), and university (ps_uvr). We calculate the total years of schooling by adding
these variables and define work experience as Age - Years of Education - 6. We restrict the
analysis to persons who have between 1 and 40 years of experience. Workers are classified into
one of 8 experience groups. The experience groups are defined in five-year intervals (1-5 years
of experience, 6-10, 11-15, 16-20, 21-25, 26-30, 31-35, and 36-40).
Counts of persons in education-experience groups: The counts are calculated in the

sample of men who do not reside in collective households, have a positive value for weeks
worked in the previous calendar year, are not enrolled in school, and are not in the armed forces
during the reference week. Because the 1986 census does not provide school attendance
information, the construction of the 1986 sample ignores the school enrollment restriction.
Annual and weekly earnings: We use the sample of men who do not reside in collective

households, reported positive weeks worked and hours worked (during the reference week), are
not in the armed forces in the reference week, and report positive earnings (sum of wages, farmi,
and selfi variables, using the variable names corresponding to the 2001 Census). The 1971
census reports weeks worked in the calendar year prior to the survey as a categorical variable.
We impute weeks worked for each worker as follows: 7 weeks for 1 to 13 weeks, 20 for 14-26
weeks, 33 for 27-39 weeks, 44 for 40-48 weeks and 50.5 for 49-52 weeks. The average log
earnings for a skill cell is defined as the mean of log annual earnings or log weekly earnings over
all workers in the relevant population.
Fraction of time worked: We use the sample of men who do not reside in collective

households and are not enrolled in school (with the exception of the 1986 Census where school
attendance information is not available). The fraction of time worked for each person is defined
as the ratio of weeks worked (including zeros) to 52.
United States:

The data are drawn from the 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Integrated Public Use
Microdata Samples (IPUMS) of the U.S. Census. In the 1960 Census, the data extract forms a 1
percent sample of the population. In the 1970 Census, the extract forms a 3 percent sample

48
(obtained by pooling the state, metropolitan area, and neighborhood files). Beginning in 1980,
the extracts form a 5 percent sample. The analysis is restricted to men aged 18-64. A person is
classified as an immigrant if he was born abroad and is either a non-citizen or a naturalized
citizen; all other persons are classified as natives. Sampling weights are used in all calculations.
Definition of education and experience: We use the IPUMS variable educrec to first

classify workers into four education groups: high school dropouts (educrec <= 6), high school
graduates (educrec = 7), persons with some college (educrec = 8), college graduates (educrec =
9). The college graduate sample is split into workers with 16 years of schooling or with postgraduate degrees using the variables higrade (in 1960-1980) and educ99 (1990-2000). We
assume that high school dropouts enter the labor market at age 17, high school graduates at age
19, persons with some college at age 21, college graduates at age 23, and workers with postgraduate degrees at age 25, and define work experience as the worker’s age at the time of the
survey minus the assumed age of entry into the labor market. We restrict the analysis to persons
who have between 1 and 40 years of experience. Workers are classified into one of 8 experience
groups, defined in five-year intervals.
Counts of persons in education-experience groups: The counts are calculated in the

sample of men who do not reside in group quarters, have a positive value for weeks worked in
the previous calendar year, are not enrolled in school, and are not in the military during the
survey week.
Annual and weekly earnings: We use the sample of men who do not reside in group

quarters, reported positive weeks worked and hours worked (last week’s hours in 1960 and 1970;
usual hours in 1980 through 2000), are not in the military in the reference week, and report
positive earnings. Our measure of earnings is the sum of the IPUMS variables incwage and
incbusfm in 1960, the sum of incwage, incbus, and incfarm in 1970 and 1980, and incearn in

1990-2000. In the 1960-1980 Censuses, the top coded annual salary is multiplied by 1.5. In the
1960 and 1970 Censuses, weeks worked in the calendar year prior to the survey are reported as a
categorical variable. We imputed weeks worked for each worker as follows: 6.5 weeks for 13
weeks or less, 20 for 14-26 weeks, 33 for 27-39 weeks, 43.5 for 40-47 weeks, 48.5 for 48-49
weeks, and 51 for 50-52 weeks. The average log earnings for a skill cell is defined as the mean
of log annual earnings or log weekly earnings over all workers in the relevant population.

49
Fraction of time worked: We use the sample of men who do not reside in group quarters

and are not enrolled in school. The fraction of time worked for each person is defined as the ratio
of weeks worked (including zeros) to 52.
Mexico:

The data are drawn from the 1960, 1970, 1990, and 2000 IPUMS of the Mexican Census.
The data extracts from a 1.5 percent sample in the 1960 census, a 1 percent sample in 1970, a 10
percent sample in 1990, and a 10.6 percent sample in 2000. The analysis is restricted to men
aged 18-64. Sampling weights are used in all calculations.
Definition of education and experience: We use the IPUMS variable edattain to classify

workers into the five education groups: high school dropouts with 0-8 years of schooling
(educrec >=110 and <=212), high school dropouts with 9-11 years of schooling (educrec = 221
or 222), high school graduates (edattain = 311 or 321), persons with some college (edattain =
312 or 322), and college graduates (edattain = 400). Our definition implies that the sample of
high school dropouts with 0-8 years of schooling contains workers who have, at best, completed
primary education. The sample of high school dropouts with 9-11 years of schooling contains
workers who completed primary school but have less than a secondary education. The sample of
high school graduates contains those who completed only their secondary general track
education or those who obtained a secondary technical degree. The sample of workers with some
college includes workers who completed their secondary general track and report having some
college or university, or who completed their secondary technical track and have a postsecondary technical degree. The sample of college graduates includes workers who report having
completed a university education. Workers who do not report a valid value for the educational
attainment variable are excluded from the analysis. There are some inconsistencies in our coding
of education classification for workers who report completing a primary education, but less than
a secondary education in a technical track. We recoded these workers as being high school
dropouts with 0-8 years of school if they did not attend school for at least 9 years. There are also
some inconsistencies for workers who report completing a secondary technical degree. Some of
these workers report attending school for much fewer than 12 years, while others report
attending school for much more than 12 years. We reclassified workers who report completing a
secondary technical degree as high school dropouts if they attended school for less than 11 years,

50
and reclassified them as “some college” if they attended school for more than 13 years. We
assume that high school dropouts enter the labor market at age 17, high school graduates at age
19, persons with some college at age 21, and college graduates at age 23, and define work
experience as the worker’s age at the time of the survey minus the assumed age of entry into the
labor market. We restrict the analysis to persons who have between 1 and 40 years of experience.
Workers are classified into one of 8 experience groups, defined in five-year intervals.
Counts of persons in education-experience groups: The counts of workers who remained

in Mexico are calculated in the sample of men who are at work (the IPUMS employment status
variable empstat = 1100), report a positive value for monthly income, and are not enrolled in
school. The counts of emigrants are obtained from the U.S. Census using the same restrictions
described above in our discussion of the U.S. data, with the caveat that the emigrants must be
persons who are immigrants and born in Mexico. The 1960 census does not report the variable
empstat nor does it report a person’s school enrollment status. The sample of workers in 1960 is

then composed of persons who report a positive value for monthly earnings.
Monthly earnings: The variable gives the total monthly earnings (both salary and self-

employment income) in 1960, 1990, and 2000, and the total monthly income in 1970. We
exclude persons who are not “at work” and do not report a valid, positive value for monthly
earnings. In each census, the top-coded monthly earnings are multiplied by 1.5. The average log
earnings for a skill cell is defined as the mean of log monthly over all workers in the relevant
population.
Labor force participation rate: We use the sample of men who provide a valid answer for

their employment status variable (empstat). We define a labor force participant as someone who
is either working or unemployed (i.e., someone who is not “inactive”). This variable is only
available in the 1970, 1990 and 2000 cross-sections.

51
References

Altonji, Joseph G. and David Card (1991). “The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market
Outcomes of Less-Skilled Natives.” In Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market, edited
by John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman. University of Chicago Press.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney (2005). “Trends in U.S. Wage
Inequality: Re-Assessing the Revisionists.” Working Paper, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger (1998). “Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 11691213.
Aydemir, Abdurrahman and George J. Borjas (2005). “Attenuation Bias in Estimating the Wage
Impact of Immigration.” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Beaudry, Paul and David Green (2000). “What Is Driving US and Canadian Wages? Exogenous
Technical Change or Endogenous Choice of Technique.” Working Paper, University of
British Columbia.
Bohn, Sarah and Seth Sanders (2005). “Refining the Estimation of Immigration’s Labor Market
Effects.” Working Paper, University of Maryland.
Bonin, Holger (2005). “Is the Demand Curve Really Downward Sloping?” Working Paper, IZA.
Borjas, George J. (1987). “Immigrants, Minorities, and Labor Market Competition.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 40, 382-392.

Borjas, George J. (2003). “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the
Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118,
1335-1374.

52
Borjas, George J. (2006). “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of
Immigration.” Journal of Human Resources, 41, 221-258.
Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz (1997). “How Much Do
Immigration and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 1, 1-67.

Boudarbat, Brahim, Thomas Lemieux, and W. Craig Riddell (2003). “Recent Trends in Wage
Inequality and the Wage Structure in Canada.” Working Paper, University of British
Columbia.
Bowles, Samuel (1970). “Aggregation of Labor Inputs in the Economics of Growth and
Planning: Experiments with a Two-Level CES Function.” Journal of Political Economy,
78, 68-81.
Caponi, Vincenzo (2004). “Heterogeneous Human Capital and Migration: Who Migrates from
Mexico to the US?” Working Paper, University of Western Ontario.
Card, David (1990). “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 43 (January 1990): 245-257.

Card, David (2001). “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts
of Higher Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics, 19, 22-64.
Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux (2001). “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return to
College for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
116, 705-746.
Chiquiar, Daniel, and Gordon H. Hanson (2005).”International Migration, Self-Selection, and the
Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States,” Journal of
Political Economy, 113, 239-281.

53
Citizenship and Immigration Canada (2001). Facts and Figures: Immigration Overview, 2001.
Cortes, Patricia (2005). “The Effect of Low-Skilled Immigration on U.S. Prices: Evidence from
CPI Data.” Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Filer, Randall K. (1992). “The Impact of Immigrant Arrivals on Migratory Patterns of Native
Workers.” In Immigration and the Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United
States and Source Areas, edited by George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman. University

of Chicago Press.
Frey, William (1995). “Immigration Impacts on Internal Migration of the Poor: 1990 Census
Evidence for U.S. States.” International Journal of Population Geography, 1, 51-67.
Grossman, Jean Baldwin (1982). “The Substitutability of Natives and Immigrants in
Production.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 54, 596-603.
Hamermesh, Daniel (1993). Labor Demand. Princeton University Press.
Hanson, Gordon H. (2006). “Emigration, Labor Supply, and Earnings in Mexico.” In Mexican
Immigration, edited by George J. Borjas. University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Ibarraran, Pablo and Darren Lubotsky. (2006). “Mexican Immigration and Self-Selection: New
Evidence from the 2000 Mexican Census.” In Mexican Immigration, edited by George J.
Borjas. University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.
International Monetary Fund (2004). “Mexico: Selected Issues.” IMF Country Report No.
04/418.
Jaeger, David (1996). “Skill Differences and the Effect of Immigrants on the Wages of Natives,”
Working Paper, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy (1992). “Changes in the Wage Structure, 1963-87:
Supply and Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 35-78.

54
Lewis, Ethan (2005). “Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique.” Working Paper,
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Mishra, Prachi (2005). “Emigration and Wages in Source Countries: Evidence from Mexico.”
Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Giovanni Peri (2006). “Rethinking the Gains from Immigration:
Theory and Evidence from the U.S.” Working Paper, University of California, Davis.
Passel, Jeffrey (2005). “Unauthorized Migrants: Number and Characteristics.” Working Paper,
Pew Hispanic Center.
Perrier, Patrick (2005). “Le fonction de production et les données Canadiennes.” Working Paper.
Bank of Canada.
Roy, Arun S. (1997). “Job Displacement Effects of Canadian Immigrants by Country of Origin
and Occupation.” International Migration Review, 31, 150-161.
Shah, Anwar (1992). “Dynamics of Public Infrastructure, Industrial Productivity and
Profitability.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 74, 28-36.
United Nations (2002). International Migration, 2002. Population Division, Department of
Economics and Social Affairs.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (2004). 2003 Yearbook of Immigration Statistics. Office
of Immigration Statistics.
Welch, Finis (1979). “Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom Babies’ Financial
Bust.” Journal of Political Economy, 87, S65-S97.

55
Figure 1. Trends in the immigrant/emigrant share for male workers,
by country
0.25

0.20
Migrant share

Canada
0.15

0.10

0.05

United States
Mexico

0.00
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year
Notes: The trend lines for Canada and the United States give the fraction of the workforce that is foreign-born; the
trend line for Mexico gives the fraction of the Mexican workforce that emigrated to the United States.

56
Figure 2. Trends in the immigrant/emigrant share for male workers,
by education and country
Canada:
0.4
Post-graduate degrees

Immigrant share

Some college
0.3

High school graduates

College graduates

0.2
High school dropouts
0.1
0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

United States:

Immigrant share

0.5
High school dropouts

0.4
0.3
0.2

Post-graduate
degrees

College graduates

0.1
0
1960

Some
college

High school graduates
1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

Mexico:
0.3
Emigrant share

High school graduates
Some college

0.2
High school
dropouts, 9-11

High school
dropouts, 0-8

0.1

0
1960

College graduates
1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

Notes: The trend lines for Canada and the United States give the fraction of the workforce that is foreign-born; the
trend line for Mexico gives the fraction of the Mexican workforce that emigrated to the United States.

Figure 3 – The immigrant supply shock in Canada, 1971-2001
B. Either high school or vocational degree

A. High school dropouts

C. Both high school and vocational degree
0.45

0.3

0.25

2001

1971

0.15
1986

0.1

0.2
2001

0.15
1986
0.1

0.05
0

10

20

30

0.35
1986

0.25

2001

0.15

0.05

0.05

40

0

Years of experience

10

20
30
Years of experience

40

0

E. Post-graduate degree

D. Bachelor's degree

0.45

0.4

2001
2001

0.325

Immigrant share

Immigrant share

1971

Immigrant share

0.2

Immigrant share

Immigrant share

1971

0.25

0.25

0.175

1986

1971

0.35
1971
1986

0.25

0.15

0.1
0

10

20

Years of experience

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

Years of experience

Note: The immigrant share gives the fraction of the workforce that is foreign-born in a particular education-experience group.

10

20
30
Years of experience

40

58
Figure 4. The immigrant supply shock in the United States, 1960-2000
B. High school graduates

A. High school dropouts

0.12

0.16

0.6

0.3
1980

1960

0
0

10

20
30
Years of experience

0.12

0.08
1980

0.04
1960

0
40

D. College graduates

Immigrant share

Immigrant share

Immigrant share

0.45

0.15

2000

2000

2000

0

0.08

1980
0.04
1960

0

10

20
30
Years of experience

40

0

E. Post-graduate degree

0.15

0.28

Immigrant share

2000
Immigrant share

C. Som e college

0.1
1980

0.05

0.22
2000
0.16

0.1

1960
0

1960

0.04

0

10

20
30
Years of experience

40

0

10

20
30
Years of experience

1980
40

Note: The immigrant share gives the fraction of the workforce that is foreign-born in a particular education-experience group.

10

20
30
Years of experience

40

59
Figure 5. The emigrant supply shock in Mexico, 1960-2000
A. 0-8 years of schooling

B. 9-11 years of schooling

0.24

C. High school graduates

0.16

0.45

2000

1960
2000

0.12

1990
1960

0.06

0.35
Emigrant share

0.13
Emigrant share

Emigrant share

0.18

0.1

0.07
1990

0
10

20
30
Years of experience

40

D. Some college

0

10

20
30
Years of experience

1990

0.15

40

0.05
0

10

20
30
Years of experience

E. College graduates

0.4

0.12
1960

0.32

0.09

2000

Emigrant share

Emigrant share

0.25

1960

0.04

0

2000

0.24
1990
0.16
1960
0.08
0

2000

0.06

1990
0.03

0
0

10

20
Years of experience

30

40

0

10

20
30
Years of experience

40

Notes: The emigrant share gives the fraction of the Mexican workforce in a particular education-experience group that emigrated to the United States.

40

Figure 6. Trends in the relative wage of college graduates,
by years of experience
Canada:
1

Log wage gap

Young HS dropouts
0.8

Older HS dropouts
Young HS graduates

0.6

Older HS graduates
0.4
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

United States:
1

Log wage gap

Young HS dropouts
0.8
0.6

Older HS dropouts

Older HS graduates

0.4
Young HS graduates
0.2
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

Mexico:
2.4

Log wage gap

2
1.6

Older HS dropouts
Young HS dropouts

1.2
Young HS graduates

0.8
0.4
0
1960

Older HS graduates
1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

Notes: The figures illustrate the log weekly wage gap between college graduates and the respective education
groups. The “young” group of workers has 6 to 10 years of experience; the older group has 31 to 35 years. In this
figure, the college graduate sample in the Canadian and U.S. data includes all persons who have at least a college
degree, and the high school dropout sample in Mexico includes all persons with less than 12 years of schooling.

61
Table 1. Relation between the immigrant/emigrant share and labor market outcomes.

Earnings outcomes

Weighted Regressions
1. Canada
2. United States
Mexico
3. All workers

Employment outcomes

Log
annual
earnings

Log
weekly
earnings

Log
monthly
earnings

Fraction of
weeks
worked

Labor force
participation
rate

-0.617
(0.246)
-0.845
(0.472)

-0.507
(0.202)
-0.489
(0.223)

---

-0.241
(0.108)
-0.345
(0.075)

---

---

---

4. All workers, 1990-2000

---

---

5. Urban workers

---

---

--0.798
(0.443)
0.841
(0.540)
0.652
(0.419)

-------

--0.058
(0.044)
0.062
(0.048)
0.065
(0.055)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within education-experience cells.
All coefficients are obtained from regressions weighted by the sample size used to compute the dependent variable.
For Canada and the United States, the table reports the coefficient of the immigrant share variable from regressions
where the dependent variable is the mean labor market outcome of native-born persons in an education-experience
group at a particular point in time. For Mexico, the table reports the coefficient of the emigrant share variable from
regressions where the dependent variable is the mean labor market outcome of Mexican stayers in an educationexperience group at a particular point in time. The regressions estimated in Canada have 240 observations; the
regressions estimated in the United States have 200 observations; the wage regressions estimated in Mexico have
160 observations in rows 3 and 5, and 80 observations in row 4; and the labor force participation regressions
estimated in Mexico have 120 observations in rows 3 and 5, and 80 observations in row 4. All regression models
include education, experience, and period fixed effects, as well as interactions between education and experience
fixed effects, education and period fixed effects, and experience and period fixed effects.

62
Table 2. Sensitivity analysis of the relation between wages
and the immigrant/emigrant share

Canada

Sample:
1. Baseline (from table 1)
2. Includes women in measure of
immigrant supply shock
3. Includes men and women in skill group
4. Salaried workers only
5. Omits workers with less than 5 years
or more than 35 years of experience
6. Uses 10-year grouping for experience
7. Uses four education groups, pools college
graduates in Canada and U.S.; pools high
school dropouts in Mexico
8. Omits high school dropouts
9. Omits workers with 8 or fewer years
of schooling
10. Omits college graduates
11. Omits workers with post-graduate degrees
12. Adjusts education of persons who migrated
from Mexico as children

United States

Mexico

Log
annual
earnings
-0.617
(0.246)
-0.766
(0.229)
-0.679
(0.195)
-0.518
(0.222)
-0.678
(0.158)
-0.555
(0.474)
-0.654
(0.248)

Log
weekly
earnings
-0.507
(0.202)
-0.642
(0.191)
-0.510
(0.149)
-0.398
(0.173)
-0.567
(0.147)
-0.487
(0.378)
-0.561
(0.198)

Log
annual
earnings
-0.845
(0.472)
-0.999
(0.576)
-0.923
(0.606)
-0.755
(0.409)
-0.822
(0.416)
-1.231
(0.835)
-1.112
(0.527)

Log
weekly
earnings
-0.489
(0.223)
-0.672
(0.221)
-0.865
(0.785)
-0.414
(0.180)
-0.313
(0.271)
-0.596
(0.472)
-0.643
(0.227)

Log
monthly
earnings
0.798
(0.443)
0.882
(0.382)
0.440
(0.326)
0.377
(0.362)
0.724
(0.430)
0.853
(0.708)
1.204
(0.347)

-0.769
(0.171)
-0.608
(0.215)
-0.081
(0.403)
-0.535
(0.301)
---

-0.668
(0.145)
-0.506
(0.182)
0.001
(0.318)
-0.423
(0.247)
---

-0.101
(0.606)
-0.600
(0.468)
-0.910
(0.445)
-1.134
(0.486)
---

0.078
(0.458)
-0.209
(0.310)
-0.575
(0.148)
-0.713
(0.197)
---

--------0.675
(0.507)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within education-experience cells.
All coefficients are obtained from regressions weighted by the sample size used to compute the dependent variable.
For Canada and the United States, the table reports the coefficient of the immigrant share variable from regressions
where the dependent variable is the mean log weekly or log annual earnings of native-born persons in an educationexperience group at a particular point in time. For Mexico, the table reports the coefficient of the emigrant share
variable from regressions where the dependent variable is the mean log monthly earnings of Mexican stayers in an
education-experience group at a particular point in time. All regression models include education, experience, and
period fixed effects, as well as interactions between education and experience fixed effects, education and period
fixed effects, and experience and period fixed effects.

63
Table 3. Estimates of elasticities of substitution from the CES model

Canada
First stage, estimates -1/σX
1. Simple specification
2. Generalized specification
Second stage, estimates -1/σE
3. Linear trend
4. Nonlinear trend

United States

Mexico

-0.030
(0.015)

-0.321
(0.120)

-0.286
(0.136)

-0.135
(0.037)

-0.122
(0.038)

-0.234
(0.072)

-0.047
(0.119)

-0.273
(0.153)

-2.020
(1.594)

-0.416
(0.137)

-0.327
(0.379)

-0.355
(0.099)

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The standard errors reported in rows 1 and 2 are adjusted
for clustering within education-experience cells. The dependent variable is log weekly earnings in Canada and the
United States, and log monthly earnings in Mexico. All coefficients are obtained from regressions weighted by the
sample size used to compute the dependent variable. The first (second) stage regressions have 240 (30) observations
in Canada, 200 (25) observations in the United States, and 160 (20) observations in Mexico. The “generalized
specification” in row 2 adds a linear trend interacted with experience fixed effects. The “nonlinear trend” in Canada
includes the education-specific linear trend variables and education-specific splines for the 1980s and the 1990s. The
nonlinear trend in the United States includes the education-specific linear trend between 1960 and 2000 and an
education-specific spline in the trend line for the 1990s. The nonlinear trend in Mexico includes an educationspecific linear trend between 1960 and 2000 and an education-specific spline in the trend line for the 1990s. All
second-stage regressions in all countries include education-specific shifters for the 1990s to allow for possible level
breaks in the trends. To conserve degrees of freedom, the Mexican analysis reported in row 4 allows the educationspecific trend lines to vary only among three groups: high school dropouts with 0 to 8 years of schooling, high
school dropouts with 9 to 11 years of schooling, and all other workers.

64
Table 4. Predicted percent wage impacts of 1980-2000 immigrant/emigrant supply shock

High
school
dropouts
Canada
Supply shock (%)
Short-run, σKL = 0.5
Short-run, σKL = 1.0
Short-run, σKL = 1.5
Long-Run
Non-structural elasticity
Actual % wage change
United States
Supply shock (%)
Short-run, σKL = 0.5
Short-run, σKL = 1.0
Short-run, σKL = 1.5
Long run
Non-structural elasticity
Actual % wage change

High
school
graduates

College
graduates

All
workers

5.6
-2.2
2.8
4.5
7.8
1.8
-19.3

4.1
-6.3
-1.2
0.4
3.8
-1.3
-16.2

13.8
-10.3
-5.3
-3.6
-0.2
-4.4
-8.7

27.1
-15.8
-10.8
-9.1
-5.8
-8.7
-2.2

31.9
-17.8
-12.8
-11.1
-7.8
-10.2
-7.0

13.2
-10.1
-5.0
-3.4
0.0
-4.2
-6.1

22.8
-10.5
-7.1
-6.0
-3.8
-8.2
-19.8

8.1
-5.7
-2.3
-1.2
1.0
-2.9
-14.8

9.2
-6.0
-2.7
-1.6
0.6
-3.3
-4.1

12.0
-6.9
-3.6
-2.5
-0.3
-4.3
8.2

12.8
-7.2
-3.9
-2.8
-0.6
-4.6
20.0

11.1
-6.6
-3.3
-2.2
0.0
-4.0
1.7

High
school
graduates
-35.6
17.1
12.3
10.7
7.5
19.9
7.0

Some
college

College
graduates

All
workers

-29.7
15.0
10.2
8.6
5.4
16.6
24.7

-5.8
6.5
1.7
0.1
-3.1
3.3
18.7

-14.6
9.6
4.8
3.2
0.0
8.2
16.1

7.5

23.7

18.0

13.8

Dropouts, Dropouts,
0-8 yrs
9-11 yrs
Mexico
Supply shock (%)
Short-run, σKL = 0.5
Short-run, σKL = 1.0
Short-run, σKL = 1.5
Long run
Non-structural elasticity
Actual % wage change,
1990-2000
Actual % wage change
in urban sample, 19902000

Some
college

Postgraduate
degree

-11.6
8.6
3.8
2.2
-1.0
6.5
10.7

-11.6
8.6
3.8
2.2
-1.1
6.5
3.0

4.7

3.8

Notes: The simulation uses the elasticity of substitution across experience groups reported in row 2 of Table 3, and
the elasticity of substitution across education groups reported in row 4 of Table 3. The “non-structural elasticity”
predictions use the own wage elasticity estimated in Table 1 (-0.32 for Canada, -0.36 for the United States, and -0.56
for Mexico), and sets all cross-elasticities equal to zero. The variable measuring the group-specific immigrant supply
shock in Canada and the United States is defined as the number of immigrants arriving between 1980 and 2000
divided by a baseline population equal to the average size of the native workforce (over 1980-2000) plus the number
of immigrants in 1980. The variable measuring the emigrant supply shock in Mexico is defined as the number of
persons who emigrated between 1980 and 2000 divided by a baseline native population equal to the average size of
the Mexican stayer workforce (over 1990-2000) plus the number of persons who emigrated between 1980 and 2000.
We used the share of income accruing to each of the education-experience cells to calculate all group averages
reported in this table. The percent wage changes refer to the product of the log wage change times 100.

