                  NBER RKING PAPER SERIES




                   OPENNESS, RELATIVE PRICES
                       AND MACRO POLICIES




                        Joshua Aizenman




                     Working Paper No. 1233




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         November 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity (World
Econony). Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1233
                                                    November 1983




              Openness, Relative Prices and Macro Policies



                                ABSTRACT



     This   paper analyzes the role of relative prices in the conduct of wage
indexation and monetary policy in a small economy producing traded and non—
traded goods under a flexible exchange rate regime. It is    shown that the

beneficial   effect of using relative prices in addition to aggregate prices as
indicators   f or the conduct of the above policies increases with openness. The

response of policies to relative prices rises with openness, and has dampening

effects on the volatility of deviations from purchasing power parity. The

analysis demonstrates that the beneficial effect of allowing a "basket"

indexation (or a money rule that responds also to relative prices) lies in

mitgating the effects of foreign shocks.




                                                   Joshua Aizenman
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   University of Pennsylvania
                                                   3718 Locust Walk CR
                                                   Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                                   (215) 898—7409
I. Introduction and Summary

     One structural parameter that varies across countries is the degree of

openness.1 In a way, a larger share of traded goods implies a larger exposure

to international prices, diminishing the economic relevance of the endogenous

determination of the relative price of traded to non—traded goods. The

consequences of the degree of openness for the conduct of macro—policies

deserve further attention.2 A relevant question, for example, concerns the

role of relative prices in the conduct of macro—policies, and how this role

depends on openness. This question arrises naturally in the context of a

multi—sectoral economy, because in such an economy a macro policy can also

make use of the information contained in relative prices.

     The purpose of this paper is to determine the gains to be derived from

allowing macro policies to depend on relative prices in addition to aggregate

prices, and to analyze how these gains depend on openness. The policies

considered are wage indexation and monetary policy. The framework underlying

the paper is that of a small economy, producing traded and non—traded goods.

The analysis focuses on the role of the relative price of non—traded goods.

The labor market is characterized by a short—run wage rigidity, as in Gray and

Fischer. In such a framework, wage indexation is advantageous.

     The beneficial effects of indexation stem from allowing the wage to

respond to current information which could not have been foreseen at the time

of the wage negotiation. Once we allow for non—traded goods, the price level

corresponds to a weighted average of the two sectors' prices.    Indexation to

the price level takes into account only the information content of the

aggregate price level.3 Thus, we should expect to benefit from a "basket'

indexation scheme, which will allow wages to respond differently to the price

adjustment of each sector. One purpose of this paper is to derive the



                                     —1—
characteristics of a basket indexation, and to focus on the marginal benefit

of extending the price level indexation to a basket indexation.4 Allowing for

a basket indexation has the effect of making wages respond to both relative

prices and the price level. Thus, the analysis in the paper allows one to

focus on the role that relative prices might play in optimal indexation. This

problem is analyzed is Section 2.

     The economic role of wage indexation can, in principal, be replaced by a

monetary policy which will respond to current information.5 Thus, one can

also address the role of relative prices in conducting monetary policy in the

absence of wage indexation. In such a case the analog of a price level

indexation is a money feedback rule that adjusts the money supply to the price

level. The analog to a basket indexation is a money feedback rule that

adjusts the money supply to both the price level and relative prices. The

role of monetary policy in the absence of indexation is analyzed in Section

3. Analogous to Section 2, the analysis in Section 3 investigates the role of

relative prices in conducting monetary policy, and also the dependence of the

marginal benefit of such a policy on openness. The Appendix summarizes the

notation used in the paper.

     The analysis demonstrates that the beneficial effect of allowing a basket

indexation (or a money rule that responds also to relative prices) lies in

mitigating the effects of foreign shocks (represented by foreign prices of

traded goods and foreign interest rate). The marginal benefit of allowing

relative prices to enter the indexation scheme (or the conduct of monetary

policy) is shown to increase with "aggregate" openness. The relevant measure

of aggregate openness depends positively on the share of traded goods; the

substitutability in consumption and production between traded and non—traded

goods; and the volatility of foreign shocks.



                                     —2—
      The conclusion emerging from the analysis is that openness is an

important consideration in formulating macro—policies. The response of

policies to relative prices (of traded/non—traded goods) rises with openness,

and has dampening effects on the volatility of deviations from purchasing

power parity. In a way, the more open the economy, the more damaging might be

the consequences of relative price volatility, making policy response to

relative prices more desirable. This finding seems to be consistent with the

observation that countries with "similar" hyperinflation trends, like Israel

and Argentina, differ widely in the volatility of deviations from purchasing

power parity. We observe much larger deviations from purchasing power parity

in the more closed economy (Argentina)6.



2. The Model

      Let us take a two—sector economy, producing traded and non—traded goods,

under floating rates and perfect capital mobility. Consumers are assumed to

have identical homothetic tastes, generating a price index given by




(1)        Pt =           (P)°z

where       and      are money prices of non—traded and     traded goods at

time t, and B and B are the share of non—traded and traded goods.
             n      z

      The labor market is characterized by a short—run wage rigidity. To

formulate a short—run equilibrium the paper adapts the contracting approach to

the Phillips curve. It should be noted that there exists a gap between a

contracting approach to the Phillips curve and labor contracting theories.

The contracting approach to the Phillips curve (as in Fischer and Cray) has

not so far been derived from a strict micro foundation, (as Fischer (1977) has



                                      —3—
recognized). It is capable, however, of modeling the interaction between the

money market and the Phillips curve. On the other hand, theories of labor

contracting are derived from a micro foundation; but so far those theories

have not been able to formulate in a satisfactory way the effects of money and

financial assets on labor contracts. Because the focus of this paper is on

the interaction of the money market and labor contracts, it applies to the

Phillips curve the contracting specification (as used by Fischer and Gray),

that has become a convention in the macro literature. These authors consider

the case of an economy where nominal wage contracts are negotiated in period

t—1, before current prices are known, so as to equate expected labor demand to

expected labor supply. But actual employment in period t is demand—

determined, and depends on the realized real wage. These models also allow

for partial indexation, which may be set according to some optimizing

criteria. For a recent application of the contracting approach in an open

economy see Flood and Marion (1982) and Marston (1982a).

      Suppose that the labor supply is given by



(2) L =      Q. (-_)

where W is the money wage. Labor is the only mobile factor, and output is

given by7

         =
             n   (L)a exp
(3)

      Z =        (L)a   •
                            exp   v   ; 0 < a < 1




where L,t denotes the labor employed in sector x (x = n, z) in period t, Nt

and Z represent the output of non—traded and traded goods, and Vt is a



                                         —4—
multiplicative productivity shock.



        As a reference point, let us start with the 'non—stochasttc equilibrium,"

i.e., the equilibrium in the economy if the value of all the random variables

is zero. Let us denote by lower—case variables the percentage deviation of

the upper—case variable from its value in the non—stochastic equilibrium,

                                         —
i.e., for a variable X, Xt =        (X       X0)1X0 where      is the value of X if all

random shocks are zero. To simplify notation, we delete the time index. Thus

(xc, xt+k) are replaced by (x, x+k). To facilitate discussion, it is useful

to take a log—linear approximation of the model around its non—stochastic

equilibrium, writing the model in terms of percentage deviations. This is

equivalent to the use of a first order approximation of a Taylor expansion

around the equilibrium.8

        From eq. 3 we get that output is given by



(4) n =     i(p   — w) + h•v




(5) z =           — w)   + hv


where
             —
            h =     a
                   i—a ;
                         h = 1
                             i—a
                                —

        In a fully flexible economy, w corresponds to the wage that clears the

labor market, i.e., w =         ( — W)IW         where      is the flexible equilibrium

wage rate derived from eq. 2—3, and               is the equilibrium wage if all shocks

are zero. Under the labor contract, the wage contract for period t i pre—set

at time t—i at its expected money wage level in a fully flexible regime.

Thus, the wage contract is Eti               .   Under a partial "basket" indexation,



                                                 —5—
actual wage is allowed during the contract duration to respond partially to

the unexpected changes in the prices of the various goods:



(6)             log Wt = log                  Et—1tt          ÷ b •
                                                                    z
                                                                        0
                                                                            z
                                                                                [P
                                                                                     z,t
                                                                                           P
                                                                                            z,o
                                                                                                  1/P
                                                                                                        z,o
                                                                                                              +



                                               +bn .0n .[Pn,t —Pn,o
                                                                  I/P n,o


or, in terms of our shorter notation:




                      z + bn n
                z•9z •p
(7) w =     b               .9 •                    pfl



b     and bn define the degree of wage indexation to the 'weighted" price of each

sector, where the weights correspond to the share of each sector. An equi—

valent way of defining the basket indexation scheme is:

                                                    — p ),           where b = bz.0z + bn .0n
            w = b       •
                                p +      d(pz          n
(8)
                p     B • p ÷ 0                 •
                                                     pz        and              d = (b — b ) .0 •9
                       n   n    z                                                     z   n    n z

As eq. 8 reveals, allowing for a basket indexation enables wages to adjust to

both aggregate price level and relative prices. The case where the wage

indexation responds only to the price level can be obtained for b =                                               b.   Real

output, Y, is given by:



                Y =    (N           P          + Z             P
(9)
                 t          t   •
                                        n,t          t
                                                          •
                                                                   z,t )/P t

where N and Z represent the output of non—traded and traded goods. The demand

for non—traded goods is given by




                                                                        —6—
(10)                         .       • exr(   —
                                                  c(i   —




a is the compensated demand elasticity; I is the money interest rate, and

is the expected inflation:



                 =               —
(11)                  (E

where Et is the conditional expectation operator which corresponds to the use
of information available at period t. A higher real interest rate discourages

current consumption, and c is the interest rate semi—elasticity of demand for

non—traded goods. Throughout the paper it is assumed that the information set

at time t contains the structure of the model and all variables dated t and

earlier.

       The demand for money balances is given by:



(12)                  Pt   exp(— k.i).



       The country operates under a floating rate regime, and the law of one

price is assumed to hold for traded goods:



(13         P
                z,t
                      =St •Pz,t

where St is the exchange rate at time t (domestic money price of one unit of

foreign exchange) and P is the international price of traded goods.      Under

conditions of perfect capital mobility, and the absence of risk aversion, an

arbitrage condition links the domestic and foreign interest rates:




                                                  —7—
                  — 1       =               —
(14)
                                (E   s÷1        S)/S

       To close the model, let us specify the stochastic structure. The supply

of money and foreign prices is given by



(15)
            Mt =M •exPm


(16)                = exp




       To simplify exposition, let us neglect trends in the variables, assuming
              *         *
that   m, v, i ,        p       are uncorrelated random variables, generated by white

noise processes:



(17)        x N(O,              )    for   x = in, v, 1,



       It is assumed that by the choice of units prices in the "non—stochastic"

equilibrium are given by P = P                     =   S =   1.

       To be able to derive some normative aspects of indexation, it is useful

to consider as a benchmark the real output attained in a fully flexible

economy. Let us denote by                       the value of x in a fully flexible economy.

Following Gray we adapt the loss function:



(18)       H =    E(y       —
                                y)


       where E0 stands for the unconditional expectation operator. The loss

function indicates that we wish to choose the wage indexation scheme so as to

minimize deviations from output's fully flexible level (i).                    Minimizing   H is




                                                        —8—
equivalent to minimizing the welfare loss in the labor market.9

       In a flexible economy, the labor market clearing condition implies that



(19)       wp+--v

(20)              h.v-h--v.

       From eq. 4—7 we get that



                                   ÷ (1 —               + hv
(21)        y =   [(1—b)O.p

Thus the value of our loss function is:



(22)        H' =   ()2   E((l—b         +
                                            (l—b)ep +          v).

       Optimal indexation is chosen so as to make the real wage in a contracting

economy "closest" to real wage in a flexible economy.

       To obtain the value of goods prices, we make use of all the building

blocks of our model.

       Equilibrium in the non—traded sector implies that:




(23)        n—a(pp) +y—c(i +p)

       Equilibrium in the money market is given by:




(24)        m — p =   y —   k•i;        I =   i   — s




                                              —9—
        Notice that an unexpected price level rise (p > 0) induces an expecta-

tion that prices will fall next period by p, implying that the real interest

rate is     I. +    p   .       Eq. 23 and 24 provides the short—run equilibrium conditions

which together with eq. 21 can be used to solve for                                              Obtaining the

values of goods prices allows us to solve for the values of optimal indexation

parameters. Those parameters are solved by minimizing our loss function,

resulting in:

                                          1+k-.c
             bn =1—                               V
                                    1     r           m (S+h)
                                    1+o+Vv                    h
                                                                  2



                                                                  8
                                    1 +       +           .
                                          8           c           8
                                                                      z
(26)
             bz =1—                           V
                                    ,     .       m (cS+ h)
                                    1+o+Vv • h2
where        4, =    c + (a ÷ e               • h)IO                  ,   and V is the variance of x.



        Openness can be measured either by the share of traded goods (8) or by

the substitutability in consumption (a) and production (h) of traded and non—

traded goods.'° An increase in openness, as measured by any of the above

parameters will increase 4, — c                           ,    which can be used as an openness measure.

From eq. 25—26 it follows that:




/   '          n
                            U   ,
                                          z
                                              0.
               n                          z



        Inspection of eq. 25—26 reveals that both indexation measures increase

with the relative importance of monetary to real shocks. Furthermore, an



                                                                          —10—
increase in the share of traded goods has the effect of increasing the degree

of wage indexation to traded goods prices, and reducing the degree of wage

indexation to non—traded goods. Notice that from the definition of the

indexation parameters (eq. 7), an increase in the prices of sector x would

raise wages by O.b .                         Thus, the elasticity of wage response to

       is 0   •   b       .       Consequently, a greater share of traded goods (do > 0)
increases the desired wage response to dp at a rate that exceeds the rise in

 0.
 z



The case where indexation is only to the price level corresponds to b =                 b   = b


(See Aizenman (1983)), yielding



(28)          b =     1       —                 where      p   is   defined by




(29)              =
                      () [ + k(1                     -   c)2
                                                               V
        To find the marginal benefit of allowing a "basket" indexation, it is

useful to compare the value of our loss function under each indexation

regime. Subject to an optimal basket indexation, we get a loss of


                              —          2
                                                           h2.V
(30)          H' =
                                  .)V            [1 —
                                                          2
                                                         h.Vv
                                                              +V       in




whereas subject to a price level indexation we get a loss of


                                     2
                          —                                            h2.V
(31)          H =
                      ( ) V[1                    —

                                                                           * *
                                                     Vm +h2•V v+[k(1—-)]V (i+p)
                                                                                 2




                                                               —11—
       Comparing the two reveals that allowing a basket indexation has the

effect of shielding the labor market from foreign shocks (j*              p*)• In our

framework, a basket indexation eliminates the effects of foreign shocks

completely. Inspection of eq. 30—31 reveals that the marginal benefit

allowing a basket indexation increases with "aggregate openness" measured by:


                              2
(32)        [k(1 .a)]             V     * *
                                      (i+p)
The benefit of allowing a basket indexation increases with the share of traded

goods (e), the substitutability in production and consumption between the

two sectors (1,         a),       and the volatility of foreign shocks.



3. Relative Prices and Monetary Policy



       Let us consider the case where current wages are not free to respond to

current information and analyze the role of monetary policy in such an

environment. The terms of our framework imply that all the indexation

parameters are now set to equal zero. Using a method analogous to that of

Section 2, we now consider the case where there is a money feedback rule which

adjusts the money supply in response to both the price level and relative

prices. The money supply is now given by:



(33)        m — g   •
                         p
                              —
                                   g(p
                                         —
                                             p).

m is the stochastic component of the money supply defined in Section 2. g and

 j are    parameters that determine the response of monetary policy to the price



                                                   —12—
level and the relative prices, respectively. Finding the values of both g and

g is the topic of this section.



       The money market equilibrium is now given by



(24')       m_g•p_g(p_p)_p=Y_k(i_5)
where


(34)        y=      •p +   h •   v.


Together with eq. 23 we obtain that
                  m - hv   + (p* +     *)[(•)      - ___
                                                        n
(35)                                     —
                             1   +k +h +     g


Optimal values of g and               are obtained by minimizing our loss function (eq.

18), with the following results:



(36)          =   k(O• j +    a)/c



             g=              +    — k.
(37)              v!

j   describes the responsiveness of monetary policy to relative prices. It
increases with openness, as measured by the share of traded goods (O)               and

the    substitutability in production (ic)          and consumption (a) of traded and

non—traded goods. As can be seen from eq. 35,                is set such as to nullify

the effects of foreign shocks (j* pz*) on the price level. This has the



                                                 —13—
consequence of shielding the labor market from foreign shocks. g is a measure

of the responsiveness of monetary policy to price level surprises. As is

evident from eq. 37, it increases with the relative importance of monetary to

real shocks.

       The case where we allow monetary policy to respond only to the price

level is where j=O .      In       such a case optimal g is given by:


                                   v*+vi*        v
(38)        g =                •             +            +   -   k
                  {[k(.j)]2            Vv


Notice that because we do not now allow monetary policy to respond directly to

relative prices g depends on elements of foreign shocks, which have the effect

of raising the responsiveness of monetary policy to price level surprises.

The magnitude of the resulting increase rises with aggregate openness.

       To compare monetary policy with indexation, it is useful to evaluate the

loss function subject to monetary policy. It turns out that under the use of

both the price level and relative prices as indicators for monetary policy the

resulting loss is equal to the loss generated by a "basket" indexation, given

by eq. 30. On the other hand, a monetary policy that uses only the price

level as an indicator generates a loss which is equal to the loss generated by

price level indexation (eq. 31). Thus, we can view wage indexation as a close

substitute for active monetary policy.               Furthermore, all the conclusions

relating to the benefit to be derived from allowing a basket indexation

instead of a price level indexation (See Section 2) also hold for allowing

monetary policy to respond to relative prices. Thus, we can conclude that the

benefit from allowing monetary policy to respond to relative prices in

addition to aggregate prices increases with openness. A similar conclusion

applies also to the magnitude of the desired monetary response to monetary



                                             —14—
policy: it increases with openness.

       A possible measure of deviation from purchasing power parity (PPP) is

                   p — p     —   s.        Such a measure describes deviations of the

domestic price level from the prices of traded goods. From eq. 23 and 34 we

get:




(39)        p —    p*   — s =    — (i* +                    —   (i     —
                                                                           c



Notice that our measure of deviations from PPP depend on openness and

exogenous considerations affecting the real interest rate, and is independent

of productivity and monetary shocks. This is because, in assuming homothetic

tastes, we made the relative price of non—traded goods independent of scale

consideration such as output and income. A simple way to introduce broader

considerations is to generalize the demand specification, making the demand

for non—traded goods:



(40) — a(p     —   p)    + c     •
                                     y —   c(i   +   p),          1.



       The novelty here lies in allowing non—unitary elasticity of demand for

non—traded goods (c) .                Notice that such a formulation is consistent with the
permanent income hypothesis, which implies that only a fraction of the

transitory income (y) will be spent. This modification does not change the

essence of the results reported here. Using the procedure described in the

paper, we get that subject to the optimal use of both price level and relative

prices as indicators for monetary policy:



(41)                    0,            0.
             .j._>


                                                           —15—
       We also find that for a general demand elasticity () ,                                    allowing     for

using both the price level and relative prices as policy indicators mitigates

the effects of foreign shocks (whereas for c =                               1   it eliminates them

completely). As before, openness has the effect of increasing the policy

response to relative prices. Deviations from PPP are now given by:



                — s =
(42) p —   p*

                                                                                 —   E) + c(h   +
         (1—c)[v(l        + g +        k)h           ÷ mh] ÷ (i* +   p*)[kh(1                       1   ÷ g +k)1


                                            + g ÷ h +       k) + (1   —
                                                                          e)h(f-+ k)
       Notice that for c =                       1     eq. 42 collapses into eq. 39. Unlike the case of

homothetic tastes, relative prices and PPP depend on all the disturbances that

affect the scale of economic activity in the short run. From eq. 42 we

conclude that

            dV                 *
                      —            —   s]
                 [p       p
(43)                                         <
                          d4



       Openness therefore dampens deviations from PPP. Among other things this
result reflects the fact that openness increases the policy response to

relative price surprises.




                                                               —16—
                                   Footnote


1.   A crude measure of openness is the GNP share of (exports +    import/2     .   A
     more appropriate measure should depend on elasticities of substitution in
     production and consumption between various classes of goods. A popular
     way of modelling openness is to distinguish between traded and non—traded
     goods (See, for example, Salter(1959)).


2.   One of the first to consider the effects of openness on macro—policies is
     McKinnon (1963). See also Kenen (1969) and Frenkel and Aizenman (1983).


3.   A previous analysis (Aizenman 1983) studied indexation to the price
     level, showing that openness has the effect of increasing wage
     indexation. This paper extends the above study to analyze the role of
     relative prices in the conduct of monetary policy and wage indexation.


4.   For a study of the price index appropriate to the indexation formula see
     Marston (1982b). His study considers the case of an economy producing
     one type of goods, which is an imperfect substitute for foreign goods.
     The current study analyzes a related question in the context of non
     traded goods, and extends the discussion to a monetary policy.


5.   On the trade—off between various macro—policies see Aizenman and Frenkel
     (1983).


6.   These empirical observations have been studied by De Grauwe and Janssans
     (1983). In 1977 the GNP share of (exports +   imports)/2   was 44.3% for
     Israel, and 11.45% for Argentina [See World Tables (1980)].


7.   To make the model manageable it is assumed that in the short run,
     output/labor elasticities are equal for both sectors. Allowing for
     different elasticities has no systematic effect on the results.


8.   It is assumed that the variances of the shocks are small enough to make
     such approximations useful.




                                     —17—
9.   Let 1    denote the labor employed in a frictionless, fully flexible
     economy, where £ is the labor employed in an economy under a contracting
     agreement. From eq. 2,3 we get that the welfare loss in the labor
     market, as measured by the triangle between the supply and demand can be
     approximated by


               1— c)( £)2 =_(!÷ 1—

     where


      a = exp     [       (S + 1) log cz/(1 + (1 —


     and     Z = 0         •    £       + 0    •   £       where £ is the labor employed in sector
                      z             z     ti x     n   ,


     x(x =   z,   n). Thus, minimizing the loss function H is equivalent to
     minimizing the welfare loss in the labor market. H is also the loss
     function used by Flood and Marion (1982).


                               d log N/Z
10. Notice that
                               d log P /P
                                          n z
11. On the trade off between wage indexation and monetary policy see Aizenman
     and Frenkel (1983).




                                                             —18—
                                 Appendix Notation



     Upper case variables denote levels, lower case letters denote the

logarithmic deviation of the upper case variable from the "non—stochastic"

equilibrium.



                 =   price    level at time t



                 =   price    of non—traded goods at time t



                 =   price    of traded goods at time t



                 =   real    output at time t (deflated by P)



                 =   output    of non—traded goods



                 =   output    of traded goods




      i, i       =   foreign    and domestic money interest rate



                 =   expected inflation at time t


                 =   domestic money price of one unit of foreign exchange at time t
      St


                 =   international    price of traded goods at time t



                 =   money wage rate at time t



                                         —19—
               = white     noise productivity disturbances



               =   white   noise monetary disturbances




 p             =   white   noise foreign price disturbances



        = V    =   variance      of x




 E             =   unconditional        expectation operator



               =   expectation      operator conditional on information
 Et
                   available at time t



 X             =   the level of variable X that corresponds to the
    0
                   equilibrium      when v = m = p
                                                     *
                                                         =   i   *
                                                                     = 0




 x = (X—      X)/X         =   the percentage deviation of X at time t from its

                               "non—stochastic" level X0,, X being any upper—case

                               variable defined above



b              =   wage indexation parameter



g              =   monetary policy parameter



    X          =     the value of X in a fully flexible equilibrium, X being
                   any variable defined above.



                                           —20—
                                  References

Aizenman, J. (1983). 'Wage Flexibility and Openness," NBER Working Paper
     Series, No. 1108, April 1983.

Aizenman, J. and J. Frenkel (1983). "Wage Indexation and the Optimal Exchange
     Rate Regime", Presented at the 1983 NBER Summer Institute.

De Grauwe, P. and M. Janssans (1983). "Real Exchange Rate Variability During
     1920—26 and 1973—82. Katholieke Universiteit Te Leuven, International
     Economic Research, Paper #40.

Fischer, S. "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability" in Karl Brunner and
     Pdlan Meltzer (eds.) Stabilization of Domestic and International
     Economy, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 5,
     a supplementary series to the Journal of Monetary Economics, (1977):
     1uI—+I

Flood, R.P. and Marion, N.P. "The Transmission of Disturbances Under
     Alternative Exchange—Rate Regimes with Optimal Indexing". Quarterly
     Journal of Economics XCVII, No. 1, (February 1982): 43—66.

Frenkel, J.A. and Aizenman J. "Aspects of the Optimal Management of Exchange
     Rates", Journal of International Economics 13, No. 4, (November 1982):
     23 1—56.

Gray, J.A. (1976). "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of
     Monetary Economics 2, No. 2, 221—35.

Kenen, P.B. (1969). "The Theory of Optimum Currency Areas: An Eclectic
     View," in R.A. Mundell and A.K. Swoboda (eds.) Monetary Problem of the
     International Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 41—60.

Marston, R.C. (1982a) "Wages, Relative Prices and the Choice between Fixed and
     Flexible Exchange Rates", Canadian Journal of Economics XV, No. 1, 87—
     103.


___________________ (1982b). "Real Wages and the Terms of Trade: Alternative
     Indexation Rules for An Open Economy," NBER Working Paper Series, No.
     1046.

McKinnon, R.I. (1959), "Optimal Currency Areas," American Economic Review 52,
     7 17—24.

Salter, W. (1959). "Internal and External Balance: The Role of Price and
     Expenditure Effects." Economics Record 35:226—38.

World Tables (1980), Johns Hopkins Publishers.




                                     —21—
