                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           COMPETITIVE WAGES IN A MATCH WITH ORDERED CONTRACTS

                                             Muriel Niederle

                                          Working Paper 12334
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12334


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




webpage: www.stanford.edu/~niederle, email: niederle@stanford.edu. I thank Georgy Artemov, Jonathan
Levin, Eric Maskin, Al Roth and Michael Schwarz for helpful discussions, the NSF for generous support and
the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton for its hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Muriel Niederle. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Competitive Wages in a Match with Ordered Contracts
Muriel Niederle
NBER Working Paper No. 12334
June 2006
JEL No. D4, J3, J4

                                            ABSTRACT

        A recent antitrust lawsuit against the National Residency Matching Program renewed interest
in understanding the e ects of a centralized match on wages of medical residents. Bulow and Levin
(forthcoming) propose a simple model of the NRMP, in which firms set impersonal salaries
simultaneously, before matching with workers, and show that a match leads to lower aggregate
wages compared to any competitive outcome.
        This paper models a feature present in the NRMP, ordered contracts, that allows firms to set
several contracts while determining the order in which they try to fill these contracts. I show that the
low wage equilibrium of Bulow and Levin is not robust to this feature of the NRMP, and competitive
wages are once more an equilibrium outcome. Furthermore, a match with ordered contracts has
di erent properties than former models of centralized matches with multiple contracts.

Muriel Niederle
School of Social Science
Institute for Advanced Study
Einstein Drive
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
niederle@stanford.edu
1     Introduction
In response to a recent antitrust lawsuit against the National Residency Matching Program,
Bulow and Levin (forthcoming) show that when firms set impersonal salaries simultaneously,
before matching with workers, then such a match leads to lower aggregate wages compared to
any competitive outcome. Crawford (forthcoming) shows that this concern can be addressed by
incorporating flexible salaries in the centralized match, that is, the possibility for each position
to have more than one potential salary, with the final salary to be determined together with the
worker-firm pairing. This builds on earlier work that shows that a match in which each position
can have a large number of contracts, which I will call a multiple contract match, allows for
competitive outcomes (Crawford and Knoer 1981; Kelso and Crawford, 1982, Roth 1984b, and
see also, Hatfield and Milgrom 2005).
    Here, I observe that the NRMP has a feature that I will call ordered contracts, that destroys
the low wage equilibrium of Bulow and Levin and in fact allows for competitive outcomes. In
a match with ordered contracts, firms can specify several possible contracts, just as in a match
with flexible contracts. However, firms can also determine the order in which they prefer to fill
these contracts. Specifically, at any point in the match, only one type of contract is available
which is in contrast to a match with multiple contracts. This new and additional control firms
have over contracts results in new properties concerning which stable outcomes are reached
through diﬀerent adequately modified deferred acceptance algorithms. Most importantly, the
set of contracts reached through either a firm or worker proposing suitably modified deferred
acceptance algorithm is the same, which is in general not the case in a multiple contract match.
    These results will cast the lesson we learned from Bulow and Levin in a new light.

    Since 1951 the market for medical residents has been organized through a centralized match-
ing procedure which assigns medical students to residency programs using a variant of a deferred
acceptance algorithm. The match was introduced to ensure a uniform appointment date, con-
trol the unraveling of hiring decisions, and reduce congestion problems of other, decentralized
plans that tried to promote late and uniform hiring (see Roth 2003). In 1998 Roth and Peran-
son introduce a new algorithm, that switched from a hospital proposing to a student proposing
deferred acceptance algorithm. The new algorithm also incorporates several special features,
such as accommodating couples who want two jobs. A second special feature is to allow for
ordered contracts, or reverting positions. Programs that try to fill a position under a certain
contract can, in case they do not find a suitable candidate, change (or revert) that contract to
a position with a diﬀerent contract (see Roth and Peranson 1999). This allows programs to
eﬀectively have more than one contract for any position, while being able to control the order
in which they want to try to fill those positions.

   In the 1990’s about 7 percent of the three to four thousand programs that participate in
each year have contracts that could revert to other contracts if they remain unfilled (accounting

                                                 2
for almost 6 percent of the total quota of positions). Roth and Peranson (1999) note that such
reversions typically occur when, for example, a director of a second-year postgraduate program
arranges with the director of a first-year prerequisite program that his residents will spend their
first year in that prerequisite program. If the second-year program fails to fill all its positions,
then the vacancies can “revert” to the first-year program to be filled by other applicants. More
recently, in the reinstitution of the fellowship match for gastroenterologists, this feature is
especially advertised to, for example, allow programs to try to fill a slot first with a research
fellow, and in case no suitable research fellow can be attracted, the program can decide to
fill this position with a more clinically oriented fellow instead (see Niederle, Proctor and Roth
2006).

    In 2002 an antitrust law suit was filed, charging that the main eﬀect of the match is to
suppress wages of medical residents. Bulow and Levin develop a stylized model to analyze the
eﬀects of using a centralized match such as the NRMP on wages. In their model, the surplus for
firm n (1 ≤ n ≤ N) from hiring worker m is ∆n · m, where ∆N ≥ ∆N−1 .. ≥ ∆1 . Workers care
only about their salary, p. In their simple model of the NRMP firms simultaneously announce
a wage at which they are willing to hire any worker. Workers form preferences over firms after
the announcement, where each worker prefers firms with higher wages. Then an assortative
matching occurs, that matches more productive workers with firms that oﬀer a higher wage. The
main result of the paper is that this model yields wage compression, sub-competitive average
wages and higher profits for firms compared to any competitive outcome. The intuition for the
result is that, compared to a competitive market, firms cannot change their salaries depending
on the worker they end up hiring.1

    As such, the paper can be seen as providing support for the contention that a centralized
match, such as the NRMP, may indeed be used to reduce wages. However, in fact the NRMP
allows for ordered contracts, and in this paper I show that a match with ordered contracts
allows for more wage competition that can restore competitive outcomes.
    For a stylized model of the NRMP with ordered contracts, I introduce a small change in
the Bulow and Levin framework, which will have a big eﬀect on wages. Each firm i, instead
of advertising only one position at one contract (wage) can create a second contract for the
same position, and decide which subset of workers is eligible. Specifically, firm i, instead of
announcing only one wage pi can announce two (or more) wages pi and pSi , and determine which
workers are eligible for each contract. Firm i first tries to fill the position at contract pSi . If it
   1
     The problem that firms cannot change their salary when they try to hire diﬀerent workers becomes important
when firms are asymmetric, that is when, for example, some firms are clearly more productive than others. In
this case a competitive outcome calls for gaps in the wages paid to diﬀerent workers which are not reproduced
by equilibrium strategies when firms simultaneously set one wage for their position indendent of the worker
they end up hiring. Furthermore, while the fact that firms cannot announce which (subset of) worker is eligible
for their unique wage oﬀer has some eﬀect in reducing average wages, it cannot account for the whole problem.


                                                      3
fails to fill this position, then the contract is changed (or reverted) to a new contract pi , and
firm i tries to fill the position at this new contract with a new set of eligible workers for that
contract.
    While Roth and Peranson (1999) mention that they include ordered contracts in their
redesign of the NRMP, they did not present a formal model. Issues such as the appropriate
definition of stability, existence of stable matches, incentives of applicants and firms to submit
various contracts and rank order lists, and the diﬀerence from matches with multiple contracts
as introduced by Crawford and Knoer (1981) have not been analyzed.2 While a model with
ordered contracts shares the definition of stability with a multiple contract match, I propose a
modification to the deferred acceptance algorithm to accommodate ordered contracts. These
modifications imply that the contracts reached are the same, whether a firm or applicant
proposing algorithm is used. The reason is that a firm can control the order in which positions
are made available as opposed to simply having a multitude of simultaneous potential contracts.
After analyzing a model of ordered contracts, I show the two main eﬀects on wages which are:
    First, when other firms play the mixed strategies in the wage setting equilibrium of Bulow
and Levin, every firm has a strict incentive to use ordered contracts, and can strictly increase
its expected payoﬀ.
    Second, if all firms use ordered contracts, there exists an equilibrium in which wages are
competitive.
    The actual NRMP algorithm is therefore able to achieve competitive outcomes in the model
of Bulow and Levin with the use of ordered contracts.

    A separate issue concerns what the wages of medical residents would be in a market without
a match. The history of the market for medical residents (Roth 1984a) itself casts doubt that
a market without a clearinghouse should be thought of as a competitive market. Niederle
and Roth (2003b, 2004a and 2005) and Niederle, Proctor and Roth (2006) show that the
labor market for gastroenterology fellows, after they stopped using a centralized match, once
more unraveled, with thin and dispersed markets, and reduced mobility. A survey of program
directors in this market reveals that even after the market operated without a match for nearly
a decade, most programs oﬀer the same wage to all their fellows (i.e. impersonal wages).
Furthermore, a comparison of wages of internal medicine subspecialty fellows in specialties that
do and do not use a match reveals that wages are not diﬀerent for specialties that use the match
(Niederle and Roth 2003a and 2004a.) It seems that Gastroenterology programs prefer to use
a dimension of contracts diﬀerent from the terms of employment, namely exploding oﬀers, or
the amount of time an oﬀer is available to close contracts, and to avoid losing fellows to their
   2
     Roth and Peranson (1999) show how applicants who want two kinds of contracts, namely a first-year contract
and a second-year contract, as well as couples who want two jobs, present complementarities that may make the
set of stable matchings empty. They fail to note that ordered contracts, or reversions of positions in themselves
are not a source of complementarities, and hence do not pose any problems for the existence of stable matchings.



                                                       4
competitors (Niederle, Proctor and Roth 2006).3

    The NRMP, a matching program that allows for ordered contracts, therefore allows for wage
competition. Furthermore, eliminating a centralized match, such as the NRMP, may result in
an overall reduction of competition, as wages seem not to be aﬀected, but hospitals use a
decentralized unraveled market to exercise local market power in time to limit the positions
candidates can contemplate (see also Niederle and Roth 2004b.) That is, it appears that the
NRMP does not in fact force wages to be impersonal. Therefore, when we observe impersonal
wages (e.g. all new hires in a given program receive the same wage), this is due to other factors.
The results of Bulow and Levin may still apply, i.e. that wages may be more compressed then
if each worker were paid his marginal product. However, the match is not the cause.


2       A Simple Example
The following simple example illustrates the idea behind the low wage equilibrium of Bulow
and Levin, and how ordered contracts undermine this equilibrium, and can restore competitive
outcomes.
    Consider a market with 3 firms, and 3 workers, where each firm wants to match with one
worker, and every worker can work for at most one firm. Firm n’s profit from hiring worker m
at wage p is m · n − p, and worker m’s profit is p, that is workers care only about the wage they
receive, not for which firm they work. Wages in a competitive equilibrium have to be such that
the matching is eﬃcient, that is, worker i works for firm i.
    Worker 1’s competitive wage is p1 ∈ [0, 1], such that firm 1 and worker 1 both receive
non-negative surplus. The wage p2 of worker 2 has to be high enough, that firm 1 does not
prefer to employ worker 2 at p2 compared to employing worker 1 at p1 , that is 1 − p1 ≥ 2 − p2 .
Furthermore, p2 has to be low enough, that firm 2 prefers employing worker 2 at that wage to
employing worker 1 at the wage p1, that is 4 − p2 ≥ 2 − p1 , hence p2 ∈ [p1 + 1, p1 + 2]. Similarly,
p3 ∈ [p2 + 2, p2 + 3]. The lowest competitive wages are therefore 0, 1 and 3.

    Now consider a centralized match where firms simultaneously announce wages, followed by
an assortative matching by worker productivity and wages. In the example, clearly none of the
three firms will post the lowest competitive wage, since, for example, firm 3 has an incentive to
lower the wage closer to p2 . This of course in turn will make firm 2 want to compete for worker
3 and hence increase its wage. Bulow and Levin (forthcoming) show that in equilibrium firms
use mixed strategies for wages. Firm 1 oﬀers 0 with a probability 5/6, and any wage between
(0, 1/3] with a density of 1/2. Firm 2 oﬀers any wage between (0, 1/3] with a density of 1 and a
    3
    Avery, Fairbanks and Zeckhauser (2003) show that similarly in the market for college students, colleges use
the option of early decision, to secure students and limit their availability to competitors.




                                                      5
wage between (1/3, 7/3] with a density of 1/3. Firm 3, finally, makes oﬀers between [1/3, 7/3]
with a density of 1/2.
   These strategies clearly result in wage compression, and in lower average wages for workers
namely 0.02, 0.73 and 1.56, though worker 1 receives a higher wage than in the lowest wage
competitive equilibrium. Strategies also result in higher profits for firms, namely 1, 3.67 and
6.67 compared to 1, 3 and 6 in the competitive equilibrium.

    Now I introduce the change that firm i, instead of advertising only one position at one
wage can create a second contract for that same position, for which only a subset of workers
is eligible. Specifically, firm i, instead of announcing only one wage pi announces two wages pi
and pSi , and determines which of the workers are eligible for pSi , the contract it prefers when
trying to fill the position. Workers observe all four contracts, that is they observe pj for j 6= i,
pi and pSi and rank all four contracts according to the announced wage (and in case of ties
prefer more productive firms.)
    In the simple example, a matching algorithm that yields a stable outcome is as follows: The
centralized procedure uses pSi , pj for 1 ≤ i 6= j ≤ 3 to create an assortative match just as before
(though pi is not used yet, as firm i has only one position and can hire at most one worker.).
This interim match is the final match if firm i fills its position at pSi . If firm i is unmatched,
then pSi gets replaced by pi and the new assortative match is the final allocation.
    Suppose firm 1 is the firm that can make a normal wage oﬀer p1 , and a wage oﬀer connected
to a “star-position” pS1 . Then the following strategy makes firm 1 strictly better oﬀ than simply
only announcing one wage p1 according to the Bulow and Levin equilibrium. Let pS1 = 1/6,
the midpoint of the highest interval on which firm 1 is randomizing over wages, and competing
for worker 1 and worker 2, and let only worker 2 (and 3) be eligible for this contract pS1 . Then
the expected surplus of firm 1 is 1.08, strictly higher than 1. The intuition is that compared
to Bulow and Levin, where firm 1 is indiﬀerent between all strategies, and hence its payoﬀ is
for example determined by oﬀering wage p1 = 1/3, and hiring worker 2 and worker 1, firm 1
with the use of its star-position has a positive chance to hire worker 2 at a lower wage. The
expected wage of worker 2 is 0.86.
    Similarly, if either only firm 2 or only firm 3 can have a star-position contract, they can
announce pS = 4/3, and only worker 3 is eligible for this job, and otherwise announce p2 or p3
respectively as in the Bulow-Levin equilibrium.

     When all firms can have a star-position contract, then there exists an equilibrium in which
workers receive their competitive salaries, the lowest of which are 0, 1 and 3 respectively. Each
firm i can discipline the wage oﬀer of firm i + 1 to worker i + 1 with the star-position contract.
Specifically, let firm 1 have pS1 = 1, for which only workers 2 and 3 are eligible, and in case the
position does not get filled, it reverts to a contract p1 = 0 for which all workers are eligible. Let
firm 2 have pS2 = 3, for which only worker 3 is eligible, and in case the position does not get
filled, p2 = 1 for which workers 2 and 3 are eligible. Firm 3 has no real use of a star contract, so,

                                                 6
let firm 3 only use its normal position and let p3 = 3 for which only worker 3 is eligible. When
we assume that, in case of ties, workers prefer more productive firms, then the star-position
contracts ensure that firms cannot lower their salaries for the standard position, and that the
strategies form a Nash Equilibrium. Given the contracts of all other firms, it is easy to see
that no firm can gain by deviating, as each firm is disciplined in its wage oﬀer by the slightly
less productive firm, and no worker can gain from declining to rank some contracts. Note that
firm 1, in order to discipline the wage oﬀer of firm 2, needs to oﬀer the star-contract only with
probability 1/2.4 Similarly, firm 2 has to oﬀer the star-contract only with probability 2/3, to
eﬀectively discipline firm 3’s wage oﬀer.

   Before I show that the results of the example generalize, I analyze matching with ordered
contracts. I show existence of stable matchings, how deferred acceptance algorithms have to
be modified to account for ordered contracts, and how a match with ordered contracts diﬀers
from a match with multiple contracts as introduced by Crawford and Knoer (1981) and Kelso
and Crawford (1982).


3       Matching with Ordered Contracts
In a first section I summarize known findings on simple markets in which each firm oﬀers only
one fixed wage for their position (see also Roth and Sotomayor 1990). Then I formally define
markets with ordered contracts, show existence of stable matchings and how some standard
results fail to be true in this more general framework.


3.1     Stable Matching in a simple fixed-wage framework
The market consists of a set F of firms and a set W of workers, where every firm has specified
one fixed contract for the position it advertises. Every worker w has strict preferences Âw over
all firms and herself (if she prefers at some point to rather be unmatched), that is, Âw implies
a strict ordering on the set F ∪ {w}. Similarly, every firm has strict preferences over W ∪ {f } .
Each worker can work for (be matched to) at most one firm, and every firm can employ (be
matched to) at most one worker. Formally, a matching μ is a function μ : F ∪ W → F ∪ W
such that ∀w, f : (i) |μ(w)| = |μ(f )| = 1, (ii) μ(w) ∈ F ∪ {w} and μ(f ) ∈ W ∪ {f } and
(iii) μ(w) = f ⇔ μ(f ) = w. A matching is stable, if every firm and worker is matched to an
    4
    Firm 2 prefers to announce the contract p2 = 1 versus p2 = 0, if firm 1 oﬀers pS1 = 1 with probability q
such that (2 · 2 − 1) ≥ (1 − q)(2 · 2 − 0) + q(2 · 1 − 0), that is q ≥ 1/2. Furthermore, firm 2 cannot use his
star-contract to exploit the fact that firm 1 oﬀers pS1 = 1 with probability q, and whenever firm 1 does not oﬀer
a starcontract, try to recruit worker 2 with pS2 = 0 (where only worker 2 is eligible) and in case the position is
not filled, that is, whenever firm 1 does oﬀer the starcontract, revert the contract to p2 = 1. The reason this
is not robust, is that worker 2 can simply announce that the low wage “star-contract” is unacceptable, and so
always ensure a high salary of 1.


                                                        7
acceptable partner (that is, no firm or worker is rather unmatched than remaining with the
current match) and if there does not exist a firm-worker pair that are currently not matched
to each other, but prefer each other to their current match. Formally, a matching μ is stable if
(i) ∀w, f : If μ(w) = f then μ(w) Âw w and μ(f ) Âf f, and (ii) @f, w such that f Âw μ(w)
and w Âf μ(f ).

   In this simple model, the set of stable matchings is always nonempty, and there exists a
stable match that all firms prefer over any other stable match (and which all workers like less
than any other stable matching). This firm optimal stable matching can be obtained by the
Firm Proposing Deferred Acceptance Algorithm DA (Gale and Shapley 1962).

      Step 1: Firms make oﬀers to their most preferred worker. Workers collect all their
      oﬀers, keep their most preferred acceptable oﬀer, and reject any other oﬀers.
      Step k: Firms whose oﬀer was rejected in Step k-1 make an oﬀer to their next
      most desirable worker. Workers collect all their oﬀers, keep their most preferred
      acceptable oﬀer, and reject any other oﬀers.
      The algorithm ends when either no firm has its oﬀer rejected, or all rejected firms
      have already been rejected by all the workers to which they are willing to make an
      oﬀer.

    The key to stability of this outcome is that no worker ever regrets having rejected a firm’s
oﬀer, since she does so only when she has an oﬀer she prefers, and she will be matched to that
preferred firm, unless she receives an oﬀer she prefers even more. This implies that no firm
whose oﬀer is rejected in the algorithm has any hope that the oﬀer would be accepted at any
later stage. Furthermore, the stable outcome reached is the firm optimal stable outcome, that
is the stable outcome that any firm weakly prefers over any other stable outcome.

   Furthermore, it is a dominant strategy for firms to submit their true preferences, that is
they cannot gain by misrepresentation (Dubins and Freedman, 1981, and Roth 1982). This is
not true for workers, who can gain by truncating their preferences. In theory the amount of
optimal truncation can be substantial (see Coles 2005), though in practice they may not be
that large (Roth and Peranson 1999). Similarly, there exists a worker optimal stable matching
that is reached by a worker proposing deferred acceptance algorithm.


3.2    Stable Matching with Ordered Contracts
In a model with ordered contracts every firm i can have up to K contracts p1i , ..., pK   i , let Pi
be the set of contracts and Ki the number of contracts of firm i. For each contract pki , firm i
specifies a strict preference ordering over the set of workers eligible for this contract Wik ⊆ W .
For example, firm i may decide that a specific worker w may be eligible for p1i , but not for p2i .

                                                 8
Furthermore firm i has a strict ordering over which contract should be filled first. Let the first
contract be p1i , and only if firm i cannot fill the position at p1i , will firm i try to recruit workers
at p2i , and so on.
    Firm f has preferences over {f } ∪ Pi × W, where, by definition, for any k, j such that
k + j < Ki , ∀w ∈ Wik , ∀w0 ∈ Wik+j , (pkf , w) Âf (pk+j     0
                                                      f , w ).
    Let PF be the total set of contracts, where pf ∈ PF ® f ∈ F and p is a contract that f
oﬀers. A worker w has preferences over {w} ∪ PF .
    The definition of a matching is similar to before, only that we replace firms with contracts,
and additionally ensure that each firm has only one of its contracts filled. Formally, a matching
is a function μ : PF ∪ W → PF ∪ W such that ∀w, pf (i) |μ(w)| = |μ(pf )| = 1, (ii) μ(w) ∈
PF ∪ {w} and μ(pf ) ∈ W ∪ {pf } and (iii) μ(w) = pf ⇔ μ(pf ) = w and (iv) ∀f : |{pf :
μ(pf ) ∈ W }| ≤ 1.
    For any matching μ let, in slight abuse of notation, μ(f ) be the position, worker pair in case
f has one of its contracts filled, and otherwise let μ(f ) be f.
    A matching is stable if there exists no firm, worker, contract triplet such that the firm
would rather fill its position with that worker at that contract, and the worker would rather
accept that contract, than stay with their current match. Formally, a matching is stable if (i)
∀w, pf , f : If μ(w) = pf then μ(w) Âw w and μ(f ) Âf f, and (ii) @f, pf , w such that pf Âw μ(w)
and (pf , w) Âf μ(f ).

   To show that a stable matching always exists, I provide a modified deferred acceptance
algorithm whose outcome is always a stable match.
   I start with the simpler firm proposing modified deferred acceptance algorithm, before I
show the worker proposing modified deferred acceptance algorithm. Then I show that they
both yield stable outcomes.
   The Firm Proposing Modified Deferred Acceptance Algorithm: MDA

      MDA Step 1: All firms have only their first contract available.

           DA: Step 1: Firms make oﬀers to their most preferred worker. Workers collect
      all their oﬀers, keep their most preferred acceptable oﬀer, and reject any other oﬀers.
                Step k: Firms whose oﬀer was rejected in Step k-1 make an oﬀer to their
      next most desirable worker. Workers collect all their oﬀers, keep their most preferred
      acceptable oﬀer, and reject any other oﬀers.
                The DA sub-algorithm ends when either no firm has its oﬀer rejected, or all
      rejected firms have no more workers they want to make an oﬀer to, at the current
      contract.

      MDA Step k: Any firm that has its position at contract pji unfilled, changes the
      contract to pj+1
                   i   in case it has another contract to revert to. Then the algorithm

                                                   9
     continues with a DA sub-algorithm, where all previous oﬀers are cancelled and have
     to be remade.
     The algorithm ends, when all firms that have no oﬀer held by an applicant have no
     more contract to change or revert to. Workers that hold an oﬀer from a firm at a
     contract are matched to that firm at that contract, remaining firms and workers are
     unmatched.

    Note that when some firm f reverts its position to a new contract, the deferred acceptance
algorithm part can simply continue at whichever oﬀers are held right now, instead of canceling
all oﬀers and restarting the whole process anew. The reason is that no firm that has not
changed a contract can gain by remaking an oﬀer that was rejected, as it was rejected because
the worker either finds the oﬀer unacceptable, or has a better oﬀer in hand, and will have so
once more as the algorithm unfolds, now that there are even more desirable contracts than
before.
    The Worker Proposing modified Deferred Acceptance algorithm: MDA

     MDA Step 1: All firms have only their first contract available.

        DA: Worker proposing DA sub-algorithm which ends when either no worker has
     her oﬀer rejected, or all rejected workers have no more firms they want to make an
     oﬀer to, at the current contract.

     MDA Step k: Any firm that has its position at contract pji unfilled, reverts the
     contract to pj+1
                  i   in case it has another contract to change to. Then the algorithm
     continues with the DA steps, where all previous oﬀers are annulled and have to be
     remade.
     The algorithm ends, when all the firms that have no oﬀer have no more position
     to revert to. At this point any worker whose oﬀer is held by a firm at a specific
     contract is matched to that firm at that contract.

   Unlike in the firm proposing algorithm, in the worker proposing MDA, interim oﬀers have
to be annulled, because some worker, who has an oﬀer held by a firm, may prefer one of the
new contracts that are introduced when a firm changed its contract.

Theorem 1 Stability: Whenever firms have a strict ordering over a finite number of con-
tracts, that is ordered contracts, and for each contract a strict preference ordering over the
workers, and workers have a strict ordering over firm-contract pairs, then both the firm and
worker proposing MDA yield a stable outcome.

Theorem 2 Firm-optimal stable match: The firm proposing MDA yields the firm optimal
stable match.

                                             10
   But, as we will see below, the worker proposing MDA need not yield the worker optimal
stable match.

    That is in a two-sided matching market with ordered contracts, just as in simple matching
markets, we can define the set of stable outcomes. Note that for stability the special dynamic
feature of ordered contracts is not taken into account, and so, theorems that use stability in
a market with multiple contracts still apply. Finally, a version of a Gale Shapley deferred
acceptance algorithm yields stable outcomes, and in case firms propose, indeed the stable
outcome that all firms prefer over any other stable outcome.


3.3    Some incentive properties of matchings achieved through MDA
Before analyzing incentive properties the modified deferred acceptance algorithm imposes on
firms and workers when submitting their preferences, I investigate in more detail how the
outcome of the firm and worker proposing MDA diﬀer. In simple matching environments,
McVitie and Wilson (1970) and Roth (1984a) showed that all stable matchings have the same
workers and positions matched and share the set of unmatched workers and positions. We can
find a version of this theorem in case firms have ordered contracts about the set of contracts
matched when either the firm or worker proposing MDA is used.

Theorem 3 The two (possibly diﬀerent) stable outcomes reached through the worker proposing
MDA and the firm proposing MDA have the same set of workers and the same set of firms
matched at the same contracts.

    The theorem has a few immediate implications. On a first note, a firm proposing MDA seems
computationally easier than the worker proposing MDA, since there, after every reversion of
contracts, all the existing oﬀers have to be cancelled and the whole oﬀering process has to start
anew. However, Theorem 3 implies that a simple way to determine the outcome of a worker
proposing MDA is the following: First, with the use of a firm proposing MDA determine the set
of contracts that will be used in a worker proposing MDA. Then, with those contracts, simply
run a regular worker proposing deferred acceptance algorithm.

    To apply the theory of ordered contracts to actual markets, it is important to understand
the incentives firms and workers face when submitting their preference list to a centralized
system. The next corollary shows that firms do not have any incentive to add (or scratch)
undesirable positions (i.e. positions that will not be filled), on the top of their preference list.
That is firms cannot gain from manipulating the timing at which they reach various contracts
in either the worker proposing or firm proposing MDA.

    Corollary 1: In both firm and worker proposing MDA’s, firms cannot gain by adding con-
tracts that will never be filled on top of their list or scratching contracts that are completely

                                                11
undesirable. Furthermore, in both MDA’s the order in which firms revert contracts is irrelevant
to the final outcome.

   However, Theorem 3 also immediately implies that workers may have an incentive to ma-
nipulate their preferences, as, whichever MDA is used, firm or worker proposing, the set of
contracts filled is the same.
   Corollary 2: The worker and firm proposing MDA both result in matchings that use the
contracts filled in the firm optimal stable match. That is, the worker optimal stable match is not
reached by the worker proposing MDA, unless the worker proposing optimal match has the same
contracts filled than the firm optimal MDA. This implies that workers may have an incentive
to misrepresent their preferences even in the worker proposing MDA.
    To illustrate the statements of corollary 2, an example is most useful.
    Example: Suppose there are two firms f1 and f2 with two contracts for one position each,
one at low wage L and one at high wage H, and two workers w1 and w2 . Every firm prefers
to fill the position at the low wage, and prefers, for a given wage, worker w1 over w2 . Every
worker prefers high over low wages, but for a given contract prefers f1 over f2 . There are four
stable matchings:
                     µ         ¶       µ         ¶      µ       ¶      µ         ¶
                        h1 h2             l1 l2           h1 l2           l1 h2
               μW =             , μF =             ,ν =           ,ρ =
                       w1 w2             w1 w2           w1 w2           w2 w1

The worker optimal stable match μW cannot be reached through the worker proposing modified
deferred acceptance, in fact both firm and worker proposing MDA’s lead to μF . To see that,
note that in a match with ordered contracts, firms submit first the order of contracts to be
used when trying to fill the position, in this case, the first contract is the low wage contract
L, and the second contract is H. Then, for each contract the firms submit the rank order over
workers, in this case, for both L and H that would be w1 , w2 . In a worker proposing MDA, in
the first round, the available contracts are, for each firm, the low wage contract L. Given these
contracts, the first deferred acceptance subalgorithm yields a matching of worker wi with firm
fi , , for i = 1, 2 and hence matching μF .
      Furthermore, each worker has an incentive to misrepresent her preferences. If any of the
two workers submits preferences such that only high wage contracts are acceptable, otherwise
the worker prefers to be unmatched, then the worker can guarantee herself a high wage.

    The example also highlights the diﬀerences of a match with ordered contracts, to a mul-
tiple contracts match in which salaries are determined using a standard version of a deferred
acceptance algorithm. In this alternative way to introduce wages (Crawford and Knoer 1981,
and Kelso and Crawford 1982) or also general contracts (Roth 1984b and Hatfield and Milgrom
2005) a firm i has a finite set of contracts qi ∈ Qi , and preferences over Qi × W, and every
worker w has preferences over ∪i Qi ∪ {w}. Note that a firm that has multiple contracts does

                                               12
not necessarily have more possible rankings over contract-worker pairs compared to a firm that
has ordered contracts, as long as the firm with ordered contracts has enough of those (at most
|Qi | · |W | for each firm i). One diﬀerence of standard models of multiple contracts to a model
with ordered contracts is that in the standard model, all contracts are potentially present si-
multaneously and available immediately. Therefore, if workers were to make oﬀers, they could
immediately oﬀer to work for the highest wage or the most desirable contract. In contrast, an
ordered contracts match has a sequential dimension built in, in which firms, even when they
are not the ones making oﬀers, decide on the order in which to try to fill contracts. The eﬀect
of this seemingly small diﬀerence can once more best be seen in the continuation of the former
example:

    Example continued: Suppose firms now have both wage oﬀers available immediately,
that is each firm i submits a preference list (w1 , l), (w2 , l), (w1 , h), (w2 , h), that is each firm
most prefers a worker at a low wage, and for a given wage prefers w1 to w2 . Analogously, each
worker w submits preferences (f1 , h), (f2 , h), (f1 , l), (f2 , l). Given these submitted rank order
lists, a worker proposing deferred acceptance algorithm will yield μW , as first, both workers
make an oﬀer to firm 1 at a high wage, firm 1 keeps the oﬀer of worker 1 and rejects w2 ’s
oﬀer, who makes an oﬀer to work for firm 2 at the high wage, which is a stable outcome. The
diﬀerence to the match with ordered contracts is that in this multiple contract match the high
wage contracts are available immediately, that is workers can apply to them right away. In the
case of ordered contracts, every firm has only one contract available at any round of a deferred
acceptance algorithm, and only if a firm failed to match, does the position change to a new
contract.

    That is, in a standard matching model where firms can have simultaneous multiple con-
tracts, the firm and worker proposing deferred acceptance algorithm lead in general to diﬀerent
contracts being filled, even though the same set of firms will be matched (Hatfield and Milgrom
2005). In the case of a match with ordered contracts, not only is the same set of firms matched,
but also the same set of contracts, between a firm proposing and a worker proposing modified
deferred acceptance algorithm.
    The robustness of this feature to a worker and firm proposing algorithm is helpful in actual
applications, as the NRMP switched to a student proposing algorithm in 1998.5 Introducing
the possibility to have several contracts ranked simultaneously would greatly aﬀect the outcome
of the match. However, the contracts filled in a match with ordered contracts are not aﬀected
by the choice of which side of the market makes oﬀers.
  5
  The algorithm designed by Roth and Peranson, and used by the NRMP, works like a worker proposing
MDA (private communication from Alvin Roth.)




                                                  13
4    Matching with Ordered Contracts in the Bulow-Levin
     environment.
The general model of Bulow and Levin has N firms and N workers, where each firm wants to
hire one worker, and every worker can work for at most one firm. Firm n’s profit from hiring
worker m at wage p is ∆n · m − p, where ∆N ≥ .. ≥ ∆1 ≥ 0, and worker m’s utility is p, that is
workers care only about the wage they receive, not for which firm they work. All preferences and
productivities are common knowledge. In their model of a match, firms first make simultaneous
salary oﬀers followed by an assortative match, which matches high productivity workers to high
salary firms, and, in case of salary ties, to more productive firms. Firms are required to rank
all workers, that is, required to be willing to employ any worker, which is inconsequential when
∆n = n, but not in general.
    In a pricing equilibrium firms choose an oﬀer to maximize their expected profits given the
other firms’ choices and the matching process. An equilibrium involves mixed strategies. For
firm n, a mixed strategy is a distribution where Gn (p) denotes the probability that firm n
oﬀers a salary less or equal than p. Let gn denote the density of firm n’s oﬀer distribution. In
equilibrium, firms compete over ranges of salaries with each other, where more productive firms
oﬀer higher salaries and compete for more productive workers.

   To describe the equilibrium, Bulow and Levin first identify the set of firms that compete
on each salary level, the density with which they oﬀer wages, and once all but the lowest
productivity firm is dealt with specify that firm 1 may oﬀer a wage of zero with a positive
probability.
   Firm n’s oﬀer density at wage p, if it competes with firms l ≤ n ≤ m is

                                                 1 X 1
                                                       m
                                                              1
                             gn (p) = q(l, m) =             −   .
                                                m − l k=l ∆k ∆n

For any given highest firm m that oﬀers p, let l(m) be the lowest firm that oﬀers p, for which
q(m) ≡ q(l(m), m) > 0. Let pN+1 be the highest salary oﬀered, and pn denote the lowest
salary oﬀered by firm n. Then firms l(N) ≤ n ≤ N compete on (pN , pN+1 ] with oﬀer densities
qn (N), where pN is such that firm N exhausts its oﬀer probability. Then, below oﬀer pN , firms
l(N − 1), .., N compete on (pN , pN−1 ] such that firm N − 1 exhausts all its remaining oﬀer
probability. The process continues until the behavior of firms 2, .., N is specified. If ∆1 = ∆2 ,
then firm 1’s behavior is also specified. Otherwise, firm 1 oﬀers zero with its remaining oﬀer
                                  P
probability, namely G1 (0) = 1 − q1 (n) · (pn+1 − pn ).
                                  n

Theorem 4 Bulow and Levin (forthcoming): There is a unique price equilibrium. Letting
qn (.) and p1 , .., pN+1 and G1 (0) be defines as above, then for each firm n, and each non-empty
interval [pm , pm+1 ], gn (p) = qn (m) for all p ∈ (pm , pm+1 ].

                                               14
   First, I show that the equilibrium of Bulow and Levin does not survive the introduction of
ordered contracts.

Theorem 5 Suppose all firms have only one position, and oﬀer wages pi according to Bulow
and Levin. If some firm i can oﬀer two wages, pSi - for which it can restrict which workers are
acceptable - and pi - for which any worker is eligible, then the firm makes strict positive gains
from using that possibility.

    Furthermore, if every firm has an ordered star-position contract, then competitive wages
are an equilibrium outcome. Let ci be the lowest competitive wage of worker i, then c1 = 0,
ci+1 = ci + ∆i .

Theorem 6 Competitive Equilibrium Wages: The following strategies form a Nash equi-
librium: Every firm announces pi = ci for 1 ≤ i ≤ N and pSN = cN with only worker wN being
eligible, and pSj = cj+1 for j < N and the workers being eligible for pSj are workers wj+1 and
higher. The workers report their preferences truthfully, that is they rank all contracts such that
they prefer higher wages to lower wages, and for a given wage more productive firms.

    That is a match with ordered contracts, which provides a description of the actual possibil-
ities oﬀered by the NRMP algorithm, allows for competitive outcomes and does not necessarily
result in lower wages.


5       Wages of Medical Fellows with and without a Match
The National Residency Matching Program allows for ordered contracts. In the 1990’s about
7 percent of the three to four thousand programs that participate in each year have positions
with contracts that could revert to other contracts if they remain unfilled (accounting for
almost 6 percent of the total quota of positions).6 In the reinstitution of the fellowship match
for Gastroenterology fellows, this feature is also especially advertised to, for example, allow
programs to try to fill a slot first with a research fellow, and in case no suitable research fellow
can be attracted the program can decide to fill this position with a more clinically oriented
fellow instead (see Niederle, Proctor and Roth 2006).

   Ordered contracts therefore allow a program to replicate how they may try to fill positions in
a decentralized market, namely to try to find a research fellow, and only go for a clinical fellow in
case no suitable candidate can be attracted.7 In an ordered contracts match a program can do
    6
     This feature is also used by the APPIC Internship Matching Program sponsored and supervised by the
Association of Psychology Postdoctoral and Internship Centers (APPIC).
   7
     Many economics departments that may have tried to hire a senior faculty in a field, opt for a junior person
once they were not so successful.


                                                      15
that without compromising the quality of the applicant pool they can consider for their second
contract (Corollary 1). It is however not clear that in a decentralized market, a program may
not be hurt if it tries to fill a position first under a certain contract, and then only later under
a second contract. If some applicants have already been hired (for example by programs that
have not tried to fill the position first under another contract), then a program may actually
lose some potential candidates, simply by having tried to fill a position first under a diﬀerent
contract.

    Indeed, Niederle and Roth (2004), and Niederle, Proctor and Roth (2006) showed that
the market for gastroenterology fellows, after they stopped using the centralized match, once
more unraveled.8 The market fails to be one big market in which all positions are oﬀered
simultaneously. A survey of gastroenterology program directors reveals that programs use terse
deadlines on oﬀers that limit the possibilities of candidates to simultaneously consider other
oﬀers. And while a few program directors (9% of respondents) did not oﬀer the same wage to
all their incoming fellows, they all responded that wages were not adjusted to outside oﬀers.
Similar results hold for other terms of fellowship contracts such as hours on call.

    The survey results are supported by data on the internal medicine fellowship market.
Niederle and Roth (2003b) show that the market is more localized without a centralized match,
that is, more gastroenterology fellows remain at the same hospital, the same city and the same
state where they did their internal medicine residency, than with a match. Furthermore, one
can compare wages of fellows whose specialties participate in a match, with wages of fellows
whose specialty matches in a decentralized way. In internal medicine, of all subspecialties that
require three years of prior residency, in the years between 2002 and 2004 four specialties used
the MSMP (Medical Specialties Matching Program) while ten did not. Niederle and Roth
(2003a) compare wages of all programs that report positive wages excluding those from Puerto
Rico using the data from the Graduate Medical Education Library 2002-2003. A simple regres-
sion of the wage on a match dummy (which is one when the specialty uses the match) reveals
no significant eﬀect of the match. Similarly, comparing wages within hospitals for specialties
that use a match and that do not, finds only a small, positive, significant (but not economically
significant) eﬀect of a match on wages. Similar results were found for the next year, using the
Graduate Medical Education Library 2003-2004 data (Niederle and Roth 2004).

   That is, it is not clear that a match compresses or lowers wages, because on the one hand,
the ordered contracts match used by the NRMP allows for wage competition. Furthermore, the
gastroenterology market, as well as the history of the residency market strongly suggest that
a market without a centralized match may not be a competitive market. While the NRMP
   8
    The failure of the gastroenterology fellowship match is one of the rare instances in which a match which
produces stable outcomes has been abandonned. McKiney, Niederle and Roth (2005) argue that this failure was
due to an unusual event, and shed light not only why this market failed, but also why such failures are so rare.


                                                      16
does not in fact force wages to be impersonal, we still observe a lot of impersonal wages. In
that, residents or first year fellow may however not be unique. For example, in many economic
departments, first year salaries of junior faculty hired in the same year are often the same. As
such the lessons of Bulow and Levin may still apply, that wages are more compressed than if
each worker were paid their marginal productivity, however the match does not seem to be the
major culprit.


6     Conclusions
The NRMP is a match with ordered contracts, which allows for programs to eﬀectively have
more than one contract per position. This paper analyzes the properties of a match with
ordered contracts, and as such fills a gap in the existing matching literature by analyzing the
actual algorithm used by the NRMP, and providing a new tool to be used for future designs of
centralized matches. I show that a match with ordered contracts has novel implications, most
notably that the set of contracts filled is the same, whether a firm or worker proposing modified
deferred acceptance algorithm is used.
   In light of the controversy about the eﬀects of a centralized match on wages, this paper shows
that a match with ordered contracts allows for competitive equilibrium wages. Furthermore,
ordered contracts allow programs to try to hire diﬀerent kinds of candidates, without taking any
penalty on the set of applicants available once they unsuccessfully tried to fill a position under
their first contract. Compared to a decentralized market a centralized match may increase
competition, as it does not allow programs to lock in candidates early, before other programs
have finished reverting their contracts to diﬀerent contracts.


7     Appendix
Proof of Theorem 1: Stability: Stability in the case of firm proposing MDA is trivial, as
any firm made an oﬀer to any worker it preferred more, and got rejected by that worker (which
implies the worker has a better oﬀer in hand). To show stability in the worker proposing MDA
outcome, note that for a given set of contracts used in the final MDA step the outcome is stable
to deviations that only use these contracts, because the DA yields stable outcomes (see Gale
and Shapley 1962, and section 3.1). Therefore I only need to show that no worker prefers a
position pji that got reverted into pj+1i  . Suppose that at some step in the MDA, at the end of
                              j
the DA part, a position pi is unfilled. Let the interim matching be μ, where μ is the worker
optimal stable match given the contracts available. Then, at μ, for any worker w eligible for
pji , μ(w) Âw pji . Now pji gets reverted into pj+1
                                                i   . Technically, this is equivalent to adding a new
firm to an existing market. By Gale and Sotomayor (1985), adding a firm implies that the
new worker optimal stable match μ0 satisfies for any worker w: μ0 (w) ºw μ(w). That is, every


                                                 17
worker eligible for pji still has μ0 (w) Âw pji . This is true for any reversion, that is no worker
would accept a contract that was reverted into another contract. ¥

     Proof of Theorem 2: Firm-optimal stable match: For a firm f, define a worker,
contract pair (pf , w) to be achievable, if there exists a stable matching at which firm f is
matched to worker w at contract pf . I show, by induction, that the stable outcome produced
by the firm proposing MDA matches every firm to their most preferred achievable worker,
contract pair, and is therefore the (unique) firm optimal stable matching. Assume that up to
a give step in the procedure no firm has yet been rejected at a contract by a worker who is
achievable. At this step suppose that worker w rejects firm f at contract pf . If worker w rejects
firm f at contract pf as unacceptable (i.e. w Âw pf ), then this worker is unachievable at this
contract and I’m done. If worker w rejects firm f at contract pf in favor of a firm g at contract
pg , I show that w is not achievable for firm f at contract pf .
     Firm g prefers w at pg to any other worker, contract pair except for those workers that have
already rejected firm g at contract pg and at any contracts in place before the contract got
reverted into pg , and hence (by the inductive assumption) are unachievable to firm g. Consider
a hypothetical matching μ that matches firm f to worker w at contract pf and everyone else
to an achievable worker contract pair. Then firm g prefers w at contract pg to the achievable
worker, contract pair at μ. So, the matching μ is unstable, since it is blocked by (g, pg , w), who
prefer each other to their match at μ. Therefore there is no stable matching that matches f to
w at pf , and so worker w is not achievable to firm f at contract pf , which completes the proof.
¥

    Proof of Theorem 3: The worker proposing and firm proposing MDA follow the same
steps, the only diﬀerence being that the interim matching is reached by either a firm proposing
or a worker proposing DA. However, McVitie and Wilson (1970) and Roth (1984a) showed that
for a given set of workers and firms, all stable matchings have the same workers and positions
matched and share the set of unmatched workers and positions. This implies that at any interim
match at the end of a DA step, in both MDA algorithms, the same positions are unfilled and
get reverted into the same set of new contracts. I have already made the argument, that the
DA part of firms, can as easily be thought of as one in which all former oﬀers are annulled and
remade.¥

    Proof of Corollary 1: By adding undesirable contracts at the top of the preference list
(or scratching them), a firm does not influence the set of stable matchings. Hence a firm does
not influence the set of contracts that are the outcome of both the firm and worker proposing
MDA.
     In the worker proposing MDA no firm can benefit from delaying its reversion of positions,
as the more steps of the MDA pass, the more desirable the competing positions become. Since
the DA step restarts whenever there is a change in a contract, delaying to revert a position, that

                                                18
is having a round in which a position by a firm is unfilled has no eﬀect. In the firm proposing
algorithm, the statement is equivalent to the statement that in a regular Deferred Acceptance
algorithm, some firms may start making oﬀers only after some others firms already made oﬀers.
This does not aﬀect the outcome of a Deferred Acceptance algorithm. ¥

    Proof of Theorem 5: Every firm i has a highest wage interval that it oﬀers with a constant
density, let it be [pLi , pH
                           i ], on which it competes for several workers, the highest being wH and
the lowest one wL . The highest (and lowest) worker is easily determined by determining the
highest (or respectively, lowest) firm that is oﬀering a wage on this highest wage interval of firm
i. Suppose that all other firms use the mixed strategies from before, then the following strategy
makes firm i in expectation strictly better oﬀ. Let pSi = (pH             L
                                                                    i − pi )/2 and the only worker
eligible for that wage be wH . It is easy to see that firm i is strictly better oﬀ with this strategy,
then foregoing the possibility to use a pSi job at all. The reason is that firm i is indiﬀerent
between all wages it oﬀers in the Bulow and Levin equilibrium, so its profit is determined by
for example oﬀering wage pi = pH       i and hiring any of the workers wH , ..., wi with (diﬀerent)
positive probability. So, trying to hire worker wH at a lower wage first, with the use of the
star-contract, which is successful with positive probability, strictly increases expected payoﬀs.
¥

    Proof of Theorem 6: First I show that a firm i cannot gain by deviating. Without firm
i, resulting wages would be cj for worker wj , and workers wj with j > i work for firm j, while
workers wj with j ≤ i work for firm j − 1. If firm i submits the strategies suggested by the
theorem, firm i hires worker wi at the lowest competitive wage for wi (displacing firm i − 1).
Firm i cannot hire any workers wj with j > i, unless firm i is willing to pay ε more than
competitive wages, and may hire workers wj with j ≤ i at competitive wages. So, given the
definition of lowest competitive wages, firm i cannot make higher profits than hiring worker wi
at ci .
    Now I show that workers cannot gain by deviating either. Given the strategies of firms,
and workers j > i, worker i is eligible, and the highest ranked worker of the standard contract
of firm i at ci , the star-contract of firm i − 1 at ci , and contracts at wages lower than ci . Any
higher wage contract is not achievable for worker wi . Hence, worker wi , by reporting truthfully
receives the highest wage he can receive given the strategies of other firms and workers.¥




                                                 19
References
 [1] Avery, Christopher, Andrew Fairbanks and Richard Zeckhauser, The Early Admissions
     Game: Joining the Elite, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA 2003.

 [2] Bulow, Jeremy and Jonathan Levin, "Matching and Price Competition", American Eco-
     nomic Review, forthcoming.

 [3] Coles, Peter, "Strategic Behavior in Matching Markets", working paper 2005.

 [4] Crawford, Vincent P., "The Flexible-Salary Match: A Proposal to Increase the Salary
     Flexibility of the National Resident Matching Program," forthcoming, Journal of Economic
     Behavior and Organization.

 [5] Crawford, Vincent P., and Elsie Marie Knoer, “Job Matching with Heterogenous Firms
     and Workers,” Econometrica 49, March 1981, 437 - 450.

 [6] Dubins, L.E., and Freedman, “Machiavelli and the Gale-Shapley algorithm,” American
     Mathematical Monthly, 88, 1981, 485-494.

 [7] Gale, David, and Lloyd Shapley, “College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage,”
     American Mathematical Monthly, 69, 1962, 9-15.

 [8] Gale, David, and Marilda Sotomayor, “Some remarks on the stable matching problem,”
     Discrete Applied Mathematics, 11, 1985, 223-232.

 [9] Hatfield, John, and Paul Milgrom, “Matching with Contracts,” American Economic Re-
     view, Vol. 95, No. 4., September 2005, 913-935.

[10] Kelso, Alexander S., and Vincent P. Crawford, “Job Matching, Coalition Formation, and
     Gross Substitutes,” Econometrica, 50 (November 1982, 1483 - 1504.

[11] McKinney, C. Nicholas, Muriel Niederle, and Alvin E. Roth, “The collapse of a medical
     labor clearinghouse (and why such failures are rare),” American Economic Review, vol.
     95, No.3, June 2005, 878-889.

[12] McVitie, D.G., and L.B. Wilson, “Stable marriage assignments for unequal sets,” BIT, 10,
     1970, 295-309.

[13] Niederle, Muriel, Deborah D. Proctor and Alvin E. Roth, “What will be needed for the
     new GI fellowship match to succeed?”, Gastroenterology, 130, January 2006, 218-224.

[14] Niederle, Muriel, and Alvin E. Roth, “Relationship Between Wages and Presence of a
     Match in Medical Fellowships,” JAMA, Journal of the American Medical Association, vol.
     290, No. 9, September 3, 2003a, 1153-1154.

                                             20
[15] Niederle, Muriel, and Alvin E. Roth, “Unraveling reduces mobility in a labor market:
     Gastroenterology with and without a centralized match,” Journal of Political Economy,
     vol.111, No. 6, December 2003b, 1342 — 1352.

[16] Niederle, Muriel, and Alvin E. Roth, “The Gastroenterology Fellowship Match: How it
     failed, and why it could succeed once again”, Gastroenterology, 127, August 2004, 658-666.

[17] Niederle, Muriel, and Alvin E. Roth, “Market Culture: How Norms Governing Exploding
     Oﬀers Aﬀect Market Performance”, January 2004b, and NBER working paper 10256.

[18] Niederle, Muriel, and Alvin E. Roth, “The Gastroenterology Fellowship Market: Should
     there be a Match?” American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, vol. 95, No.2, May
     2005.

[19] Roth, Alvin E., “The economics of Matching: Stability and Incentives”, Mathematics of
     Operations Research, 7, 1982, 617 - 628.

[20] Roth, Alvin E., “The evolution of the labor market for medical interns and residents: A
     case study in game theory”, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 92, 1984a, 991-1016.

[21] Roth, Alvin E., “Stability and Polarization of Interests in Job Matching,” Econometrica,
     1984b, 52(1), 47-57.

[22] Roth, Alvin E. “The Origins, History, and Design of the Resident Match,” JAMA, Journal
     of the American Medical Association, vol. 289, No. 7, February 19, 2003, 909-912.

[23] Roth, Alvin E. and Marilda Sotomayor, Two-Sided Matching: A Study in Game-Theoretic
     Modeling and Analysis, Econometric Society Monograph Series, Cambridge University
     Press, 1990.

[24] Roth, Alvin E. and Elliot Peranson, "The Redesign of the Matching Market for American
     Physicians: Some Engineering Aspects of Economic Design", American Economic Review,
     vol 89, no. 4, September 1999, 748 - 779.




                                              21
