                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             OPTIMAL CURRENCY SHARES IN INTERNATIONAL RESERVES:
                  THE IMPACT OF THE EURO AND THE PROSPECTS
                               FOR THE DOLLAR

                                          Elias Papaioannou
                                            Richard Portes
                                         Gregorios Siourounis

                                         Working Paper 12333
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12333


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




We thank Takatoshi Ito, Takeo Hoshi, Shin-ichi Fukuda, Andrew Rose, Philip Hartmann, J. Onno de
Beaufort Wijnholds, Hélène Rey, Harris Dellas, participants in the TRIO (NBER-TCER-CEPR) conference
and seminars at the European Central Bank, the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research, Bilkent
University, Eurobank, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of Spain for useful comments and suggestions. We
also benefitted from detailed suggestions and feedback from three anonymous referees. All errors are ours.
The views expressed are the authors’ and do not reflect those of the European Central Bank or the
Eurosystem. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Elias Papaioannou, Richard Portes and Gregorios Siourounis. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Currency Shares in International Reserves: The Impact of the Euro and the Prospects for
the Dollar
Elias Papaioannou, Richard Portes and Gregorios Siourounis
NBER Working Paper No. 12333
June 2006
JEL No. F02, F30, G11, G15

                                              ABSTRACT

Foreign exchange reserve accumulation has risen dramatically in recent years. The introduction of
the euro, greater liquidity in other major currencies, and the rising current account deficits and
external debt of the United States have increased the pressure on central banks to diversify away
from the US dollar. A major portfolio shift would significantly affect exchange rates and the status
of the dollar as the dominant international currency. We develop a dynamic mean-variance
optimization framework with portfolio rebalancing costs to estimate optimal portfolio weights
among the main international currencies. Making various assumptions on expected currency returns
and the variance-covariance structure, we assess how the euro has changed this allocation. We then
perform simulations for the optimal currency allocations of four large emerging market countries
(Brazil, Russia, India and China), adding constraints that reflect a central bank’s desire to hold a
sizable portion of its portfolio in the currencies of its peg, its foreign debt and its international trade.
Our main results are: (i) The optimizer can match the large share of the US dollar in reserves, when
the dollar is the reference (risk-free) currency. (ii) The optimum portfolios show a much lower
weight for the euro than is observed. This suggests that the euro may already enjoy an enhanced role
as an international reserve currency ("punching above its weight"). (iii) Growth in issuance of
euro-denominated securities, a rise in euro zone trade with key emerging markets, and increased use
of the euro as a currency peg, would all work towards raising the optimal euro shares, with the last
factor being quantitatively the most important.

Elias Papaioannou                                         Gregorios Siourounis
European Central Bank                                     Barclays Capital
DG-R; Financial Research (EM 1623)                        5 The North Colonnade
Postfach 16 03 19                                         Canary Warf
D-60311 Frankfurt                                         London E14 4BB
GERMANY                                                   UNITED KINGDOM
elias.papaioannou@ecb.int                                 gsiourounis@london.edu

Richard Portes
London Business School
Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
rportes@london.edu
1      Introduction

The euro has been in existence for seven years, and euro notes and coins have been in
circulation for four years. Although it is still premature to evaluate the full implications of
the only major currency established for more than a century, its successful introduction has
already brought significant consequences for international finance. For example, a growing
number of firms and sovereigns raise external finance issuing euro-denominated securities.
The use of the euro as a currency for the settlement or invoicing of international trade
transactions has also shown a notable increase in recent years (ECB, 2005). There is concern
that portfolio shifts from dollar-to euro-denominated assets, in particular, by central banks,
could result in a sharp appreciation of the euro relative to the dollar. And a key question
among politicians, academics, and the public is whether the euro will challenge or eventually
displace the dollar as the leading international currency.

    The prospects of big portfolio shifts from the dollar to the euro and the euro taking
on some of the dollar’s roles in the international financial system seemed unlikely a decade
ago, when the first stages of European Monetary Union were designed. Some did argue
that the euro could achieve the prerequisites for a major international currency (Alogosk-
oufis and Portes, 1991, 1992, 1997; Portes and Rey, 1998; Bergsten, 1997) and considered
the consequences for international portfolio allocation and exchange rates. The dominant
view, however, held that the euro’s international impact would be small (e.g., Frankel, 1995;
Eichengreen, 1998) or that the expansion of its role would be very slow (Hartmann, 1998a,b).
Indeed, many were sceptical even about its legal and technical foundations, its short- to
medium-term viability in the face of currency market pressures and its long-run impact in-
side Europe (e.g., Feldstein, 1997). Those who doubted that the euro would be successful
stressed that the Eurozone was not an “optimal currency area” and could therefore lead to
tensions among member states in the conduct of monetary policy. Moreover, the non-unified
political voice of Europe would impede the euro’s internationalization. Its role would be
little more than that of the Deutsche mark — both theory (network externalities, e.g., Rey,
2001) and history (dollar and sterling, e.g., Eichengreen, 2005) suggested great inertia in
the international status of currencies. The incumbent dollar was so dominant that only a
cataclysmic shock could threaten its hegemonic status.

    Now, however, the prospect that the euro will at least challenge the dollar’s role in global
markets sounds less implausible. The euro zone is comparable with the American economy

                                               1
in terms of GDP and trade openness, and it may even become larger when non-eurozone
EU members join in. The European Central Bank (ECB) has kept inflation expectations
low, minimizing fears that it might abandon the anti-inflationary tradition of the “core”
countries. Perhaps most important, the rising current account deficit and external debt of
the United States create pressure on the dollar. In a recent survey of central banks (RBS,
2005), most respondents said that they intended further diversification away from the dollar,
due to their fear of a hard landing (Truman and Wong, 2006, discuss reserve diversification
policies)1 . As the size of dollar-denominated external obligations rises, international portfolio
holders perceive a rising “concentration risk” (Greenspan, 2004). On the other hand, the
reluctance of the United Kingdom to adopt the euro and remaining obstacles to the full
integration of euro-area government bond markets are both important negative factors for
euro internationalization (Portes and Rey, 1998). In addition, although there has been a
major transformation and expansion of euro zone securities markets since 1999, they are
generally not yet as liquid and deep as in the US (Biais et al., 2006, Dunne et al., 2006).

       This paper contributes to the ongoing policy and academic debate on the euro’s inter-
national role by studying its eﬀect on the composition of central banks’ foreign exchange
reserves. Although we focus here on only one feature of a currency’s international use, re-
serve composition, our analysis will also touch on other interrelated dimensions. Examining
international reserve holdings will lead us, for example, to consider how changes in the in-
voicing of financial and international trade transactions aﬀect the composition of reserves.
Foreign exchange reserves are just one of the international roles of currencies. This may be
secondary to the vehicle currency role, which itself may rest on the standing of currencies
in financial markets and the level of development of these markets. Yet there are very close
links among these various roles (Kenen, 2003). Indeed, we find that the choice of reference
currency, hence currency pegs (and the currency or currencies of foreign exchange market
intervention) strongly influence the composition of reserves. Thus studying the eﬀect of the
euro on the composition of foreign exchange reserves may also bring new insights on other
aspects of internationalization.

       Although we do not consider the reserve accumulation decision (see European Central
Bank, 2006), we note that one reason for looking now at the currency composition of for-
eign exchange reserves is their increasing importance in the international financial system.
   1
    Russia, for example, announced on 8 June 2006 that it had shifted some of its reserves from dollars to
euros and now holds 50% USD, 40% EUR, and 10% GBP (Financial Times, 9 June 2006).


                                                    2
Reserve growth in recent years has been dramatic. Figure 1 illustrates this. At the end of
2005 the stock of international reserves was 4.25 trillion dollars, having doubled in five years.
The supply comes primarily from US current account deficits. On the demand side, this
rapid accumulation comes from the emerging market and developing countries, which have
tripled their reserves since the end of 1998. Current account surpluses in export-oriented de-
veloping countries have been supplemented by capital inflows. Emerging market economies
have accumulated foreign assets as protection against financial crises and as a consequence
of foreign exchange market intervention to prevent appreciation of their own currencies. In
addition, the recent rise in oil and other commodity prices has increased foreign reserves
in fuel-exporting countries, like Russia, Mexico and the Middle East. The expansion of re-
serves beyond minimum necessary levels oﬀers central banks more flexibility in allocating
them among currencies and types of assets.

       The currency portfolio allocation of central banks with large reserves also aﬀects exchange
rates among major industrial countries (Blanchard et al., 2005) and is relevant to the recent
debate on the sustainability of the U.S. current account (e.g., Gourinchas and Rey, 2005a,b;
Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ, 2005; Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber, 2003, 2005; Roubini and
Setser, 2005). Decisions by even a handful of central banks to shift their reserve composition
away from the dollar could result in sizable dollar depreciation. Although many (notably
Dooley et al, 2004, 2005) argue that Asian central banks with large reserves will not diversify
away from the dollar, since they pursue an export-led growth strategy targeting the US
market and will maintain exchange-rate stability relative to the dollar, even a limited shift
out of dollar assets could result in sizable exchange rate movements.2

       To assess the impact of the euro on international reserve holdings, we develop a dynamic
mean-variance currency portfolio optimizer in a before-after event study framework. Using
an optimizer that allows for dynamic correlations and serial dependence in the variance-
covariance matrix of returns, and making various assumptions about currency returns, we
obtain the optimal portfolio composition of central banks’ foreign exchange reserves for the
   2
    Such an adjustment need not occur abruptly. Former U.S. Treasury Secretary John Snow argued (13
January 2005) that diversification would be relatively small and would not have large implications for the
dollar ("I think some diversification at the margin is certainly to be expected. I don’t think it’ll have any
major ripples on our domestic markets."). Although this statement might just reflect optimism and desire
to prevent a dollar run, there are surely factors suggesting that the rebalancing will occur gradually. First,
the market closely observes how central banks manage their reserves. It is therefore quite diﬃcult for a large
central bank to rebalance quickly, since this might create excess volatility and trigger a crisis. Second, the
euro zone authorities might be unwilling to let the euro appreciate sharply, with undesirable eﬀects on euro
zone competitiveness..


                                                      3
eleven years surrounding the introduction of the euro in 1999. We study the five main
international currencies, namely the U.S. dollar (USD), the euro (EUR), the Swiss franc
(CHF), the British pound sterling (GBP), and the Japanese yen (JPY), to assess how the
“optimal” share of the euro altered after 1999, compared to the optimal pre-1999 allocation
to the three main euro predecessor currencies, the French franc (FFR), the Deutsche mark
(DEM) and Dutch guilder (NLG).

       We do this exercise for the "representative central bank", i.e. at the aggregate level, so we
can compare these estimated optimal shares with the actual aggregate shares communicated
by the International Monetary Fund in its Annual Report. Table 1 gives the IMF allocations
of global reserves (those reported to the IMF). The data show an increase in the shares of
both the dollar and the euro in recent years, notably at the expense of the yen and “Other
Unclassified Currencies”. Although the increase in the share of the euro is partly driven by
its appreciation during 2002-2004 and changes in the IMF’s methodology in compiling the
data, since its introduction in 1999 the single European currency is gradually becoming more
important, especially in the developing world.3

       Central banks are unique institutions, however, and a simple mean-variance optimization
that might look suitable for a global investor is clearly inappropriate. Anecdotal evidence,
survey data and the scant empirics (reviewed in the next section) all suggest that a central
bank needs to be highly liquid and will want to hold a sizable fraction of its reserves in
the currencies of the country’s main trading partners, in the currencies of its international
liabilities, and if the domestic currency is pegged, in the currency or currencies of its peg.
We therefore augment the currency optimizer with constraints reflecting these needs.

       This approach has some nice features. The portfolio diversification methodology is both
intuitive and theoretically driven (in a micro-founded International CAPM). Second, it is also
consistent with what we observe (see Section 2). Central banks consult asset management
experts and explicitly argue that maximizing returns (subject to their high risk aversion)
   3
    The IMF has recently revised its methodology in compiling data on the currency composition of foreign
reserves. Consequently the data are not fully comparable across years, since country coverage changes. In
previously reported data, the IMF resorted to its own estimates, when countries were not reporting to its
confidential database. The revised IMF data reflect a considerably smaller sample, since they are based
only on reported data. Most importantly, since “reporting compliance” has traditionally been very low in
Asia, the recent estimates do not include most East Asian economies. This is very important, since not
only are these countries among the largest foreign reserve holders, but anecdotal evidence suggests that they
overly invest in dollar assets. The recent ECB update on the International Role of the Euro (ECB 2005)
provides details on the problems of the IMF data. Truman (2005b) presents data on reserve composition for
14 countries. Most show significant shifts from dollar and yen to euro from 2000 to 2004.


                                                     4
is one of their primary objectives. Some, like the Swiss National Bank, have hired external
money managers to achieve higher returns. Other developing countries with large reserves,
like South Korea and Singapore, have set up heritage funds to maximize actively the return
on (part of) their reserves. In addition oil-exporting countries like Russia and Norway have
set up specialized funds to manage their oil revenues, investing in various types of securities
(even equity) to achieve diversification. Our methodology is flexible enough to allow us
to add specific constraints reflecting the central banks’ special needs. To represent their
liquidity needs during periods of turmoil, we add portfolio rebalancing transaction costs,
which we proxy with bid-ask spreads in the currency markets. In addition, when we look at
specific countries, we augment the currency optimizer with constraints reflecting the desire of
monetary authorities to hold a sizable fraction of their reserves in the currency of their main
trading partners and the currency of government external liabilities. This methodology allows
us to perform some simulations on the composition of a particular central bank’s reserve
holdings, given these special needs (constraints). Comparing the actual reserve composition
(for example from aggregate IMF data or from central banks that report their portfolio
holdings) and the allocations we obtain from the optimization gives us a rough measure of
currency internationalization, a concept that is commonly used but rarely quantified.

   Our results can be summarized as follows.

   First, we find that since interest rates and especially exchange rates are very volatile, the
mean-variance optimizer yields very unstable results when we assume a random walk of the
exchange rate (i.e., expected currency returns equal the one-year interbank rate) or when we
assume that central banks have perfect foresight regarding exchange rate movements. We
thus present estimates assuming a weak version of uncovered interest parity (UIP), but also
adding transaction costs of portfolio rebalancing. Even in this case, however, small changes
either in currency returns or the variance-covariance matrix have non-negligible eﬀects on
the optimal portfolio weights. This result may explain the high inertia in reserve composition
and rationalize why central banks proceed slowly when diversifying.

   Second, we match the high allocation of the dollar in reserve holdings (about 60-65%)
when we use the US currency as the base-index or reference currency. Thus the high share
of the dollar should not come as a surprise, given the fact that most central banks (even in
industrial currencies) express their returns in dollar terms.

   Third, regarding the other main international currencies, the optimizer yields allocations


                                               5
that significantly diﬀer from actual (reported) reserve holdings. In particular, the mean-
variance optimization framework yields roughly equal allocations to the four main currencies,
and the optimal euro share is lower than what we observe. We regard this as evidence of the
increasing international role of the euro, which leads to higher reserve holdings in euros than
optimal portfolios would show. So far, however, this increased internationalization comes
primarily at the expense of the yen, the pound sterling and the Swiss franc rather than
against the dollar. An alternative interpretation would be that the euro’s current role is
for some unknown reason artificially high and will fall in the longer run. We regard this as
implausible.

   Fourth, the evidence suggests that during the past few years the spreads on transactions
in the euro have fallen significantly (see Table 2). Spreads have also narrowed significantly for
other industrial countries’ currencies, thus making diversification away from the dollar more
attractive. Although the traditionally low transaction costs in US currency and financial
assets have been regarded as a key factor behind the dollar’s international dominance, the
optimal currency portfolios we calculate are not very sensitive to these costs. So this drop
in spreads alone will not trigger a major switch away from the dollar. Our optimal portfolio
estimates do not, however, incorporate the fact that spreads have also fallen significantly on
transactions in euro-denominated securities, which would also favour a shift away from the
dollar into the euro.

   Fifth, we augment the currency optimizer with constraints capturing the desire of central
banks to hold a sizable portion of their holdings in the currency of their external debt and
in the trade invoicing currency, and we perform some simple simulations for four emerging
market countries that have recently accumulated large amounts of foreign reserve assets:
Brazil, Russia, India and China — the BRICs (Goldman Sachs, 2003, 2005). The constrained
optimization results assign larger weights to the euro than the aggregate estimates (for the
"representative central bank"), especially for Brazil and Russia. These simulations illustrate
that the dominant position of the dollar might be challenged sooner than expected. This is
because the euro zone is now the main trading partner of many emerging market countries
(Russia, Brazil and India in our sample) that run large current account surpluses. In addition
an increasing number of non-EU residents and governments issue euro-denominated assets.
Still, when we incorporate transaction costs, the estimates with debt and trade constraints
do not show the euro’s share challenging that of the dollar.



                                               6
    Sixth, we find that the reference currency, or the choice of risk-free asset, plays the most
important role in determining the optimal composition of reserves in the mean-variance
framework. But in practice, where there is a managed exchange rate regime, the reference
currency is naturally the currency or currencies to which a country’s own currency is pegged.
This suggests that a major challenge to the dollar might come if more countries move away
from managing their exchange rates with respect to the dollar and adopt euro-based anchors
or basket pegs in which the euro has a high weight. This finding adds to previous literature
on the determinants of foreign exchange reserve composition, by showing that quantitatively
in a mean-variance framework the currency of the (de jure or de facto) peg is substantially
more important than transaction costs, the direction of trade and the currency composition
of external debt.

    The paper is structured as follows. In the next Section, we review the evidence on what
determines foreign exchange reserves. The lessons from history, the relatively few empirical
studies, and survey and case-specific evidence are very consistent. Central banks do pay re-
gard to the trade-oﬀ between returns and risk, and their reserve-holding behavior also reflects
liquidity motives, the currencies of international trading and financing relationships, and the
exchange-rate regime (currency peg). In Section 3 we describe our analytical framework. In
Section 4 we present the results from the dynamic mean-variance analysis, making various
assumptions about expected currency returns and using three diﬀerent techniques to project
the variance-covariance matrix of returns. We also perform various checks on the sensitivity
and robustness of our results. In Section 5 we look at individual countries, incorporating
the desire of central banks to hold a sizable fraction of their foreign exchange reserves in
the currencies of their main trading partners, the currencies of their external debt and the
anchor currency of the peg. In this context, we present some portfolio optimizations for the
BRICs. In Section 6 we summarize.


2     Related literature on the currency composition of
      foreign reserves

2.1    History

Those who see a growing international role for the euro point out that history provides
examples of leading international currencies losing their dominant status or of sharing inter-


                                               7
national status (see Lindert, 1969). Most recently, during the gold standard era, the pound
sterling enjoyed a dominant international role similar to that of the dollar since the early
fifties. Yet both economic policies and the two world wars weakened the British economy and
its external finances, and the dollar replaced sterling as the leading international currency.
The development of the New York financial markets in the 1920s and the establishment of
the Federal Reserve System were also major factors in the rise of the dollar. Hartmann
(1998) and Eichengreen (2005) point out that although some theoretical analyses based on
network externalities in the use of money for transactions suggest that there will be only
one international currency, this argument does not apply to the currency of denomination of
reserves. This is because the need for diversification forces private agents and central banks
away from only one currency.4 History also suggests that the primary considerations for the
composition of reserves have been market liquidity (which in turn depends on central banks’
willingness to ensure it, currency convertibility, financial stability, and the underlying devel-
opment of financial markets) and a dominant position in international trade. Yet besides
these economic reasons, geopolitical factors are also important. Sterling’s internationaliza-
tion occurred after the United Kingdom established itself as an imperial power, while the
dollar ascended after the United States emerged as the dominant military power.


2.2       Regression evidence

Large-sample evidence on the determinants of reserve composition based on regression tech-
niques is scant. Attempts to address this question directly by regressing actual currency
shares on macroeconomic, monetary and financial factors are hampered by the reluctance of
central banks to release data on the currency composition of reserves.

       In a recent paper, Chinn and Frankel (2005) use aggregate IMF data (similar to those
presented in Table 1) on the shares of seven main currencies in total identified oﬃcial reserve
holdings during the 1973-1998 period to investigate determinants of the global composition
of international reserves. Their main finding is that the shares of major currencies in global
reserve holdings are very persistent (the coeﬃcient on the lagged dependent variable is be-
tween 0.85 and 0.96). In addition, the lagged depreciation rate and inflation (or exchange
rate volatility) enter with negative and significant coeﬃcients, while income enters with a
   4
     Eichengreen (2005) writes that “It may pay to hold reserves in the most liquid market, which tends to be
the market in which everyone else holds reserves, but market liquidity is not all that matters. It may worth
tolerating a bit less market liquidity in return for the benefits of greater diversification. . . ”


                                                     8
significantly positive coeﬃcient.5 Chinn and Frankel also perform an out-of-sample forecast
and compare it with the actual (reported) realized share of the euro. Their projections sug-
gest that it will take at least 25 years for the euro to challenge the dominance of the dollar as
a major reserve currency, unless there is a major deterioration in the stability of the dollar
(depreciation, inflation).

       Although this approach is informative, it is not fully reliable mainly due to non-trivial
data problems. First, besides the IMF data limitations discussed earlier (footnote 3), the
analysis is based on aggregate global data. The IMF does not provide data from individual
central banks. Although the IMF also provides a disaggregation between industrial and de-
veloping countries, this separation is again coarse. Moreover, the more reliable data from the
industrial group are not fully suitable, since these countries cannot hold their own currencies
as reserves. On the other hand, data for developing countries, which are more appropriate to
judge the international role of currencies, are recorded with substantial error (ECB 2006).6
Second, the extrapolation procedure implicitly assumes that the same dynamics govern the
composition of reserves before and after the introduction of the euro. Yet the introduction
of the euro has probably changed exchange rate dynamics. Third, as the authors acknowl-
edge, most of the forecast is generated by the lagged dependent variable, while the most
interesting question would be to understand what drives this huge persistence (see also Tru-
man, 2005a, on this point).7 This high inertia is consistent with our optimization results.
Optimal allocations are quite sensitive to even small changes in expected returns and the
variance-covariance structure. We believe this explains at least part of the unwillingness of
central banks to rebalance their portfolios quickly.

       Dooley, Lizondo and Mathieson (1989) and more recently Eichengreen and Mathieson
(2000) utilized confidential IMF data on shares of the major international currencies in
reserve holdings in a large number of industrial and developing countries to investigate the
high persistence. Although there are still data problems here, both studies find that currency
pegs, the direction of trade, and the currency of foreign debt can explain the high inertia in
   5
     Eichengreen and Frankel (1996), Eichengreen (1998) and Chinn (1999) reach similar results in slightly
diﬀerent samples.
   6
     For a similar point see Chinn and Frankel (2005) and Eichengreen and Mathieson (2000).
   7
     Fukuda and Ono (2005) build an open economy model with monopolistic competition among firms that
generates high inertia in the currency invoicing of exports. This provides an explanation of the dollar’s
dominant and stable role in invoicing international trade transactions. Since trade patterns aﬀect the com-
position of foreign reserves, this theory suggests one explanation for the high persistence of the dollar in
reserve holdings.



                                                     9
reserve composition. Not only are these factors highly significant and robust determinants
of the currency composition of reserve holdings, but their importance is very stable across
time. Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2003, 2004) also emphasize the role of trade
links and currency pegs as the key reasons behind East Asian and Latin American central
banks’ unwillingness to follow a pure textbook diversification strategy. They argue that if
the dollar peg and export growth are the key objectives of East Asian economies, that should
limit diversification away from the US dollar. Our results suggest that even if the East Asian
countries increase their trade with the euro zone and issue euro-denominated securities, as
long as they peg their currencies against the dollar, it is very unlikely that they will massively
diversify away from the dollar.


2.3       Case study and survey evidence

Although many central banks do not release data on the actual composition of their reserves,
they are becoming increasingly transparent on their general asset management strategies.
Recent collections of articles by the Royal Bank of Scotland and the European Central
Bank (RBS, 2003, 2005; ECB, 2004) provide interesting information from central bank asset
management practitioners as well as survey data on their reserve policies. The main message
from these collections is that central banks do follow a portfolio optimization strategy, while
also taking into account the unique features of monetary authorities.

       The reviews by Reddy (2003) and De León (2003) of the asset management practices of
the Indian and the Canadian central banks respectively suggest that these institutions pursue
mean-variance portfolio diversification policies in their main international holdings.8 This
is further emphasized in Naameh’s (2003) overview of developing countries. Naameh also
presents evidence that constraints associated with trade, debt composition and the currency
peg are particularly important for emerging market and developing countries: “A country in
the CFA zone may need to service its debt in US dollars, pay for its net imports in Japanese
yen and intervene in the foreign exchange market in euros. In such a case, the portfolio will be
severely constrained, so the best available assets and their relative weights will not determine
its return and risk.” Along related lines, Gmuer and Cavegn (2003) rationalize the Swiss
   8
     Diversification is also stressed by Hansen, Olgaard and Hensen (2003) in their review of the Danish
Central bank approach. They write: “The ratio between yield and risk can be improved by spreading the
krone duration into additional currencies. . . . The smaller the degree of covariation between the interest rates
of the currencies in which the reserve is placed, the greater the diversification gain. Distribution on several
currencies also spreads the liquidity risk.”


                                                       10
central bank’s hiring of external portfolio managers by the absence of such constraints.
Fisher and Lie (2004) represent the central bank decision problem as an explicit mean-
variance optimization exercise (theirs is quite diﬀerent from ours, in that they assume given
returns and optimize over asset classes).

       This country-specific case-study evidence is confirmed in the 2003 and 2005 central bank
surveys conducted by Pringle and Carver (RBS 2003, 2005). Although these studies should
be read cautiously (the questions are quite general, there are selectivity issues; and most
central banks with big reserves did not participate), they tend to validate the importance
of pegs, trade, external debt and geopolitical factors in reserve composition. There is some
indication that central banks are shifting towards euro-denominated securities.9 For example,
39 central banks out of the 45 replied that they have increased their exposure to the euro,
while only 15 central banks increased exposure to the US dollar and 29 reduced this exposure.
In addition most respondents stated that they were considering alternative currencies for
further diversifying their risk (such as the Swedish and the Norwegian krona or the Australian
and Canadian dollar) which oﬀered higher returns and lower correlation with the other major
currencies, while being highly liquid.


2.4       Key findings on reserve composition

The main findings on reserve composition that we incorporate in our currency optimization
framework are the following:

       1. Monetary authorities tend to hold a high share of their reserves in the currency of
their main trading partner(s).

       2. The currency composition of foreign debt is a significant factor in the allocation of
central banks’ reserve holdings. Since sovereign and private issuance in euro-denominated
securities has increased greatly since 1999, this would imply that central banks will raise the
proportion of their reserves in euros to match country assets with liabilities.

       3. A central bank that pegs its domestic currency to a given currency tends to hold a
larger share of its reserves in that currency. Although the dollar is still the main anchor
currency, the importance of the euro is steadily increasing. Currently almost 50 countries
   9
    Pringle and Carver (2005) thus conclude that “diversification from dollar-denominated to euro-
denominated assets appears to be taking place more rapidly than had been anticipated two years ago (in
the 2003 survey), although this result may to some extent reflect revaluation changes”. See footnote 1 above.


                                                     11
have oﬃcially pegged their exchange rate to the euro (ECB 2005). Although pegging to the
euro is mainly observed in the new EU member states and EU neighboring regions, countries
with sizable reserve holdings outside the European sphere of influence, like Russia and Libya,
are using the euro in their basket peg (or basket reference value, like China).

       4. Central banks pursue portfolio diversification strategies, but with a high risk aversion
and a desire to have liquidity especially during periods of turmoil. The introduction of the
euro reduced diversification opportunities, so ceteris paribus one should have expected a fall
in the euro share after 1999. But the euro market has become more liquid and deeper, and
foreign exchange transaction costs for the euro have fallen.


3        Methodology

Following the empirical evidence suggesting that central banks employ (explicitly or implic-
itly) risk diversification strategies, we propose a dynamic mean-variance framework with
constraints and transaction costs.10 For each period (year), the central bank maximizes:


                                                  X
                                                  I
                            max Et [Rt+1 ] =            wi,t Et (ri,t+1 ) + wf,t rf,t+1                    (1)
                            wi ,wf
                                                  i=1

       Subject to:


                                                Wt0 Vt+1 Wt ≤ σ 2                                         (1a)


                                         X
                                         I
                                                wi,t + wf,t = 1, ∀ t                                     (1b)
                                          i=1



                                            wi > 0 ∀ t and ∀ i                                            (1c)

       Et (ri,t+1 ) indicates the expected (in period t) return on currency i in the next period
t + 1, and rf is the return in the risk-free asset. We assume here that currency returns are
  10
     The inclusion of transaction costs makes the problem dynamic in the sense that initial allocations matter
in the optimization since they alter the expected returns vector (see also Codirla, Siourounis and Woo (2005)).
Fisher and Lie (2004) implement an analogous but static approach with given (non estimated) returns and
variances.


                                                         12
expressed relatively to the the US dollar and thus use the one-year USD interbank rate as the
risk-free asset. We consider alternative risk-free assets subsequently. wi,t denotes the share
of currency i in the portfolio in year t. σ 2 indicates the desired portfolio variance, W is the
vector of portfolio weights (with elements wi,t ) and V is the variance-covariance matrix of
(expected) returns. The weights on each currency sum to one. We also require that central
banks do not take short positions in any currency.11 The problem that the central bank faces
is thus to choose a portfolio of currencies that maximizes returns for a given volatility (risk
tolerance). There are two challenges in performing this maximization routine, predicting
currency returns and projecting the variance-covariance matrix.


3.1       Expected Currency Returns

One can decompose the expected returns in currency i in period t as the one-year interest
rate yield and the change in the exchange rate.12 Denoting the log spot exchange rate as s,
currency returns can be written:


                                    Et (ri,t+1 ) = bi,t + Et (si,t+1 − si,t )                                (2)

where bi,t is the interest rate on currency i.

       Although interest rates are known at the beginning of each period, future (one-year)
exchange rates are notoriously hard to predict (Meese and Rogoﬀ, 1983; Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ,
1995). Although the uncovered interest parity condition (UIP) dictates that currencies of
similar risk should have the same returns, a vast literature indicates that the exchange rate,
especially over short horizons, follows a random walk and is almost impossible to predict.13
The interest rate parity condition appears to hold, but only in the medium and long term
(3-5 years).

       We will thus present estimates based on four diﬀerent assumptions on currency returns.
First, we assume that the exchange rate follows a random walk. In this scenario the return
  11
     Relaxing this constraint makes the base currency less important since the investor can borrow (go short)
in a low carry currency and invest (go long) in a high carry one and still be consistent with her risk profile.
  12
     If central banks issue local currency for intervention purposes, then FX returns are given by the interest
rate yield diﬀerential between foreign (bi,t+1 ) and domestic bills (bt ) plus the expected exchange rate fluctu-
ations. For simplicity we assume that the global investor earns the full interest rate yield bi,t or equivalently
that (bt ) = 0. It can be shown that this assumption does not change our conclusions in any significant way.
  13
     See Hau and Rey (2004, 2006) and Siourounis (2004) for empirical models linking exchange rates with
equity returns and capital flows that beat a random walk for some currency pairs and some horizons.


                                                       13
is just bi,t . Second, we assume that central banks have perfect foresight (knowledge) of
exchange rate movements. Thus we use actual realized exchange rate changes, which add to
the interest rate yield diﬀerential. Third, we assume that UIP holds, i.e. currency returns
are equalized across currencies. In this scenario the central bank just minimizes the variance
of its currency portfolio. Fourth, we continue to assume equal returns across currencies, but
we also augment the optimizer with rebalancing costs, which we proxy with extreme bid-ask
spreads (calculated over the past year). Transaction costs may significantly reduce returns.
They can also aﬀect the direction of reallocation if the market outlook suddenly changes and
a shift out of a given position is required.

       To address uncertainty further, in all Tables we present results using simulations that
allow for error in forecasting currency returns (with each of the four previous methods).
Specifically we will assume that the noise follows a Gaussian process with zero mean and
the variances of each individual asset variances (the diagonal elements of Vt+1 ). In all Tables
(unless otherwise specified) we simulate 500 portfolios and report the mean of these as the
most plausible estimate.14


3.2       Variance-Covariance Matrix

Another challenge is to project the variance-covariance matrix (VCM) of returns (Vt+1 ). The
forecast of the variance-covariance matrix is at the heart of the mean-variance optimization
framework, since the estimated shares appear sensitive to even small changes in the elements
of the VCM.

       For robustness we follow three diﬀerent computational methodologies to produce esti-
mates of the VCM: Simple historical; Constant Conditional Correlation multivariate GARCH
(CCC-GARCH) (Bollerslev, 1990); and Dynamic Conditional Correlation multivariate GARCH
(DCC-GARCH) (Engle, 2002; Engle and Kroner, 2001; Engle and Sheppard, 2001; Cappiello
et al., 2003). The diﬀerence between simple historical and CCC-GARCH is that the latter
allows for time-varying volatility. The diﬀerence between CCC-GARCH and DCC-GARCH
is that the latter allows for time-varying correlations. For precision we use daily data (from
Bloomberg) and estimate the VCM matrix using a four-year window.15
  14
     Results with 100 replications do not depart significantly from those with 500 or 1, 000. We also experi-
ment in some models with 5, 000 replications to find quite similar results.
  15
     We use 252 trading days per calendar year, which amount to 1008 daily observations per estimation
window. In the GARCH estimates we use one lag for both conditional variances and correlations. We note


                                                     14
    In all tables (unless otherwise specified) we assume that central banks have a conservative
annual risk appetite of σ = 3.3%. We can express this as a risk management quantity, the
Value at Risk (VaR). If next period’s value of the portfolio is EVt+1 = Wt0 Rt+1 , then the
VaR constraint requires that:

                                       P r(Wt0 Rt+1 < −EVa ) < a                                           (4)


    Here EVa is the maximum capital loss tolerated over any year with probability a. We set
a = 5% and EVa = 5.4%, which is equivalent to the 3.3% annual risk set above.16

    We study the five main international currencies, the US dollar (USD), the Swiss franc
(CHF), the Japanese yen (JPY), the British pound sterling (GBP) and the euro (EUR).
Before 1999, we replace the euro with the three main EMU currencies, the Deutsche mark
(DEM), the French franc (FFR) and the Dutch guilder (NLG).17 We carry out the optimiza-
tion for the five years before, the year of and the five years after the introduction of the euro
(the period 1995-2005) and then compare the "optimal" share in the euro currencies in each
period, before and after 1999.18


3.3     Transaction Costs (Bid-Ask Spreads)

We also introduce in the optimizer transaction costs as a further element of realism. A key
feature of an international currency is low transaction costs (Niehans, 1971; Portes and Rey,
1998). Transaction costs are also important in the recent microstructure approach to the
foreign exchange market (Lyons, 2001). Table 2 presents bid-ask spreads from Bloomberg of
the main international currencies against the US dollar from December 1995 until October
that GARCH is used as a filter that aims to capture structural relationships between underlying returns
series and estimate the correct conditional variance and correlation means. We acknowledge, however, that
one could generate 1 year ahead VCM forecasts by iterating forward the estimated GARCH equations (for
DCC-GARCH, see Engle and Sheppard, 2001; for an application of DCC-GARCH to bond returns see
Cappiello et al., 2003). Given the mean-reverting nature of GARCH and the one year forecast horizon, 252
forward iterations result in estimates very close to the long-run conditional variance and correlation means
used here.
  16
     We explore the sensitivity of the optimal allocations to this risk tolerance in Section 4.5.
  17
     At birth of the EUR the shares of DEM, FRF and NLG were respectively 34.38%, 17.47% and 10.53%.
Source: European Central Bank.
  18
     At 31 December 1998, we include just the DEM as the closest proxy for the euro. We report results
based on a yearly horizon since central banks report yearly financial statements. We also experiment with a
two- and three-year horizon finding similar results. In the previous version of the paper we also added gold
in the optimization to find similar results. Here we ignore gold, however, since it is part of a larger problem
for central banks, that of cross-asset allocation, and because gold holdings in developing countries (that are
the big foreign exchange reserve holders) are minimal.

                                                      15
2005. Bid-ask spreads are one measure of liquidity on the foreign exchange market. The
Table presents the mean bid-ask spreads based on daily data over the last year, as well as the
maximum value over the previous year.19 In an early assessment of the eﬀect of the euro on
the foreign exchange markets, Hau et al. (2002a, 2002b) found that bid-ask spreads (as well
as turnover) for most bilateral euro markets during 1999 were systematically higher than
they were during 1998 for bilateral markets for the German mark. Detken and Hartmann
(2002) found similar results (but of lower magnitude) in a larger sample.

       The data are partly in line with these early findings. Mean spreads in the USD/DEM ex-
change rate were 0.04% in 1998, while mean spreads in the EUR/USD market were somewhat
higher at 0.05% and 0.07% during the first two years of the euro. But this was temporary.
Mean spreads in the euro market have fallen to minimal levels in the past two years (at
0.01%). Although spreads vis-a-vis the dollar have fallen in all major currency markets, the
euro and the pound sterling markets are consistently the most eﬃcient during the past two
years. Still, mean spreads might not reflect accurately the transactions costs of rebalancing,
since central banks often need to intervene in the market in periods of turmoil. Thus Ta-
ble 2 also reports the maximum bid-ask spread over the previous year.20 The data clearly
indicate that the euro has brought sizable gains in this regard, since extreme spreads have
narrowed drastically. For example, during the four years before the introduction of the euro,
the maximum spread in the Deutsche mark, the French franc and the Dutch guilder were
0.68%, 0.44% and 0.53% respectively.21 Yet since the beginning of 2001, the maximum bid-
ask spread in the EUR/USD market was 0.11%. Thus foreign central banks now have a
much more attractive alternative, since even in periods of liquidity crunch the euro foreign
exchange markets seem highly liquid, with quite low transaction costs.22 In addition other
  19
      Mean spreads are calculated as the mean bid-ask spreads for every year prior to the optimization and
then expressed as a percentage of the mid-price at the time of the optimization.
   20
      Extreme spreads are calculated as the maximum value of the bid-ask spread in the year prior to the
optimization and then expressed as a percentage of the mid-price at the time of the optimization.
   21
      On 2 October 2000, sterling experienced a very large shock linked to the overall negative environment
of global asset markets. In 2003, the Swiss franc had a day of very wide spreads when the announcement
from the central bank regarding the inflation and growth outlook was a big surprise for market participants.
We exclude these events from our analysis. Our results do not depart in any significant way from the those
reported here.
   22
      Our analysis just compares bid-ask spreads in the foreign exchange markets against the dollar. Clearly
to get a full picture of the eﬀect of the euro in lowering transaction costs, one needs to examine turnover
and spreads in other markets as well. For example, the Brazilian real/USD market is more liquid than the
Brazilian real/EUR market, and this holds for most such pairs. Thus the dollar has so far maintained its
role as the dominant vehicle currency: in the April 2004 BIS survey of foreign exchange markets, the dollar
was involved in 88.7% of reported transactions (90.3% in 2001), the euro in 37.2%, the yen in 20.3%, the
pound sterling in 16.9%, and the Swiss franc in 6.1% (Bank for International Settlements, 2004).


                                                    16
major currencies have enhanced their liquidity, and spreads have also fallen, as for the two
Scandinavian currencies and the Canadian dollar. This makes diversifying away from the
US dollar particularly attractive, since these currencies are not so correlated with the dollar
and are now relatively cheap to trade.23


4        Results for the representative central bank

4.1        Random walk of the exchange rate

We start by estimating optimal currency weights assuming that the exchange rate fol-
lows a random walk. Thus we assume that in each year the expected currency apprecia-
tion/depreciation is zero, so that central banks just realize the one-year carry (interest rate).
Panel A of Appendix Table A reports the one-year money-market rate (inter-bank rate) at
the end of each year for the main currencies we consider in our analysis. The pound sterling
usually has the highest yield, while the yen and the Swiss franc have the lowest yields. Al-
though central banks most likely do not perform “carry” strategies, since uncovered interest
parity dictates that the exchange rate should move to compensate for these diﬀerences, it is
useful to investigate the allocations that the optimizer yields.

       Table 3 presents the results under the three diﬀerent projection methods of the variance-
covariance matrix of returns. Reflecting the big changes from year to year in short-term
interest rates, the optimizer yields unstable estimates. For example, the optimal allocation
to the dollar falls significantly in 2001-2003, when the Fed lowered interest rates to help the
economy recover from the recession. The recent tightening of US monetary policy resulted
in an immediate increase in the optimal dollar allocation. Reflecting their low interest rates,
the optimizer assigns an allocation close to zero for the Swiss franc and the yen. But it
also gives a very low share for the euro. In fact, only USD and GBP attract significant
allocations.

       The large share for the dollar reflects its status as the risk-free asset and the interdiction of
short sales. Since currency markets are highly positively correlated, the short-sale constraint
is important: it stops the investor from utilizing this high correlation by going short and thus
reversing the positive correlation to a negative one, in order to provide diversification. Hence
  23
    Bid-ask spreads are only one indicator of market liquidity. We use them because they can easily be
integrated into the mean-variance framework.


                                                    17
the only way central banks can achieve a low risk portfolio here is to hold a high proportion
in the risk-free asset. Moreover, some other currencies have lower returns (notably the JPY),
so the optimizer assigns large allocations to the dollar. But GBP gets a high share because
of high interest rates. This first exercise illustrates some of the diﬃculties in applying the
mean-variance framework to our problem.


4.2    Perfect foresight

Since their control over monetary policy should give central banks superior information
about exchange rate movements, one could ask what the optimal portfolio allocation would
be assuming perfect foresight regarding currency returns. Realized currency returns (the
percentage change in the nominal exchange rate in equation (2)) are reported in Panel B
of Appendix Table A. We thus maximize (1) using realized returns, which equal the one
year inter-bank rate plus the realized one-year exchange rate movement (sum of Panel A
and Panel B of Appendix Table A). These changes are based on a buy-hold strategy (buy
on 1 January of each year and sell on 31 December of the same year). Reflecting the high
volatility in exchange rate movements, the optimal weights are again unstable, with no clear
patterns. For example, assuming (almost) perfect foresight at the introduction of the euro in
1999 implies that central banks knew that the euro would depreciate substantially (yielding
negative returns overall). Not surprisingly, then, the optimizer allocates a zero share to the
euro. Again, the short-sale constraint treats the dollar favorably as the risk-free (reference)
currency that gets a high allocation. The euro does well when it is appreciating but gets a
negligible allocation when it is depreciating.


4.3    Minimum variance

The results given in Table 3 and Table 4 illustrate the big challenges in applying the mean-
variance framework to a portfolio allocation among currencies. On the one hand, if one
assumes a random walk of the exchange rate, then the optimal allocation focuses on the
currency which has the highest yield (carry). Not only does this go against the interest
parity condition, but it is very unlikely that a central bank will bet on the carry, since this
would imply continuous rebalancing, with possibly destabilizing consequences in the foreign
exchange market. On the other hand, if one makes the unrealistic assumption of perfect
foresight, then naturally it does not make much sense for an investor to allocate much to an

                                                 18
asset with negative returns (unless she needs to be invested in that asset with the associated
risk).

       We therefore ask what central banks would do if they just wanted to invest in the min-
imum variance portfolio, since currency returns are almost unpredictable. Table 5 reports
the minimum variance portfolio allocations. These are obtained by simply minimizing the
variance-covariance matrix of the risky assets. Since all assets are expressed relatively to
the dollar, the optimization does not include the risk-free asset (the USD). Although we
therefore cannot examine how the optimal allocation to the dollar changes relatively to the
other main currencies, it is useful to examine the optimal allocation to the euro as compared
with GBP, JPY and CHF. The share of EUR is high in 1999-2000, but then falls sharply.
In contrast the optimal allocations to sterling and the yen rise notably after 1999-2000. The
Swiss franc does not appear in any optimal portfolio, primarily due to its high correlation
with the euro.


4.4        Interest parity with transaction rebalancing costs

Since the five main international currencies have comparable risk characteristics, interest
parity dictates that the expected currency returns (interest plus expected exchange rate
movement) should be equalized. Although a vast literature suggests that UIP does not hold
(see Sarno and Taylor, 2004), we follow others in believing that this is the most plausible
approach for central banks. Central banks typically do not speculate on short-term fluctua-
tions among the main international currencies and follow a medium-term portfolio strategy
(Pringle and Carver, 2005). If we assume that UIP holds, we implicitly assume that all
currency pairs have the same total expected return as the risk-free asset. In the presence of
transaction costs, the returns of the risky assets become unattractive since they are lower
compared to the return of the risk-free asset, but they come at a positive risk. Neverthe-
less, central banks need to have positive allocations in more than one currency to maintain
liquidity, debt service and trade payments.24 In addition, recall that with the simulation we
perform, we explicitly assume that the UIP might not hold exactly. In this case, although
the risky assets are (by default) unattractive, central banks still want to include them in
their portfolio. Within the mean-variance framework the only way we can get positive al-
locations in the risky assets, even if they oﬀer returns inferior to the risk-free asset, is to
  24
       We explicitly assess some of these needs in the following section.



                                                        19
take risk. We continue to use a conservative annual portfolio volatility of 3.3%. In Table 6
we present mean-variance portfolio allocations for a global investor in the currency market
using extreme bid-ask spreads in the previous year to represent rebalancing costs.25 In this
set of estimates, the optimal weight of the dollar falls in 1999 but then recovers and stabilizes
around 60%. The euro allocation falls after 1999. The yen and Swiss franc allocations are
relatively stable and show advances relative to sterling.26 Thus this most realistic scenario
yields an allocation to the dollar that is close to the observed share, while (depending on
monetary policy changes across Japan, Europe, Switzerland and the United Kingdom) the
optimal shares in the other currencies are on average the same.



       To summarize so far: Adding transaction costs makes returns unequal and thus gives
more content to the exercise. The ‘optimal’ share of the dollar is close to what we observe,
that of the euro, at a level similar to the Swiss franc, the yen and the sterling, is less than
half what we observe in the data. We interpret that as preliminary evidence that the euro is
becoming an international currency, insofar as actual shares of the euro substantially exceed
those that portfolio optimization would imply. But for the euro to challenge the dollar,
central banks would have to treat the euro as the reference (risk-free) currency. There would
also be some shift out of the dollar if central banks were to allow selling currencies short,
which would increase allocations to risky assets. This is a rather diﬀerent perspective on
currency competition than one finds in the existing literature.


4.5       Alternative assumptions and robustness tests

4.5.1      Risk profile

All our optimizations so far have assumed a desired annual portfolio volatility of 3.3%. Table
7 investigates how the portfolio allocations change if we assume higher or lower desired
portfolio volatility. We carry out the exercise assuming UIP and transaction costs and use
  25
     In a previous version of the paper we presented results also using mean spreads. We believe, however,
that extreme spreads more accurately capture central banks’ needs. The results with mean spreads are
available upon request. To capture transactions costs fully, we should include the spreads on purchases and
sales of securities such as government bonds (Portes and Rey, 1998, stress the importance of these transaction
costs). This we leave to future research.
  26
     Note that bid-ask spreads are an increasing function of currency volatility (this emerges from study
of the foreign exchange market microstructure and from empirical evidence such as in Hartmann, 1998).
Therefore in this exercise we are over-penalizing variance.



                                                     20
DCC-GARCH for the VCM, so the results here are directly comparable to those of Panel
C in Table 6. As we should expect, we observe that greater risk aversion (annual standard
deviation of 2.3%) leads to a higher allocation to the dollar, whereas lower risk aversion
gives higher allocations to all the alternative currencies. The eﬀect of varying risk aversion is
shown graphically in Figure 3, where we see the optimal portfolio allocations in October 2005
as a function of diﬀerent levels of this parameter. Note that as we increase risk tolerance the
optimizer assigns larger weight mainly to the pound sterling, which has the highest returns.


4.5.2   Fat tails

All our calculations so far are generated by shocking the expected returns vector with an
iid Gaussian error, which has zero mean and standard deviation equal to that of the cor-
responding currency. A robustness check is provided by using a distribution of currency
returns with fat tails (assuming a diﬀerent distribution, like a power law, would make our
mean-variance framework meaningless). We see the results in Table 8. Again, we assume
UIP and transactions costs and use DCC-GARCH, so the relevant comparison is with Panel
C of Table 6. The diﬀerences are minimal.


4.5.3   The importance of the reference currency

Our discussion so far has already suggested that the role of the dollar as the risk-free currency
in our optimizations may be a key to the results we obtain, which give it a high share in
the calculated optimal portfolios. Since returns do not vary greatly, there is a strong "bias"
towards holding the asset with zero variance. These shares are not far from those observed
in the data. One interpretation is that the dollar’s high share reflects its status as the "safe
haven" currency. Another is that central banks do in fact use the dollar as the reference
currency for expressing returns on alternative assets. Our preferred interpretation, however,
is that taking the dollar as the risk-free asset corresponds to the case in which the domestic
currency is pegged to the dollar, so there is zero volatility with respect to the dollar. This is
consistent, for example, with the results of Dellas and Yoo (1991) for Korea. As we shall see
below, when the reference currency is the domestic currency, the optimal portfolio allocations
change substantially when there is a change in the exchange-rate regime (e.g., moving oﬀ a
peg to the dollar).

   One way of investigating this eﬀect is to try alternative reference currencies in our calcu-

                                               21
lations for the representative central bank. We see the results in Table 9, where we re-base all
currencies in the SDR, JPY and EUR. We continue to assume UIP but no transactions costs.
We use DCC-GARCH for the VCM, so the results are in principle comparable with Panel
C of Table 6 (the only diﬀerence being the inclusion of bid-ask spreads). The allocations
confirm the importance of the reference currency in all three cases. Before 1999-2000 we get
the same result as before: the risk-free asset dominates all other allocations. After 2000,
however, and only when the EUR is used as the base currency, we see a sizable reduction in
its allocation and at the same time a significant rise in all other allocations and particularly
the Swiss franc. This is mainly due to the fact that after 2000, appreciations of the EUR
relative to the USD were followed by appreciations of the CHF relative to the USD of about
the same magnitude. This resulted a quite stable EUR/CHF cross that is reflected in the
extremely low estimated volatility and correlation in the empirical VCM. This observation is
true for the other crosses as well but to a lesser extent. Market participants have repeatedly
signalled the notable reduction of the observed as well as the implied volatility in the FX
market. This is the first preliminary evidence within a mean-variance framework of the EUR
eﬀect in the observed volatility of the FX market. We also believe that the importance of
the reference currency is strong evidence for the importance of currency peg arrangements
in determining the composition of reserves. We oﬀer additional evidence for this claim in
Section 5.3.


5     Simulated results for the BRICs with constraints

As we have seen, a central bank wishes to hold a significant share of its reserves in the
currencies of its country’s external debt and in the currencies of its main trading partners.
These two factors help to explain the significant share of the dollar since the 1970s, when the
American economy was by far the largest market for developing countries’ exports, and the
dollar was the main currency of security issuance. But during the last few years, issuance
in euro-denominated securities has increased substantially, even from firms and governments
outside the euro zone (ECB 2005). In addition, the euro zone is of comparable weight to the
US in international trade. To assess the impact of the currency composition of foreign debt
and the direction of trade we augment the currency optimizer with constraints reflecting the
debt and trade desiderata.

    We cannot do this for the (aggregate) "representative central bank", nor would we learn

                                              22
much from studying the reserve-holding behavior of the major developed countries, because
they cannot hold their own currencies as foreign exchange reserves. We therefore focus on
four large emerging market countries: Brazil, Russia, India, and China, all of which have
been accumulating foreign assets rapidly. Not only are these countries the largest emerging
economies in terms of both population and GDP, but they are among the largest foreign
exchange reserve holders. Indeed China has the highest reserves in the world, on a par with
Japan. Following the recent increase in oil prices and exports, Russia is now the sixth largest
reserve holding country. India is the seventh, while Brazil has the second highest reserves
(after Mexico) in the Western hemisphere. The BRICs also give us a geographical spread.

   We believe that the optimization story is very appealing for these as well as other countries
with large reserve holdings, while it might not be a very suitable representation of the reserve
composition decision of central banks with relatively low levels of foreign assets. That is
because those central banks might need to hold almost all their reserves in dollars, since the
dollar’s status as the vehicle currency means that market interventions usually take place in
the USD market. For countries with such large holdings as the BRICs, however, maximizing
returns should be a key objective of reserve management.


5.1     Currency composition of external debt

We begin by incorporating into the optimizer constraints requiring that each of the four
countries has to hold a specified share of its reserves in the currency of its external debt. In
Table 10 we report optimal allocations when the central bank wants to hold reserves in the
currencies of the country’s external debt at levels at least equal to 50% of the share of the
debt in each currency. For example, in 1997 Russia had approximately 65% of its external
debt issued in USD and 29% issued in DEM (see Appendix Table B for the actual shares).
For that year, we thus impose as a constraint that the Russian central bank would want to
hold at least 32.5% of its reserves in dollars and 14.5% of its reserves in Deutsche marks. The
50% thresholds are of course ad hoc.27 Since we impose the same constraint across all major
currencies, however, we can still make inferences over time, assessing how the replacement
of the French franc and the Deutsche mark by the euro changed the optimal composition
of international reserve holdings. Data for the currency composition of external debt come
from the latest update of the World Bank’s Global Development Finance Database. Our
  27
     We also experiment with other thresholds, imposing for example that each of the four central banks
holds at least either 75% or 25%.of the share of the debt in each currency. The results are quite similar.

                                                   23
preferred comparisons are between the pre-1999 years and 2002 and 2003, since there are
data limitations regarding the foreign debt statistics for the 1999-2001 period.

   Table 10 presents the results of the constrained optimization problem. We assume con-
stant currency returns (UIP holds) and proxy the rebalancing costs with maximum bid-ask
spreads in the previous year. For brevity we only report estimates in which we project the
variance-covariance matrix with DCC-GARCH (results are similar when we either employ
historical estimation or with CCC-GARCH). So the procedure is similar to that of Panel C
in Table 6. First, the results indicate that the optimal share of the euro for Brazil and Rus-
sia is significantly higher than for the representative central bank in Table 6. Reflecting the
relatively low issuance of euro-denominated debt in China and India, the optimizer assigns
lower weights in the euro for the two Asian countries. Second, the role of the dollar remains
significant, with relatively stable shares in all four countries in the range of 50% to 60%.

   But data limitations make the results in Table 10 tentative and at best indicative. The
coverage of the data ends at 2003, which is when foreign governments and corporations
outside Europe started issuing euro-denominated securities at an increasing pace (ECB 2005).
In addition, the maturity of the debt is also a key factor for central banks, and it probably
would be desirable to use the currency composition of short-term debt.28


5.2     Direction of international trade

It is also of great interest to examine how the pattern of trade influences optimal reserve
allocation. Not only has the direction of trade been found to be a significant determinant of
reserve composition in the empirical studies, but trade shares are relatively stable over time.
In addition, international trade patterns also capture the other two main factors that central
banks take into account, the composition of debt and the composition of the basket peg. On
the former, recent evidence shows that countries issue and trade securities with the same
countries that they trade goods (e.g. Aviat and Courdacier, 2004; Rose and Spiegel, 2004;
Lane, 2005). Thus the trade statistics also capture (part of) the currency of external debt
issuance. On the latter, Shioji (2005) simulates a multi-country dynamic open economy
model and shows that the currency invoicing of trade has a direct eﬀect on the optimal
currency composition of the basket peg.
  28
     Unfortunately, the Global Development Finance Database does not report the currency composition of
short-term debt. But since most emerging economies borrow over short maturities, using the currency shares
of both short and long-term debt obligations is still quite useful.

                                                   24
       We proceed by incorporating the desire of the BRIC central banks to manage their
reserves partly depending on the trade share (imports plus exports as a percentage of total
trade with the world) with each of the four developed countries.29 Data come from the IMF’s
Direction of Trade Database and also cover 2004. For comparability with the external debt
estimates we also report estimates with a 50% threshold.30 For example, in 2004 the share
of Brazilian trade with the US and the euro zone was almost the same at 20% (see Appendix
Table C for the actual shares). We thus impose that the Brazilian central bank wants to
hold at least 10% of its reserves in dollars and at least 10% in euros. In 2004 the euro zone
was the main trading partner for Russia, accounting for more than 45% of Russian exports
and imports. It was also the main trading partner of India and Brazil, although the actual
shares of trade were not significantly higher than that with the US. China on the other hand
had approximately the same trade shares with the euro zone, the US, and Japan.

       The constrained optimization results assuming that expected currency returns are equal-
ized are given in Table 11. For brevity we report estimates based on a DCC-GARCH filtering
of the VCM and also incorporate transaction costs with extreme bid-ask spreads in the pre-
vious year. These are also our preferred estimates, since we are capturing both liquidity
needs and trade invoicing, which also proxies for foreign debt issuance.

       First, reflecting the increasing weight of the euro zone in international trade, the optimal
allocation to euros increases significantly, notably in Russia (around 25%) and Brazil (around
15%). For China and India, the share is somewhat over 10%. These are higher than in Table
6. Still, in all countries the optimal weights of the euro are smaller than the observed
holdings. We again interpret this as an indicator of the rapid internationalization of the
euro, ‘punching above its weight’. Second, the allocation in the dollar continues to be very
close to the observed (reported) shares.
  29
     We also experiment with exports and imports separately and find similar results.
  30
     It would have been preferable to use data on trade invoicing rather than the direction, since foreign
reserves are used for international payments. For example Shioji (2005) makes a connection between invoicing
rather than the direction of trade and the optimal currency peg. But lack of data precludes this. ECB (2005)
and Kamps (2005) provide tentative evidence indicating an increased role of the euro as an invoicing currency
in international trade, using an unbalanced panel of more than thirty countries.




                                                     25
5.3    The minimum variance portfolio with all returns expressed
       relative to the domestic currency

Expressing returns in domestic currency units helps to capture any de jure or de facto
currency pegs, since then central banks would intervene in the foreign exchange markets in
the currency of the peg. We thereby incorporate the third factor that has been found to be a
significant determinant of reserve composition. Moreover, it resolves the ‘technical’ problem
we found above, in that we could not include the dollar in the minimum variance problem
since it was the base currency. We report results using the composition of trade constraint.

    The results in Table 12 are highly unstable. And since at least in some time periods,
central banks try to minimize the volatility of their exchange rate against the dollar, the
share of the dollar is typically very high. The euro emerges as a distant second. We note
that a mean-variance approach would not apply in this context: First, we cannot treat
the domestic currency as the riskless asset, since this is the liability of the central banks.
Second, given the currency peg that some countries follow explicitly or implicitly, they
minimize volatility with the peg currency (USD here) rather than maximizing returns. In
this framework, China’s tight peg to the dollar naturally gives it the dominant role in China’s
reserves. In years when pegs collapsed (Russia 1998, Brazil 1999), the dollar no longer gives
minimum variance, and the euro’s share increases substantially. That suggests it is indeed
the ‘alternative’ international currency. Third, for countries like Russia and Brazil where the
minimum variance is much higher than our 3.3% limit, we would need to assume exotic risk
preferences to apply the mean-variance framework. And given the relatively high domestic
interest rates, mean-variance optimization would give 100% in the risk-free asset — not a very
useful result from the standpoint of this paper.


6     Conclusion

Foreign exchange reserves have grown rapidly in recent years, and there is as yet no sign
that the rate of accumulation will fall. Currently two-thirds of global international reserves
are held in US dollar assets. The reserve currency status of the dollar confers an “exorbitant
privilege” on the United States (Gourinchas and Rey, 2005b), which can run large and
prolonged current account deficits, financing them in its own currency. But academics and
money managers encourage emerging market countries’ central banks to diversify their assets,


                                              26
switching away from the dollar. Recent developments in international financial markets
add pressure on the dollar. First, the emergence of the euro oﬀers a serious alternative
placement for foreign assets. Moreover, after a brief initial period, transaction costs in the
euro currency markets have fallen drastically. Second, several other industrial countries’
currencies have also enhanced their liquidity and thus also oﬀer attractive alternative assets
for further diversification. Portfolio rebalancing away from the dollar would have immediate
implications for the US and the global economy.

   Our main methodological contribution is to assess reserve holdings in a dynamic mean-
variance optimization framework augmented by transactions costs and with constraints re-
flecting central banks’ special needs. The starting point of our approach is to consider a
representative central bank. We make various assumptions about expected currency returns
and the structure of the variance-covariance matrix to estimate what a currency optimizer
implies for the composition of foreign reserves. Then we incorporate transaction costs in the
optimization framework. Since central banks need to provide liquidity in abnormal market
times, we use extreme bid-ask spreads to measure rebalancing costs. Finally, turning to indi-
vidual countries, we can bring into the optimization framework the needs of central banks to
hold a sizable portion of their holdings in the currencies of their external debt, the currencies
of their main trading partners and the anchor currency of the peg. We performed simula-
tions for four large emerging market countries, Brazil, Russia, India, and China. Although
these constraints are ad hoc, we are able to assess the impact over time of the introduction
of the euro. The results suggest that since an increasing number of countries issue euro-
denominated securities in the international markets and the euro zone is the main trading
partner of many developing countries, the optimal share in the euro has increased signifi-
cantly in recent years. Quantitatively the most important factor, however, appears to be the
reference currency to which countries decide to peg their own currencies.

   We find that the mean-variance framework with the dollar as the reference (risk-free)
asset, together with the interdiction of short-selling and the observed high positive correla-
tions of foreign exchange markets, explains rather well the large shares of the dollar in central
banks’ portfolios. The pound sterling typically shows a high "optimal" share, whereas those
of the yen and the Swiss franc are very low; these calculated shares reflect well the relative
returns and variances. Moreover, we find that the actually observed euro allocations are
substantially greater than emerge from the optimizations. This we take to mean that the
euro has in fact quickly gained status as the ‘alternative’ international currency. Our results

                                               27
suggest, however, that a substantial increase in the euro’s share of central bank reserves
would require


   • that more countries include the euro in their currency pegs (de facto or de jure) - the
     composition of debt and trade have smaller eﬀects than the choice of reference currency

   • that the scope for active central bank management of their portfolios widen by per-
     mitting them to take short positions (this becomes increasingly important with the
     observed trend to increased co-movement of the major currencies)


   Recent evidence of moves in the first direction comes from Russia and Eastern Europe,
whereas there is some suggestion of movement in the second direction from Japan, Singapore,
and perhaps China.

   We believe that starting with a theoretically grounded, simple mean-variance framework
and properly modifying it to incorporate the specific needs of monetary authorities can
bring new insights about the prospects of adjustment. Evidence suggests that an increasing
number of central banks pursue similar optimization strategies, consulting or even hiring
money managers to assist them. Besides rebalancing the currency composition of foreign
reserves, there is currently increasing pressure on central banks to invest in higher return
assets, such as mortgage and asset-backed securities, highly rated corporate bonds and even
equity. It would be thus very interesting to extend our framework allowing for currency
returns in the money markets as well as government bonds, commercial paper and equity of
each of the main industrial countries.




                                            28
References

[1] Alogoskoufis, George and Portes, Richard (1991)."International Costs and Ben-
   efits from EMU", in The Economics of EMU, European Economy Special Issue No 1,
   1991, pp. 231-245.

[2] Alogoskoufis, George and Portes, Richard (1992). "European Monetary Union
   and International Currencies in a Tripolar World." in Matthew Canzoneri, Vittorio Grilli
   and Paul Masson (eds), Establishing a Central Bank: Issues in Europe and Lessons from
   the U.S., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[3] Alogoskoufis, George and Portes, Richard (1997). "The Euro, the Dollar, and the
   International Monetary System", in P. Masson, T. Krueger and B. Turtelboom, (eds),
   EMU and the International Monetary System. International Monetary Fund, Washing-
   ton DC.

[4] Aviat, Antonin and Coeurdacier, Nicolas (2004). "The Geography of Trade in
   Goods and Assets." DELTA (Paris, France) Working paper 2004-10, May 2004, forth-
   coming in the Journal of International Economics.

[5] Bank for International Settlements (2004). Triennial Central Bank Survey: For-
   eign Exchange and Derivative Market Activity in 2004, Bank for International Settle-
   ments, Basel.

[6] Bergsten, Fred C. (1997). "The Dollar and the Euro." Foreign Aﬀairs, July/August
   1997, pp. 83-95.

[7] Biais, Bruno; Declerc, Fany; Dow, James; Portes, Richard, and von Thad-
   den, Ernst-Ludwig (2006). European Corporate Bond Markets: transparency, liq-
   uidity, eﬃciency, CEPR, London, UK.

[8] Blanchard, Olivier, Giavazzi, Francesco and Sa, Filipa (2005). "International
   Investors, the U.S. Current Account, and the Dollar", Brookings Papers on Economic
   Activity, November 2005, 1, pp. 1-65.

[9] Bollesrslev, Tim (1990). "Modelling the Coherence in Short-run Nominal Exchange
   Rates: A Multivariate Generalized ARCH Approach." Review of Economic and Statis-
   tics, 72 (2), pp. 498-505.

                                           29
[10] Cappiello, Lorenzo; Engle, Robert F. and Sheppard, Kevin. (2003) "Asym-
    metric Dynamics in the Correlations of Global Equity and Bond Returns" ECB Working
    paper 204, January 2003.

[11] Chinn, Menzie (1999). "Memo on the Determinants of Central Bank Euro Holdings."
    mimeo University of California-Santa Cruz.

[12] Chinn, Menzie, and Frankel, Jeﬀrey (2005). "Will the Euro Eventually Surpass
    the Dollar as Leading International Reserve Currency?", forthcoming in G7 Current Ac-
    count Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, Richard Clarida (ed.), The University
    of Chicago Press, Chicago, ILL.

[13] Codirla, Corvin, Siourounis Gregorios, and Woo, David (2005). "The Bar-
    clays Capital FX Optimiser: A User’s Manual", Global FX Strategy, Barclays Capital,
    London, United Kingdom.

[14] Dellas, Harris and Yoo, Chin Bang. (1991). "Reserve Currency Preferences for
    Central Banks: The Case of Korea." Journal of International Money and Finance,
    10(1), pp. 406-419.

[15] De Leon, Jacobo (2003). "How the Bank of Canada Manages Reserves." in How
    Countries Manage Reserve Assets. Robert Pringle and Nick Carver (Eds.), Central
    Banking Publications, London, United Kingdom.

[16] Detken, Carsten, and Hartmann, Philipp (2000). The Euro and International
    Capital Markets", April 2000, International Finance, 3 (1), pp. 53-94.

[17] Detken, Carsten, and Hartmann, Philipp (2002). "Features of the Euro’s Role
    in International Financial Markets." Economic Policy, Fall 2002, 35 (2), pp. 555-597.

[18] Dooley, Michael and Garber, Peter (2005). "Is it 1958 or 1968? Three Notes on
    the Longevity of the Revived Bretton Woods System." Brookings Papers on Economic
    Activity, November 2005, 1, pp. 147-209.

[19] Dooley, Michael P., Folkerts-Landau, David and Garber, Peter M. (2003).
    "An Essay on the Revived Bretton Woods System." National Bureau of Economic Re-
    search (Cambridge, MA), Working Paper No. 9971, September 2003.



                                           30
[20] Dooley, Michael P., Folkerts-Landau, David and Garber, Peter M. (2004).
    "Interest Rates, Exchange Rates and International Adjustment." National Bureau of
    Economic Research (Cambridge, MA), Working Paper No. 10727, September 2004.

[21] Dooley, Michael P., Folkerts-Landau, David and Garber, Peter M. (2005).
    "Interest Rates, Exchange Rates and International Adjustment." National Bureau of
    Economic Research (Cambridge, MA), Working Paper No. 11711, November 2005.

[22] Dooley, Michael P., Lizondo, Saul and Mathieson, Donald (1989). "The Cur-
    rency Composition of Foreign Exchange Reserves." International Monetary Fund Staﬀ
    Papers, June 1989, 36 (2), pp. 385-434.

[23] Dunne, Peter, Moore, Michael, and Portes, Richard (2006). European Govern-
    ment Bond Markets: Transparency, Liquidity, Eﬃciency, CEPR, London, UK.

[24] Eichengreen, Barry (1998). "The Euro as a Reserve Currency." Journal of the
    Japanese and International Economies, December 1998, 12 (4), pp. 483-506.

[25] Eichengreen, Barry (2005). "Sterling’s Past, Dollar’s Future: Historical Perspectives
    on Reserve Currency Competition." National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge,
    MA) Working Paper No. 11336, May 2005.

[26] Eichengreen, Barry, and Frankel, Jeﬀrey (1996). "The SDR, Reserve Curren-
    cies, and the Future of the International Monetary System," in The Future of the
    SDR in Light of Changes in the International Financial System, Michael Mussa, James
    Boughton, and Peter Isard (eds.), International Monetary Fund, 1996.

[27] Eichengreen, Barry, and Mathieson, Donald (2000). "The Currency Composition
    of Foreign Exchange Reserves: Retrospect and Prospect." International Monetary Fund
    (Washington, D.C.) Working Paper 131, July 2000.

[28] Engle, Robert (2002). "Dynamic Conditional Correlation - A Simple Class of Mul-
    tivariate GARCH Models." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, July 2002,
    20 (3), pp. 339-350.

[29] Engle, Robert and Kroner, Kenneth (1995). "Multivariate Simultaneous
    GARCH." Econometric Theory, 11 (1), pp. 122-150.



                                              31
[30] Engle, Robert and Sheppard, Kevin (2001). "Theoretical and Empirical Prop-
    erties of Dynamic Conditional Correlation Multivariate GARCH." National Bureau of
    Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 8554, October 2001.

[31] European Central Bank (2004). Risk Management for Central Bank Foreign Re-
    serves. Carlos Bernadell, Pierre Cardon, Joachim Coche, Francis X. Diebold and Simone
    Manganelli (Eds.) Frankfurt, Germany.

[32] European Central Bank (2005). Review of the International Role of the Euro. De-
    cember 2005, Frankfurt, Germany.

[33] European Central Bank (2006). The Accumulation of Foreign Reserves. ECB Oc-
    casional Paper 43, February 2006, Frankfurt, Germany.

[34] Feldstein, Martin (1997). "The Political Economy of The European Economic and
    Monetary Union: Political Sources of an Economic Liability." Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, Fall 1997, 11 (4), pp. 23-42.

[35] Fisher, Stephen J. and Lie, Min C. (2004). "Asset Allocation for Central Banks:
    Optimally Combining Liquidity, Duration, Currency and Non-Government Risk." in
    Risk Management for Central Bank Foreign Reserves. Carlos Bernadell, Pierre Cardon,
    Joachim Coche, Francis X. Diebold and Simone Manganelli (Eds.) Frankfurt, Germany.

[36] Frankel, Jeﬀrey (1995). "Still the Lingua Franca: The Exaggerated Death of the
    Dollar," Foreign Aﬀairs, July/August 1995, 74 (4), pp. 9-16.

[37] Fukuda, Shin-ichi and Ono, Masanori (2005). "On the Determinants of Export
    Prices: History vs. Expectations", mimeo University of Tokyo and Fukushima Univer-
    sity.

[38] Gmuer, Enrich and Cavegn, Gion (2003). "A view from the Swiss National Bank."
    in How Countries Manage Reserve Assets. Robert Pringle and Nick Carver (Eds.),
    Central Banking Publications, London, United Kingdom.

[39] Goldman Sachs (2003). "Dreaming with BRICs," Global Economic Paper 99.

[40] Goldman Sachs (2005). "How Solid are the BRICs?" Global Economic Paper 134.




                                              32
[41] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Rey, Hélène (2005a). "International Financial
    Adjustment." Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 4923, February
    2005.

[42] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Rey, Hélène (2005b). "From World Banker to
    World Venture Capitalist: US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege."
    Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 5220, August 2005. Forthcoming
    in G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, Richard Clarida
    (ed.), The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

[43] Greenspan, Alan (2004). Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan at the European
    Banking Congress 2004, Frankfurt, Germany November 19, 2004.

[44] Hansen, Ib; Olgaard, Christian and Jensen, Peter Kaer (2003). "Risk Manage-
    ment of Currency Reserves." in How Countries Manage Reserve Assets. Robert Pringle
    and Nick Carver (Eds.), Central Banking Publications, London, United Kingdom.

[45] Hartmann, Philipp (1998a). Currency Competition and Foreign Exchange Markets.
    Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

[46] Hartmann, Philipp (1998b). "The Currency Denomination of World Trade after
    European Monetary Union." Journal of the Japanese and International Economies,
    12 (4), pp. 424-454.

[47] Hau, Harald, Killeen, William, and Moore, Michael (2002a). "Has the Euro
    Changed the Foreign Exchange Market?" Economic Policy, 17(1), pp. 149-192.

[48] Hau, Harald, Killeen, William, and Moore, Michael (2002b). "The Euro as an
    International Currency: Explaining Puzzling First Evidence from the Foreign Exchange
    Markets." Journal of International Money and Finance, 21 (3), pp. 351-383.

[49] Hau, Harald and Rey, Hélène (2004). "Can Portfolio Rebalancing Explain the
    Dynamics of Equity Returns, Equity Flows, and Exchange Rates?" American Economic
    Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2004, 94 (2), pp.126-133.

[50] Hau, Harald, and Rey, Hélène (2006). "Exchange Rates, Equity Prices and Capital
    Flows," Review of Financial Studies, Spring 2006, 19 (1), pp. 273-317.

[51] International Monetary Fund (2005). Annual Report, 2005, Washington DC.

                                           33
[52] International Monetary Fund (2005). Direction of Trade Statistics, 2005, Wash-
    ington DC.

[53] Kamps, Annette (2005). "The Euro in International Trade", mimeo, European Cen-
    tral Bank.

[54] Kenen, Peter (2003). "The Euro and the Dollar: Competitors or Complements?" in
    The European Union and the United States, Michel Dumoulin and Geneviève Duchenne
    (eds.), pp. 251-274.

[55] Lane, Philip R. (2005). "Global Bond Portfolios and EMU." European Central Bank
    (Frankfurt, Germany) Working Paper 553, November 2005.

[56] Lindert, Peter (1969). "Key Currencies and Gold: 1900-1913." Princeton Studies in
    International Finance No. 24. Princeton University.

[57] Lyons, Richard (2001). The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates. MIT Press,
    Cambridge, MA.

[58] Meese, Richard and Rogoﬀ, Kenneth (1983). "Empirical Exchange Rate Models
    of the Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?" Journal of International Economics,
    February 1983, 14 (1), pp. 3-24.

[59] Naameh, Michael (2003). "Reserve Management in Developing Countries." in How
    Countries Manage Reserve Assets. Robert Pringle and Nick Carver (Eds.), Central
    Banking Publications, London, United Kingdom.

[60] Niehans, Jurg (1971). "Money and Barter in General Equilibrium with Transactions
    Costs." American Economic Review, December 1971, 61(5), pp. 773-783.

[61] Obstfeld, Maurice and Rogoﬀ, Kenneth (1996). Foundations of International
    Macroeconomics. MIT Press, Cambridge (MA), USA.

[62] Obstfeld, Maurice and Rogoﬀ, Kenneth (2005). "The Unsustainable US Current
    Account Position Revisited." Forthcoming in G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sus-
    tainability and Adjustment, Richard Clarida (ed.), The University of Chicago Press,
    Chicago, ILL.

[63] Portes, Richard, and Rey, Hélène (1998). "The Emergence of the Euro as an
    International Currency." Economic Policy, April 1998, 26(1), pp. 305-343.

                                           34
[64] Pringle, Robert and Carver, Nick (2003). "How Countries Manage Reserve As-
    sets." in How Countries Manage Reserve Assets. Robert Pringle and Nick Carver (Eds.),
    Central Banking Publications, London, United Kingdom.

[65] Pringle, Robert and Carver, Nick (2005)."Trends in Reserve Management - Sur-
    vey Results." in Reserve Management Trends. Robert Pringle and Nick Carver (Eds.),
    Central Banking Publications, London, United Kingdom.

[66] Reddy, Yaga Venugopal (2003). "Reserve management at the Reserve Bank of
    India," in How Countries Manage Reserve Assets. Robert Pringle and Nick Carver
    (Eds.), Central Banking Publications, London, United Kingdom.

[67] Rey, Hélène (2001). "International Trade and Currency Exchange," Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies, April 2001, 68 (2), pp. 443-464.

[68] Royal Bank of Scotland (2003). How Countries Manage Reserve Assets. Robert
    Pringle and Nick Carver (Eds.), Central Banking Publications, London, United King-
    dom.

[69] Royal Bank of Scotland (2005). Reserve Management Trends. Robert Pringle and
    Nick Carver (Eds.), Central Banking Publications, London, United Kingdom.

[70] Rose, Andrew and Spiegel, Mark M. "A Gravity Model of Sovereign Lending:
    Trade, Default, and Credit." National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA)
    Working Paper No. 9285, October 2002.

[71] Roubini, Nouriel and Setzer, Brad (2005). "The U.S. Twin Deficits and External
    Debt Accumulation: Are They Sustainable?." working paper, Stern School of Business.

[72] Sarno, Lucio and Taylor Mark (2003). The Economics of Exchange Rates. Cam-
    bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

[73] Shioji, Etsuro (2005). "Invoicing Currency and the Optimal Basket Peg for East
    Asia: A New Open Economy Macroeconomics Perspective" mimeo Yokohama National
    University

[74] Siourounis, Gregorios (2004). "Capital Flows and Exchange Rates: An Empirical
    Analysis" London Business School Institute of Finance and Accounting Working Paper
    400.

                                            35
[75] Snow, John (2006). Interview with Bloomberg TV, January, 13, 2006.

[76] Truman, Edwin (2005a). "Comment on “Will the Euro Eventually Surpass the Dollar
    as Leading International Reserve Currency? by Menzie Chinn and Jeﬀrey Frankel"
    forthcoming in G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, Richard
    Clarida (ed.), The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

[77] Truman, Edwin (2005b).Postponing Global Adjustment, Institute for International
    Economics Working Paper 05-6, July, Washington DC.

[78] Truman, Edwin, and Wong, Anna (2006). The Case for an International Reserve
    Diversification Standard, Institute for International Economics, Washington DC.

[79] World Bank (2005). Global Development Finance Database, 2005, Washington DC.




                                           36
                                                                  Figure 1: Global Foreign Exchange Reserves
                                                                                (USD billions, year-end)

  4,500

                      All countries               Industrial countries              Emerging markets and developing countries
  4,000


  3,500


  3,000


  2,500


  2,000


  1,500


  1,000


   500


      0
              1994          1995           1996           1997           1998          1999           2000           2001           2002          2003           2004           2005




The Figure reports the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves in the period 1994-2005. All values are expressed in US dollars. Source: International Monetary Find World Economic Outlook
Database.
                                       Figure 2: Optimal allocations for different sigma values
                                 (Assuming UIP with Extreme Bid-Ask Spreads as Transaction Costs)

       100%
         90%
         80%
                                                                                                                                             EUR
         70%                                                                                                                                 CHF
         60%                                                                                                                                 GBP
         50%                                                                                                                                 JPY
         40%                                                                                                                                 USD

         30%

         20%
         10%
          0%
                  1.30% 1.60% 2.00% 2.30% 2.60% 3.00% 3.30% 3.60% 4.00% 4.30% 4.60% 5.00% 5.50%




The Figure reports the mean currency weights of an optimal asset allocation for different risk profiles based on a constrained mean-variance
optimization routine across the five main international currencies for October 2005. The mean allocation is calculated from 500 portfolio allocations
generated by shocking the expected returns vector with an iid Gaussian error, which has zero mean and standard deviation equal to that of the
corresponding currency. We assume currency returns equal to the risk free asset across the main international currencies and also incorporate
transaction (rebalancing) costs, using extreme bid-ask spreads over the previous year. The variance-covariance matrix is estimated with a dynamic
conditional correlation multivariate GARCH (DCC-GARCH). These weights are directly comparable to the last column in Table 6, Panel C, where
the annual portfolio volatility in the optimization routine was set to 3.3% (replicated in the figure above).
Table 1: Share of Main Currencies in Total Identified Official Holdings of Foreign Exchange

                         1995        1996        1997       1998        1999       2000       2001       2002       2003        2004        2005

All countries
U.S. dollar              59.00       62.10      65.20       69.40       71.00      70.50      70.70      66.50      65.80       65.90       66.54
Japanese yen              6.80        6.70       5.80        6.20        6.40      6.30       5.20        4.50       4.10        3.90        3.58
Pound sterling            2.10        2.70       2.60        2.70        2.90      2.80       2.70        2.90       2.60        3.30        3.75
Swiss franc               0.30        0.30       0.30        0.30        0.20      0.30       0.30        0.40       0.20        0.20        0.14
Euro                       —           —          —           —         17.90      18.80      19.80      24.20      25.30       24.90       24.39
Deutsche mark            15.80       14.70      14.50       13.80         —         —          —           —          —           —           —
French franc              2.40        1.80       1.40        1.60         —         —          —           —          —           —           —
Netherlands guilder       0.30        0.20       0.40        0.30         —         —          —           —          —           —           —
ECU                       8.50        7.10       6.00        1.20         —         —          —           —          —           —           —
Other currencies          4.80        4.30       3.80        4.50        1.60      1.40       1.20        1.40       1.90        1.80        1.60

Industrial Countries
U.S. dollar              52.30       57.40      59.10       67.60       73.50      72.50      72.70      68.90      70.50       71.50       73.71
Japanese yen              6.70        5.70       5.90        6.90        6.70      6.50       5.60        4.40       3.80        3.60        3.32
Pound sterling            2.10        2.10       2.00        2.10        2.20      2.00       1.90        2.10       1.50        1.90        2.11
Swiss franc               0.10        0.10       0.10        0.20        0.10      0.20       0.30        0.60       0.20        0.10        0.13
Euro                       —           —          —           —         16.10      17.10      18.00      22.40      22.10       20.90       19.15
Deutsche mark            16.60       15.90      16.20       13.40         —         —          —           —          —           —           —
French franc              2.30        1.70       0.90        1.20         —         —          —           —          —           —           —
Netherlands guilder       0.20        0.20       0.20        0.20         —         —          —           —          —           —           —
ECU                      13.60       12.30      11.20        2.30         —         —          —           —          —           —           —
Other currencies          6.00        4.70       4.40        6.20        1.40      1.60       1.50        1.70       1.90        2.00        1.58

Developing Countries
U.S. dollar              70.30       68.50      72.40       71.20       68.20      68.20      68.60      64.00      60.70       59.90       60.49
Japanese yen              7.00        8.10       5.70        5.60        6.00      6.00       4.90        4.70       4.40        4.30        3.81
Pound sterling            2.20        3.50       3.30        3.30        3.70      3.60       3.60        3.80       3.90        4.80        5.13
Swiss franc               0.70        0.60       0.60        0.50        0.40      0.30       0.30        0.20       0.20        0.20        0.15
Euro                       —           —          —           —         19.90      20.60      21.80      26.10      28.90       29.20       28.80
Deutsche mark            14.40       13.00      12.50       14.30         —         —          —           —          —           —           —
French franc              2.40        2.00       2.10        2.10         —         —          —           —          —           —           —
Netherlands guilder       0.50        0.30       0.50        0.40         —         —          —           —          —           —           —
ECU                       0.00        0.00       0.00        0.00         —         —          —           —          —           —           —
Other currencies          2.60        3.90       3.00        2.70        1.70      1.30       0.90        1.20       1.90        1.60        1.61

Source: International Monetary Fund (IMF) 2005 Annual Report.
Country coverage changes every year (so the observations are not fully comparable across years). ECU reserves held by the monetary authorities existed
in the form of claims on both the private sector and the European Monetary Institute (EMI), which issued official ECUs to European Union central
banks through revolving swaps against the contribution of 20 percent of their gross gold holdings and U. S. dollar reserves. On December 31, 1998, the
official ECUs were unwound into gold and U.S. dollars; hence, the share of ECUs at the end of 1998 was sharply lower than a year earlier. The
remaining ECU holdings reported for 1998 consisted of ECUs issued by the private sector, usually in the form of ECU deposits and bonds. On January
1, 1999, these holdings were automatically converted into euros. All shares are estimated at the end of year. The 2005 values are based on preliminary
data from the IMF COFER database.
Table 2. Bid/Ask Spreads


            Dec-95             Dec-96             Dec-97              Dec-98             Dec-99              Dec-00              Dec-01              Dec-02             Dec-03             Dec-04              Oct-05
         Mean     Max       Mean     Max       Mean     Max       Mean      Max      Mean      Max       Mean      Max        Mean     Max       Mean      Max       Mean     Max       Mean     Max       Mean     Max

EUR       —     —             —     —            —     —            —     —          0.04%    0.20%      0.05%    0.11%      0.07%    0.11%      0.05%    0.10%     0.04%    0.08%     0.01%    0.04%      0.01%   0.04%
JPY     0.08% 0.39%         0.05% 0.09%        0.04% 0.38%        0.07% 0.44%        0.05%    1.07%      0.05%    0.09%      0.05%    0.21%      0.04%    0.09%     0.04%    0.09%     0.02%    0.06%      0.02%   0.05%
GBP     0.04% 0.06%         0.04% 0.29%        0.05% 0.30%        0.03% 0.30%        0.04%    0.31%      0.10%    0.07%      0.05%    0.07%      0.04%    0.08%     0.04%    0.07%     0.01%    0.04%      0.01%   0.06%
CHF     0.09% 0.09%         0.06% 0.15%        0.04% 0.40%        0.07% 0.11%        0.04%    0.09%      0.05%    0.07%      0.04%    0.11%      0.05%    0.08%     0.05%    0.27%     0.02%    0.06%      0.02%   0.08%

NLG 0.11% 0.29%             0.11% 0.24%        0.10% 0.28%        0.09% 0.53%          —        —         —         —          —        —          —       —          —        —         —        —          —       —
DEM 0.08% 0.28%             0.05% 0.68%        0.04% 0.28%        0.09% 0.42%          —        —         —         —          —        —          —       —          —        —         —        —          —       —
FRF 0.02% 0.06%             0.05% 0.14%        0.03% 0.15%        0.04% 0.09%          —        —         —         —          —        —          —       —          —        —         —        —          —       —


Mean spreads are calculated from daily data for the preceding year. Mean spreads are expressed as a fraction of the mid asset price. Max spreads represent the maximum value over the past year, expressed as a fraction of
the mid asset price. The sample starts at 01/01/1995 and ends at 31/10/2005.
Currency abbreviations: euro (EUR); Swiss franc (CHF); British pound sterling (GBP); Japanese yen (JPY); French franc (FRF); Deutsche mark (DEM) and Dutch guilder (NLG).
Source: Bloomberg.
Table 3: Mean-Variance Optimal Allocations Assuming Random Walk of the Exchange Rate and No Transaction Costs

                Dec-95            Dec-96            Dec-97           Dec-98           Dec-99            Dec-00           Dec-01           Dec-02           Dec-03            Dec-04           Oct-05
                                                                                           Panel A:Historical Volatility
USD             68.51%            60.85%           58.10%            58.28%           55.45%           58.02%            58.04%           58.17%           59.17%           60.88%            60.98%
JPY             0.07%             0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            0.00%             0.04%            0.20%            0.02%            0.00%             0.00%
GBP             20.82%            33.03%           41.58%            41.73%           44.57%           40.20%            36.38%           37.84%           39.02%           38.81%            38.00%
CHF             0.59%             0.25%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            0.43%             0.53%            0.04%            0.01%            0.00%             0.62%
DEM             0.49%             0.64%            0.33%               —                —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
FRF             8.31%             4.91%            0.00%               —                —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
NLG             1.21%             0.32%            0.00%               —                —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
EUR             10.01%            5.88%            0.33%             0.00%            0.00%            1.35%             5.02%            3.76%            1.78%            0.32%             0.41%

                                                                                             Panel B: CCC GARCH
USD             51.22%            57.30%           60.57%            58.46%           53.09%           63.51%            56.88%           51.73%           53.62%           60.79%            63.39%
JPY             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.42%            0.02%            0.05%             0.00%
GBP             30.41%            37.94%           38.92%            41.55%           46.93%           35.37%            34.74%           42.76%           44.45%           38.31%            35.87%
CHF             0.00%             0.23%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            0.00%             0.66%            0.16%            0.04%            0.00%             0.30%
DEM             0.44%             1.01%            0.24%               —                —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
FRF             17.01%            2.83%            0.27%               —                —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
NLG             0.91%             0.70%            0.00%               —                —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
EUR             18.37%            4.54%            0.51%             0.00%            0.00%            1.13%             7.72%            4.93%            1.87%            0.87%             0.45%

                                                                                             Panel C: DCC GARCH
USD             49.58%            58.87%           60.73%            58.46%           53.09%           63.73%            58.13%           51.76%           53.55%           60.89%            63.48%
JPY             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%
GBP             34.96%            41.14%           39.28%            41.55%           46.93%           35.42%            36.52%           44.18%           45.49%           38.67%            34.93%
CHF             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            0.47%             0.72%            0.01%            0.00%            0.14%             0.75%
DEM             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%               —                —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
FRF             15.27%            0.00%            0.00%               —                —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
NLG             0.21%             0.00%            0.00%               —                —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
EUR             15.47%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            0.39%             4.65%            4.06%            0.98%            0.32%             0.86%
The Table reports the mean currency weights of an optimal asset allocation based on a constrained mean-variance optimization routine across the five (seven prior to 1998) main international currencies.
The mean allocation is calculated from 500 portfolio allocations generated by shocking the expected returns vector with an iid Gaussian error, which has zero mean and standard deviation equal to that of
the corresponding currency. We assume a random walk of the exchange rate. Thus currency returns equal the one-year interbank rate (Panel A of Appendix Table A). The variance-covariance matrix in
Panel A is composed by the unconditional historical correlations and variances. In Panel B the variance-covariance matrix is estimated with a constant correlation multivariate GARCH (CCC-GARCH)
and in Panel C with a dynamic conditional correlation multivariate GARCH (DCC-GARCH) . The annual portfolio variance in the optimization routine is set to 3.3%. Before 1999, EUR is the sum of
allocations in the Deutsche mark (DEM), the French franc (FRF) and the Dutch guilder (NLG). For other currency abbreviations see notes in Table 2. The US dollar (USD) is used as the cash (risk free)
asset.
Table 4: Mean-Variance Optimal Allocations with Perfect Foresight on Currency Returns

                Dec-95            Dec-96            Dec-97           Dec-98           Dec-99            Dec-00           Dec-01           Dec-02           Dec-03           Dec-04            Oct-05

                                                                                          Panel A:Historical Volatility
USD             67.13%            62.63%           58.01%            66.10%           75.03%           68.54%            58.78%           57.66%           57.83%           60.71%            62.27%
JPY             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%             16.11%           24.90%           0.52%             0.01%            4.81%            7.15%            0.00%             14.27%
GBP             0.21%             37.38%           42.00%            5.36%            0.09%            1.09%             40.42%           20.15%           18.27%           37.72%            23.48%
CHF             13.17%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            29.44%            0.81%            7.11%            0.00%            0.64%             0.00%
DEM             3.71%             0.00%            0.00%             12.43%             —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
FRF             11.86%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%              —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
NLG             3.93%             0.00%            0.00%             0.00%              —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
EUR             19.50%            0.00%            0.00%             12.44%           0.00%            0.41%             0.00%            10.28%           16.75%           0.93%             0.00%

                                                                                             Panel B: CCC GARCH
USD             54.39%            58.87%           60.73%            65.07%           67.45%           69.37%            59.23%           51.60%           51.08%           60.32%            63.29%
JPY             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%             16.78%           32.56%           1.03%             0.00%            3.68%            8.76%            0.03%             0.77%
GBP             0.20%             41.14%           39.28%            4.08%            0.00%            2.75%             38.16%           15.92%           21.99%           35.11%            35.95%
CHF             19.57%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            26.32%            1.62%            0.18%            0.03%            0.17%             0.00%
DEM             0.88%             0.00%            0.00%             14.08%             —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
FRF             23.63%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%              —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
NLG             1.33%             0.00%            0.00%             0.00%              —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
EUR             25.84%            0.00%            0.00%             14.08%           0.00%            0.54%             1.00%            28.62%           18.14%           4.37%             0.00%

                                                                                             Panel C: DCC GARCH
USD             54.51%            58.87%           60.73%            63.75%           67.46%           70.26%            60.63%           52.33%           54.42%           60.36%            63.33%
JPY             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%             15.61%           32.56%           0.00%             0.00%            0.85%            5.51%            0.00%             0.00%
GBP             0.00%             41.14%           39.28%            2.47%            0.00%            1.20%             34.20%           18.59%           21.74%           34.67%            36.69%
CHF             20.28%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            28.54%            5.08%            0.15%            0.00%            0.15%             0.00%
DEM             1.53%             0.00%            0.00%             18.17%             —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
FRF             23.50%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%              —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
NLG             0.19%             0.00%            0.00%             0.00%              —                —                 —                —                —                —                 —
EUR             25.22%            0.00%            0.00%             18.17%           0.00%            0.00%             0.10%            28.09%           18.33%           4.82%             0.00%

The Table reports the currency weights of an optimal asset allocation based on a constrained mean-variance optimization routine across the five (seven prior to 1998) main international currencies. We
assume perfect foresight on returns. Thus currency returns equal the interbank rate plus the exchange rate (vis -a - vis the US dollar) appreciation. The mean allocation is calculated from 500 portfolio
allocations generated by shocking the expected returns vector with an iid Gaussian error, which has zero mean and standard deviation equal to that of the corresponding currency. The variance-covariance
matrix in Panel A consists of the unconditional historical correlations and variances. In Panel B these are estimated with a constant correlation multivariate GARCH (CCC-GARCH) , and in Panel C
with a dynamic conditional correlation multivariate GARCH (DCC-GARCH) . The annual portfolio vaolatility in the optimization routine is set to 3.3%. Before 1999, EUR is the sum of allocations in the
Deutsche mark (DEM), the French franc (FRF) and the Dutch guilder (NLG) (for 1998 equals the allocation to the Deutsche mark (DEM), see also text for more details). For other currency abbreviations
see notes in Table 2. The US dollar (USD) is used as the cash (risk free) asset.
Table 5: Mean-Variance Optimal Allocations Assuming UIP (Variance minimization)

                 Dec-95           Dec-96            Dec-97            Dec-98           Dec-99            Dec-00            Dec-01           Dec-02           Dec-03           Dec-04            Oct-05
                                                                                            Panel A:Historical Volatility
USD               —                 —                 —                 —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                 —
JPY             31.23%            16.19%            14.74%            11.32%           6.16%             17.57%           20.24%            29.86%           37.45%           39.38%            40.45%
GBP             31.47%            37.30%            48.77%            70.21%           21.50%            38.35%           57.18%            63.33%           60.01%           60.62%            57.75%
CHF             0.00%             0.00%             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%
DEM             0.00%             0.00%             0.00%               —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                 —
FRF             25.99%            43.33%            36.49%              —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                 —
NLG             11.31%            3.18%             0.00%               —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                 —
EUR             37.30%            46.51%            36.49%            18.47%           72.34%            44.09%           22.57%            6.81%            2.54%            0.00%             1.80%
Volatility      8.03%             5.99%             6.00%             7.28%            4.42%             5.68%            6.87%             6.86%            6.81%            7.29%             7.46%
                                                                                              Panel B: CCC GARCH
USD               —                 —                 —                 —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                 —
JPY             29.18%            20.17%            13.25%            9.98%            13.90%            34.79%           38.84%            24.83%           39.53%           35.97%            50.10%
GBP             36.91%            20.78%            41.20%            62.34%           31.31%            24.14%           39.78%            55.58%           60.47%           49.23%            34.59%
CHF             0.00%             0.00%             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%             0.00%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%
DEM             0.00%             0.00%             0.00%               —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                 —
FRF             33.91%            45.98%            41.59%              —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                 —
NLG                               13.08%            3.95%               —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                 —
EUR             33.91%            59.06%            45.55%            27.68%           54.79%            41.07%           21.38%            19.59%           0.00%            14.80%            15.31%
Volatility      5.58%             4.79%             6.05%             7.10%            4.51%             5.19%            5.97%             6.03%            5.95%            7.25%             7.39%
                                                                                            Panel C: DCC GARCH
USD               —                 —                 —                 —                —             —         —                            —                —                —                 —
JPY             29.47%            26.76%            21.98%            13.74%           18.67%       42.67%     43.10%                       23.37%           38.74%           32.49%            51.54%
GBP             36.95%            34.53%            41.96%            62.74%           20.55%       22.61%     49.31%                       60.04%           61.26%           50.08%            34.43%
CHF             0.00%             0.00%             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%         0.00%     0.00%                        0.00%            0.00%            0.00%             0.00%
DEM             0.00%             0.00%             0.00%               —                —             —         —                            —                —                —                 —
FRF             32.86%            38.71%            14.64%              —                —             —         —                            —                —                —                 —
NLG             0.73%             0.00%             21.42%              —                —             —         —                            —                —                —                 —
EUR             33.58%            38.71%            36.06%            23.51%           60.78%       34.71%     7.59%                        16.58%           0.00%            17.43%            14.02%
Volatility      5.36%             4.69%             6.53%             7.21%            5.06%        5.79%      6.10%                        6.11%            6.07%            7.50%             7.63%
The Table reports the currency weights of an optimal asset allocation based on a constrained mean-variance optimization routine across the main international currencies. We assume returns equal to the
risk free asset across the main international currencies (UIP holds). Thus the routine just minimizes the variance of the portfolio. The variance-covariance matrix in Panel A consists of the unconditional
historical correlations and variances. In Panel B the variance-covariance matrix is estimated with a constant correlation multivariate GARCH (CCC-GARCH), and in Panel C with a dynamic conditional
correlation multivariate GARCH (DCC-GARCH). Before 1999, EUR is the sum of allocations in the Deutsche mark (DEM), the French franc (FRF) and the Dutch guilder (NLG) (for 1998 equals the
allocation to the Deutsche mark (DEM), see also text for more details). The last row of each Panel reports (in italics) the portfolio volatility.
Table 6: Mean-Variance Optimal Allocations Assuming UIP for the Exchange Rate and Transaction Costs (extreme bid-ask spreads)

                Dec-95            Dec-96            Dec-97           Dec-98           Dec-99            Dec-00            Dec-01           Dec-02           Dec-03           Dec-04            Oct-05
                                                                                           Panel A:Historical Volatility
USD             71.11%            60.48%           60.65%            65.57%           49.71%            58.43%           64.52%            63.57%           63.41%           62.62%           64.03%
JPY             3.68%             5.73%            5.47%             7.10%            8.73%             7.14%            9.63%             10.62%           11.25%           14.05%           9.41%
GBP             6.51%             6.05%            8.77%             7.99%            12.10%            12.78%           10.44%            11.09%           11.88%           12.78%           10.09%
CHF             4.02%             5.47%            4.70%             7.56%            11.53%            8.97%            6.97%             8.67%            6.57%            4.61%            7.54%
DEM             3.67%             4.28%            4.98%               —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                —
FRF             7.01%             11.52%           8.43%               —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                —
NLG             3.96%             6.38%            6.88%               —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                —
EUR             14.64%            22.18%           20.28%            11.63%           17.77%            12.64%           8.39%             6.03%            6.83%            5.93%            8.91%

                                                                                              Panel B: CCC GARCH
USD             60.00%            50.75%           58.13%            63.54%           45.32%            55.16%           57.04%            56.09%           60.31%           63.51%           62.19%
JPY             4.45%             8.28%            5.89%             5.87%            6.68%             13.92%           11.45%            11.11%           10.99%           8.93%            13.85%
GBP             6.17%             7.96%            9.12%             9.57%            17.81%            10.89%           14.69%            15.67%           8.73%            11.09%           11.63%
CHF             7.63%             9.56%            5.79%             6.90%            12.62%            8.65%            6.87%             8.06%            8.02%            7.90%            5.70%
DEM             5.50%             3.94%            4.54%               —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                —
FRF             11.35%            12.96%           10.60%              —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                —
NLG             4.84%             6.46%            5.80%               —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                —
EUR             21.70%            23.36%           20.95%            13.98%           17.42%            11.34%           9.90%             9.03%            11.90%           8.56%            6.61%

                                                                                              Panel C: DCC GARCH
USD             58.42%            49.97%           57.46%            64.88%           47.23%            58.21%           59.83%            58.98%           59.55%           64.12%           62.03%
JPY             3.07%             7.17%            9.79%             9.27%            9.03%             15.03%           11.71%            12.63%           13.40%           8.07%            15.45%
GBP             9.15%             12.23%           8.75%             8.52%            17.18%            9.16%            11.98%            13.29%           12.13%           9.79%            8.14%
CHF             6.84%             6.76%            6.06%             7.08%            10.36%            7.39%            9.01%             7.02%            6.55%            8.04%            6.49%
DEM             4.81%             3.82%            3.93%               —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                —
FRF             11.86%            11.26%           7.06%               —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                —
NLG             5.79%             8.70%            6.83%               —                —                 —                —                 —                —                —                —
EUR             22.46%            23.79%           17.82%            10.09%           16.06%            10.17%           7.42%             8.04%            8.32%            9.96%            7.88%

The Table reports the mean currency weights of an optimal asset allocation based on a constrained mean-variance optimization routine across the five (seven prior to 1998) main international currencies.
The mean allocation is calculated from 500 portfolio allocations generated by shocking the expected returns vector with an iid Gaussian error, which has zero mean and standard deviation equal to that of
the corresponding currency. We assume currency returns equal to the risk free asset across the main international currencies and also incorporate transaction (rebalancing) costs, using extreme bid-ask
spreads over the previous year. The variance-covariance matrix in Panel A consists of the unconditional historical correlations and variances. In Panel B the variance-covariance matrix is estimated with
a constant correlation multivariate GARCH (CC-GARCH), and in Panel C with a dynamic conditional correlation multivariate GARCH (DCC-GARCH). The annual portfolio volatility in the
optimization routine is set to 3.3%. Before 1999, EUR is the sum of allocations in the Deutsche mark (DEM), the French franc (FRF) and the Dutch guilder (NLG) (for 1998 equals the allocation to the
Deutsche mark (DEM), see also text for more details). For other currency abbreviations see notes in Table 2. The US dollar (USD) is used as the cash (risk free) asset.
Table 7: Risk Profile and Optimal Allocations (UIP and extreme bid-ask spreads)

              Dec-95             Dec-96              Dec-97              Dec-98            Dec-99            Dec-00              Dec-01             Dec-02             Dec-03             Dec-04             Oct-05

                                                                                    Panel A: Annual Standard Deviation(-1%)=2.3%

USD           70.42%            64.86%              71.43%              74.71%             61.39%            70.78%              72.09%             70.39%             71.52%             75.02%            73.62%
JPY           2.56%              6.52%               5.87%               5.05%              5.51%             8.78%               9.03%              7.17%              8.49%              6.30%            12.16%
GBP           8.49%              6.96%               5.96%               7.44%              9.99%             7.04%               7.53%             11.02%              8.90%              7.25%             4.22%
CHF           4.27%              5.00%               4.68%               4.86%              4.63%             5.42%               6.15%              5.88%              4.70%              5.30%             4.25%
DEM           3.15%              2.56%               3.83%               7.85%                —                 —                   —                  —                  —                  —                 —
FRF           7.88%              9.12%               3.67%               0.00%                —                 —                   —                  —                  —                  —                 —
NLG           3.21%              4.91%               4.46%               0.00%                —                 —                   —                  —                  —                  —                 —
EUR           14.24%            16.59%              11.96%               7.85%             18.38%             7.95%               5.16%              5.51%              6.36%              6.12%             5.73%

                                                                                   Panel B: Annual Standard Deviation (+1%)=4.3%

USD           45.79%            34.55%              44.22%              54.12%             34.68%            45.17%              47.82%             45.69%             49.76%             53.14%            51.82%
JPY           4.07%             16.12%              12.87%              10.36%             13.17%            17.43%              15.08%             14.53%             14.68%             14.66%            12.14%
GBP           9.49%             13.15%              11.48%              11.30%             16.29%            13.23%              13.55%             19.02%             10.55%             11.75%            13.50%
CHF           10.05%             9.96%               7.34%               9.94%             17.40%            10.80%              11.91%             12.03%             10.99%             10.08%             8.00%
DEM           9.01%              6.34%               5.12%              14.08%               —                 —                   —                   —                 —                  —                  —
FRF           15.23%            12.84%              12.38%               0.00%               —                 —                   —                   —                 —                  —                  —
NLG           6.29%              6.91%               6.45%               0.00%               —                 —                   —                   —                 —                  —                  —
EUR           30.52%            26.08%              23.94%              14.08%             18.27%            13.32%              11.58%              8.68%             13.95%             10.35%            14.51%

The Table reports the mean currency weights of an optimal asset allocation based on a constrained mean-variance optimization routine across the five (seven prior to 1998) main international currencies. The mean
allocation is calculated from 500 portfolio allocations generated by shocking the expected returns vector with an iid Gaussian error, which has zero mean and standard deviation equal to that of the corresponding
currency. We assume currency returns equal to the risk free asset across the main international currencies and also incorporate transaction (rebalancing) costs, using extreme bid-ask spreads over the previous year.
The variance-covariance matrix in both Panels A and B is estimated with a dynamic conditional correlation multivariate GARCH (DCC-GARCH) . In Panel B the annual portfolio volatility in the optimization
routine is set to 2.3%. In Panel A the annual portfolio volatility in the optimization routine is set to 4.3%. (Thus these weights are directly comparable to the estimates in Table 6 Panel C, where the annual portfolio
volatility in the optimization routine was set to 3.3%).
Before 1999, EUR is the sum of allocations in the Deutsche mark (DEM), the French franc (FRF) and the Dutch guilder (NLG) (for 1998 equals the
allocation to the Deutsche mark (DEM), see also text for more details). For other currency abbreviations see notes in Table 2. The US dollar (USD) is used as the cash (risk free) asset.
Table 8: Assuming "Fat-tails" in the Distribution of Currency Returns in the Simulation (UIP with Transanction Costs)


                Dec-95            Dec-96           Dec-97            Dec-98             Dec-99           Dec-00            Dec-01            Dec-02           Dec-03            Dec-04          Oct-05

USD             57.69%           50.28%            58.71%           64.43%             47.96%            57.79%            59.39%            58.18%           60.19%           63.66%           62.62%
JPY             4.44%            9.52%             9.52%            6.24%              7.61%             12.92%            11.75%            11.32%           11.76%           10.77%           14.78%
GBP             10.13%           11.25%            6.86%            10.69%             14.86%            9.03%             13.40%            11.91%           10.17%           9.44%            8.63%
CHF             6.37%            8.13%             6.62%            8.27%              10.69%            7.43%             7.64%             8.14%            9.00%            6.19%            5.41%
DEM             5.30%            4.37%             6.95%              __                 __                __                __                __               __               __               __
FRF             10.54%           9.99%             5.38%              __                 __                __                __                __               __               __               __
NLG             5.46%            6.36%             5.83%              __                 __                __                __                __               __               __               __
EUR             21.30%           20.72%            18.16%           10.25%             18.75%            12.79%            7.76%             10.42%           8.83%            9.93%            8.54%




The Table reports the currency weights of an optimal asset allocation based on a mean-variance optimization routine across the five (seven prior to 1998) main international currencies. The mean allocation
is calculated from 500 portfolio allocations generated by shocking the expected returns vector with an iid error, drawn from a fat-tailedt distribution, which has zero mean and standard deviation equal to
that of the corresponding currency. The annual portfolio volatility in the optimization routine is set to 3.3%. Before 1999, EUR is the sum of allocations in the Deutsche mark (DEM), the French franc (FRF
and the Dutch guilder (NLG) (for 1998 equals the allocation to the Deutsche mark (DEM), see also text for more details). For other currency abbreviations see notes in Table 2. The US dollar (USD) is used
as the cash (risk free) asset. Thus these weights are directly comparable to the estimates in Table 6 Panel C, where returns are assumed to follow a standard normal distribution.
Table 9: Mean-Variance Optimal Allocations Assuming UIP for the Exchange Rate (SDR, EUR and JPY as the risk free assets)

                 Dec-95           Dec-96            Dec-97           Dec-98           Dec-99           Dec-00          Dec-01           Dec-02           Dec-03            Dec-04           Dec-05

                                                                                 Panel A: All Currencies expressed in SDR
SDR             56.29%            47.69%            54.61%           41.80%           39.34%           46.13%         42.66%           53.76%            54.13%            55.73%           52.60%
USD              6.14%             8.71%             8.28%           20.22%           19.54%           17.28%         16.96%           13.68%            14.26%            12.83%           16.37%
JPY              5.86%             8.15%             9.83%           12.43%            9.70%            6.73%          9.17%            9.08%             9.84%             8.67%            8.36%
GBP              4.70%             9.00%             3.67%            8.57%           11.20%            9.01%          9.39%            8.31%             8.24%             8.63%            7.33%
CHF              6.37%             7.31%             6.83%            7.70%           11.95%            9.05%          7.48%            7.69%             8.01%             6.63%            6.27%
DEM              7.19%             5.65%             5.03%              —                —                —              —                —                 —                 —                —
FRF              7.57%             7.98%             6.30%              —                —                —              —                —                 —                 —                —
NLG              5.87%             5.51%             5.47%              —                —                —              —                —                 —                 —                —
EUR             20.64%            19.14%            16.79%            9.29%            8.28%           11.80%         14.33%            7.48%             5.53%             7.50%            9.07%

                                                                                 Panel B: All Currencies expressed in JPY
JPY             66.60%            66.70%            69.25%           70.64%           69.47%           71.32%         71.26%           71.10%            60.74%            63.56%           57.99%
USD              5.76%             4.00%             9.43%            6.73%            7.60%            7.25%          7.79%            7.54%             9.06%             8.37%           13.15%
GBP              4.57%             6.38%             8.51%            4.68%            8.53%            6.14%          5.16%            7.70%             6.23%             8.62%            7.89%
CHF              6.33%             7.14%             2.81%            5.51%            8.04%            6.86%          7.25%            7.48%             8.65%             8.84%           11.67%
DEM              4.09%             7.30%             3.88%            4.16%            0.00%            0.00%          0.00%            0.00%             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%
FRF              4.50%             4.87%             3.20%            5.27%            0.00%            0.00%          0.00%            0.00%             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%
NLG              8.17%             3.60%             2.93%            3.00%            0.00%            0.00%          0.00%            0.00%             0.00%             0.00%            0.00%
EUR             16.76%            15.77%            10.01%           12.43%            6.35%            8.43%          8.56%            6.18%            15.33%            10.61%            9.31%

                                                                                 Panel C: All Currencies expressed in EUR
EUR             72.28%            68.02%            76.27%           70.36%           51.51%           63.78%         57.07%           45.17%            37.32%            35.94%           30.12%
JPY              8.54%            12.25%             9.40%            9.39%           10.46%            6.83%          8.48%           11.26%             9.34%            13.63%           13.65%
USD              7.63%             7.46%             5.40%            5.67%            7.60%            6.58%          7.50%            9.05%            13.50%            13.53%           13.08%
GBP              5.96%             7.63%             3.62%            7.76%           10.04%            9.67%          9.69%           11.22%            16.52%            12.59%           18.39%
CHF              5.59%             4.66%             5.32%            6.82%           20.39%           13.15%         17.26%           23.31%            23.32%            24.31%           24.77%

The Table reports the mean currency weights of an optimal asset allocation based on a constrained mean-variance optimization routine across the six (eight prior to 1998) main international
currencies. The mean allocation is calculated from 500 portfolio allocations generated by shocking the expected returns vector with an iid Gaussian error, which has zero mean and standard
deviation equal to that of the corresponding currency. We assume currency returns equal to the risk free asset across the main international currencies. The variance-covariance matrix is
estimated with a dynamic conditional correlation multivariate GARCH (DCC-GARCH) . The annual portfolio volatility in the optimization routine is set to 3.3%. Before 1999, EUR is the sum
of allocations in the Deutsche mark (DEM), the French franc (FRF) and the Dutch guilder (NLG) (for 1998 equals the allocation to the Deutsche mark (DEM), see also text for more details). For
other currency abbreviations see notes in Table 2. In Panel A the IMF SDR is used as the cash (risk free) asset and all returns are expressed relatively to the SDR. In Panel B the Japanese yen is
used as the cash (risk free) asset and all returns are expressed relatively to the yen. In Panel C the euro is used as the cash (risk free) asset and all returns are expressed relatively to the euro.
Table 10: Simulated Optimal Allocations for Selected Developing Countries with Currency Composition
of External Debt as Constraint

              Dec-95          Dec-96          Dec-97           Dec-98         Dec-99         Dec-00          Dec-01          Dec-02         Dec-03

                                                                        Panel A: Russia

USD           56.75%          48.86%          56.87%          61.95%          46.60%         56.65%          59.58%         57.06%          59.99%
JPY            4.06%           8.68%           8.01%           5.25%           6.32%         10.67%           9.21%         10.49%           8.91%
GBP            4.89%           8.47%           7.92%           7.98%          11.85%          8.69%           7.83%          8.67%           8.05%
CHF            5.45%           5.17%           3.83%           6.09%          11.95%          7.78%           6.37%          6.01%           4.45%
DEM           19.22%          20.06%          18.66%             —               —              —               —              —               —
FRF            9.56%           8.71%           4.63%             —               —              —               —              —               —
EUR           28.77%          28.76%          23.29%          18.66%          23.14%         16.18%          16.97%         17.76%          18.57%


                                                                         Panel B: India

USD           53.22%          46.24%          56.14%          62.97%          47.62%         55.43%          57.27%         55.71%          58.15%
JPY           10.42%          15.62%          11.19%          11.38%          12.60%         14.51%          14.93%         13.50%          13.53%
GBP            8.72%          10.54%           9.67%           7.74%          14.72%          8.27%          10.22%         11.52%           9.73%
CHF            6.24%           7.27%           5.24%           5.32%          12.18%          8.40%           7.46%          6.05%           7.93%
DEM            7.70%           6.94%           8.61%             —              —               —               —              —               —
FRF           13.62%          13.33%           9.05%             —              —               —               —              —               —
EUR           21.32%          20.27%          17.66%          12.51%          12.76%         13.37%          10.08%         13.19%          10.63%

                                                                        Panel C: China

USD           54.50%          46.39%          56.62%          63.39%          48.47%         54.67%          57.75%         55.86%          58.30%
JPY           13.16%          16.29%          13.00%          11.30%          13.05%         16.01%          15.73%         13.56%          15.95%
GBP           10.32%          13.08%           9.23%           7.55%          10.61%          8.38%           8.64%         12.61%           7.47%
CHF            6.88%           6.43%           7.27%           7.03%          13.31%          8.70%           7.46%          8.68%           7.57%
DEM            5.09%           5.49%           6.43%             —              —               —               —              —               —
FRF            9.97%          12.26%           7.35%             —              —               —               —              —               —
EUR           15.05%          17.74%          13.78%          10.65%          14.44%         12.20%          10.37%          9.26%          10.67%


                                                                        Panel D: Brazil

USD           55.18%          46.98%          57.14%          62.46%          47.57%         56.43%          58.05%         57.07%          58.82%
JPY            7.01%          11.95%          10.15%           8.34%          10.38%         12.23%          11.09%         11.40%          13.30%
GBP            8.08%          10.94%           8.44%           9.54%          13.78%         10.67%           8.80%          9.04%           8.97%
CHF            8.46%           8.76%           7.83%           6.43%          11.26%          9.42%           6.32%          7.89%           7.74%
DEM            7.95%           7.24%           7.71%             —              —               —               —              —               —
FRF           13.26%          14.08%           8.63%             —              —               —               —              —               —
EUR           21.20%          21.32%          16.34%          13.12%          16.86%         11.23%          15.70%         14.57%          11.13%

The Table reports the currency weights of an optimal asset allocation based on a constrained mean-variance optimization routine across the five
(seven prior to 1998) main international currencies for Russia, India, China and Brazil. The variance-covariance matrix is estimated with a dynamic
conditional correlation multivariate GARCH. The annual portfolio volatility in the optimization routine is set to 3.3%. We assume currency returns
equal to the risk free asset across the main international currencies and also incorporate transaction (rebalancing) costs, using extreme bid-ask
spreads over the previous year. Before 1999, EUR is the sum of allocations in the Deutsche mark (DEM), the French franc (FRF) and the Dutch
guilder (NLG) (for 1998 equals the allocation to the Deutsche mark (DEM), see also text for more details). For other currency abbreviations see
notes in Table 2. The US dollar (USD) is the risk free asset.
The constraints are based on currency composition of external (total) debt. The table reports the weights imposing as a constraint that the central
bank holds reserves in the currencies of the country’s external debt at levels at least equal to 50% of the share of its debt in each currency.
Table 11: Simulated Optimal Allocations for Selected Developing Countries with Direction of Trade as
Constraint

         Dec-95         Dec-96          Dec-97         Dec-98         Dec-99        Dec-00        Dec-01         Dec-02        Dec-03        Dec-04

                                                                      Panel A: Russia

USD      55.73%         48.49%         56.24%          62.21%         43.07%        52.47%        58.74%         54.75%        60.65%        61.86%
JPY       5.91%         10.60%          8.44%           8.14%         10.21%        11.72%         7.06%          8.15%         6.91%         4.98%
GBP       8.25%         10.06%         10.67%           8.27%         10.21%         5.89%         5.88%          9.41%         5.30%         4.69%
CHF       5.83%          6.06%          4.88%           5.81%          8.12%         4.72%         2.89%          3.66%         3.30%         3.59%
DEM       8.95%          8.62%          8.18%             —              —             —             —              —             —             —
FRF      10.67%          9.00%          5.70%             —              —             —             —              —             —             —
NLG       4.58%          7.10%          5.80%             —              —             —             —              —             —             —
EUR      24.21%         24.72%         19.68%          15.46%         28.25%        25.18%        25.40%         24.03%        23.83%        24.88%


                                                                       Panel B: India
USD      57.26%         48.22%         57.04%          62.54%         47.20%        56.60%        57.16%         56.88%        58.56%        62.63%
JPY       7.06%         10.24%          7.93%           6.63%          7.69%        12.20%        11.96%          9.08%        10.07%         9.18%
GBP       8.17%         13.21%         10.33%           8.81%         12.40%         8.82%        13.04%         12.56%        12.53%        10.39%
CHF       7.42%          7.49%          5.76%           7.63%         11.76%         9.46%         3.96%          8.62%         7.15%         6.89%
DEM       5.89%          5.22%          5.65%             —              —             —             —              —             —             —
FRF       8.40%         10.93%          6.79%             —              —             —             —              —             —             —
NLG       5.74%          4.61%          6.39%             —              —             —             —              —             —             —
EUR      20.03%         20.76%         18.83%          14.27%         20.81%        12.89%        13.83%         12.83%        11.65%        10.90%

                                                                      Panel C: China
USD      52.54%         45.63%         56.65%          62.73%         45.04%        52.98%        54.89%         54.71%        56.20%        56.32%
JPY      16.24%         15.63%         14.76%          13.17%         14.39%        17.29%        17.48%         15.42%        19.05%        16.92%
GBP       8.40%         11.98%          8.02%           8.96%         11.83%         9.06%        10.75%         10.97%         8.82%         9.97%
CHF       3.87%          5.14%          4.23%           4.92%          8.57%         6.74%         4.87%          6.28%         5.01%         5.82%
DEM       5.14%          5.23%          5.05%             —              —             —             —              —             —             —
FRF       9.49%         10.83%          6.28%             —              —             —             —              —             —             —
NLG       4.22%          5.48%          4.92%             —              —             —             —              —             —             —
EUR      18.85%         21.55%         16.24%          10.11%         20.04%        13.91%        11.97%         12.60%        10.89%        10.95%


                                                                      Panel D: Brazil
USD      55.80%         49.28%         57.03%          61.99%         45.43%        53.81%        57.61%         55.78%        59.11%        62.01%
JPY       6.45%          9.76%          8.18%           7.71%          8.71%        12.30%        11.07%          9.08%        11.25%         8.79%
GBP       6.62%          9.05%          8.18%           7.84%         13.52%         8.48%         8.00%         11.43%         7.82%         8.02%
CHF       6.23%          8.41%          5.34%           5.22%         10.00%         6.22%         5.62%          7.61%         5.49%         6.61%
DEM       7.62%          6.34%          7.00%             —              —             —             —              —             —             —
FRF      11.84%         10.28%          7.78%             —              —             —             —              —             —             —
NLG       5.37%          6.81%          6.39%             —              —             —             —              —             —             —
EUR      24.83%         23.43%         21.17%          17.12%         22.20%        19.16%        17.68%         16.07%        16.28%        14.56%

The Table reports the currency weights of an optimal asset allocation based on a constrained mean-variance optimization routine across the five
(seven prior to 1998) main international currencies for Russia, India, China and Brazil. The variance-covariance matrix is estimated with a dynamic
conditional correlation multivariate GARCH. The annual portfolio volatility in the optimization routine is set to 3.3%. We assume currency returns
equal to the risk free asset across the main international currencies and also incorporate transaction (rebalancing) costs, using extreme bid-ask
spreads over the previous year. Before 1999, EUR is the sum of allocations in the Deutsche mark (DEM), the French franc (FRF) and the Dutch
guilder (NLG) (for 1998 equals the allocation to the Deutsche mark (DEM), see also text for more details). For other currency abbreviations see
notes in Table 2. The US dollar (USD) is the risk free asset.
The constraints are based on the trade share with the corresponding developed countries. The trade share is defined as exports plus imports
relatively to total (world) trade. The table reports the weights imposing as a constraint that the central bank holds reserves in the currencies of the
country’s main trade partners at levels equal to 50% of the share of international trade with each partner.
Table 12: Simulated Optimal Allocations for Selected Developing Countries with Direction of Trade as
Constraint (Minimum Variance Portfolio Weights)

               Dec-95         Dec-96        Dec-97         Dec-98         Dec-99       Dec-00         Dec-01        Dec-02         Dec-03        Dec-04

                                                                          Panel A: Russia
USD            86.71%        87.72%         83.90%        80.16%          4.22%         6.54%         7.36%         96.54%        98.01%         97.34%
JPY             0.00%         0.00%          0.00%         0.00%          0.00%         0.00%         0.00%          1.03%         0.54%          0.18%
GBP             2.87%         4.47%          0.00%         0.00%          0.00%         0.00%         0.00%          2.43%         1.14%          2.48%
CHF            10.42%         7.82%          0.00%         0.00%          0.00%         0.00%         0.00%          0.00%         0.00%          0.00%
DEM             0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           —              —             —             —              —             —              —
FRF             0.00%         0.00%          3.61%           —              —             —             —              —             —              —
NLG             0.00%         0.00%         12.49%           —              —             —             —              —             —              —
EUR             0.00%         0.00%         16.10%        19.84%         95.78%        93.47%        92.64%          0.00%         0.31%          0.00%
Volatility     21.64%        21.64%         36.21%        37.26%         12.05%        13.30%        13.31%         7.58%         2.67%          2.26%

                                                                           Panel B: India
USD            87.60%        87.51%         87.74%         87.67%        46.49%        67.74%        86.86%         86.69%        87.18%         87.87%
JPY             3.36%         3.08%          2.70%          2.70%         2.50%         2.03%         1.99%          1.69%         1.56%          1.38%
GBP             2.74%         2.89%          2.97%          2.97%         2.79%         2.84%         2.54%          2.35%         2.22%          1.94%
CHF             0.81%         0.89%          1.73%          2.11%         1.81%         1.85%         0.36%          1.30%         1.29%          1.63%
DEM             3.50%         3.36%          2.99%            —             —             —             —              —             —              —
FRF             1.10%         1.25%          1.02%            —             —             —             —              —             —              —
NLG             0.90%         1.01%          0.84%            —             —             —             —              —             —              —
EUR             5.49%         5.63%          4.86%          4.55%        46.41%        25.53%         8.26%          7.97%         7.74%          7.19%
Volatility     7.84%         6.86%          5.26%          6.06%         3.69%         4.35%         3.07%          2.27%         2.36%          2.86%

                                                                           Panel C: China
USD              —              —           85.87%         85.81%        83.09%        83.92%        83.71%         84.52%        84.52%         85.19%
JPY              —              —            9.35%          8.95%         9.17%         8.77%         8.61%          8.21%         7.85%          7.27%
GBP              —              —            0.89%          1.02%         1.09%         1.04%         1.01%          0.92%         0.85%          0.85%
CHF              —              —            0.23%          0.22%         0.23%         0.23%         0.23%          0.22%         0.21%          0.22%
DEM              —              —            1.95%            —             —             —             —              —             —              —
FRF              —              —            0.86%            —             —             —             —              —             —              —
NLG              —              —            0.84%            —             —             —             —              —             —              —
EUR              —              —            3.65%          4.00%         6.41%         6.03%         6.44%          6.14%         6.58%          6.47%
Volatility       —              —           1.36%          1.52%         1.30%         1.35%         1.25%          1.26%         1.23%          1.21%

                                                                           Panel D: Brazil
USD            88.25%        88.77%         88.92%         91.81%        75.82%        79.02%        79.73%         84.32%        85.05%         85.78%
JPY             3.32%         2.85%          2.88%          2.52%         9.46%         7.97%         6.49%          2.08%         2.00%          1.78%
GBP             1.19%         1.26%          1.19%          1.30%         1.35%         1.17%         1.27%          1.45%         1.27%          1.08%
CHF             0.57%         0.61%          0.51%          0.53%         0.51%         0.76%         0.63%          0.64%         0.54%          0.46%
DEM             3.64%         3.44%          3.38%            —             —             —             —              —             —              —
FRF             1.27%         1.12%          1.22%            —             —             —             —              —             —              —
NLG             1.76%         1.96%          1.90%            —             —             —             —              —             —              —
EUR             6.67%         6.51%          6.51%          3.83%        12.86%        11.08%        11.88%         11.51%        11.15%         10.90%
Volatility     23.92%        13.70%          9.83%         2.81%         13.91%        14.46%        16.84%         18.43%        18.41%        18.81%

The Table reports the currency weights of an optimal asset allocation based on a constrained variance minimization routine across the five (seven prior
to 1998) main international currencies for Russia, India, China and Brazil. The variance-covariance matrix is estimated with a dynamic conditional
correlation multivariate GARCH. We assume currency returns equal to the risk free asset across the main international currencies. Before 1999, EUR
is the sum of allocations in the Deutsche mark (DEM), the French franc (FRF) and the Dutch guilder (NLG) (for 1998 equals the allocation to the
Deutsche mark (DEM), see also text for more details). For other currency abbreviations see notes in Table 2.
The constraints are based on the trade share with the corresponding developed countries. The trade share is defined as exports plus imports relatively
to total (world) trade. The table reports the weights imposing as a constraint that the central bank holds reserves in the currencies of the country’s main
trade partners at levels equal to 50% of the share of international trade with each partner.
Appendix Table A: Currency Returns

                                                     Panel A - Interest Rate Yield

            Dec-95      Dec-96      Dec-97      Dec-98     Dec-99       Dec-00      Dec-01       Dec-02     Dec-03     Dec-04      Oct-05


USD         5.43%       5.79%       5.97%       5.10%       6.50%       6.00%        2.44%       1.45%      1.46%       3.10%      4.72%
EUR           —           —           —           —         3.18%       4.78%        4.09%       3.49%      2.34%       2.29%      2.55%
JPY         1.27%       0.84%       0.69%       0.61%       0.26%       0.38%        0.16%       0.10%      0.09%       0.09%      0.11%
GBP         7.24%       6.36%       7.28%       7.26%       5.80%       6.53%        5.08%       4.43%      3.88%       4.96%      4.65%
CHF         3.27%       2.21%       1.90%       1.76%       1.75%       3.51%        2.84%       1.49%      0.52%       0.82%      1.24%
NLG         9.33%       6.06%       4.81%       4.51%       3.75%       4.74%        4.25%       4.52%      3.29%       2.56%      2.07%
DEM         4.70%       3.41%       3.56%       3.71%       3.19%       4.79%        4.09%       3.49%      2.33%       2.27%      2.56%
FRF         6.47%       4.13%       3.67%       3.72%       3.19%       4.79%        4.08%       3.49%      2.33%       2.27%      2.56%



                                             Panel B - Historical Exchange Rate Returns

            Dec-95      Dec-96      Dec-97      Dec-98     Dec-99       Dec-00      Dec-01       Dec-02     Dec-03     Dec-04      Oct-05


USD           —           —           —            —          —           —            —          —           —           —          —
EUR           —           —           —            —       -15.06%      -8.30%       -5.77%     16.51%      18.27%      7.72%     -11.59%
JPY         -3.25%     -11.19%     -11.93%      13.91%      10.27%     -12.02%      -14.10%     10.28%      10.25%      4.59%     -12.44%
GBP         -0.59%      9.90%       -3.96%       0.76%      -2.57%      -9.16%       -2.79%     10.23%      10.36%      7.30%      -7.32%
CHF         13.07%     -14.83%      -8.62%       5.92%     -14.55%      -2.78%       -3.05%     18.38%      11.03%      8.72%     -11.54%
NLG         8.00%       -7.64%     -15.98%      6.98%         —           —            —           —          —          —           —
DEM         8.14%       -7.02%     -15.46%      6.95%         —           —            —           —          —          —           —
FRF         9.43%       -5.67%     -14.41%      6.87%         —           —            —           —          —          —           —


Panel A reports one-year inter-bank rates. Panel B reports historical excahnge rate returns vis a vis the US dollar.
Currency abbreviations: US dollar (USD); euro (EUR); Swiss franc (CHF); British pound sterling (GBP); Japanese yen (JPY); French franc
(FRF); Deutsche mark (DEM) and Dutch guilder (NLG).
Source: Bloomberg.
Appendix Table B: Currency Composition of External Debt

                   1995        1996        1997        1998        1999         2000       2001        2002        2003


                                                              Panel A: Russia

USD               52.10%      49.40%      64.60%      64.40%      71.50%      72.30%      73.40%      69.60%      69.10%
JPY                2.00%       1.90%       0.20%       0.20%       0.20%       0.10%       0.10%       0.20%       0.40%
GBP                0.80%       0.70%       0.30%       0.30%       0.20%       0.10%       0.10%       0.10%       0.10%
CHF                2.80%       2.40%       0.10%       0.00%       0.00%       0.00%       0.00%       0.00%       0.00%
DEM               34.20%      37.80%      29.00%      29.00%         —           —           —           —           —
FRF                1.40%       1.80%       0.50%       0.00%         —           —           —           —           —
EUR               35.60%      39.60%      29.50%      29.00%      22.40%      21.20%      20.30%      23.60%      24.30%

                                                              Panel B: India

USD               52.40%      56.40%      60.00%      60.60%      61.30%      68.50%      70.40%      73.80%      76.90%
JPY               14.80%      13.30%      12.20%      13.50%      15.30%      11.40%      11.20%      11.80%      13.00%
GBP                4.70%       4.30%       4.10%       3.90%       3.60%       3.70%       3.50%       3.20%       2.80%
CHF                0.90%       0.60%       0.50%       0.40%       0.30%       0.30%       0.40%       0.40%       0.30%
DEM                6.60%       6.00%       5.30%       7.00%         —           —           —           —           —
FRF                2.10%       1.90%       1.80%       0.00%         —           —           —           —           —
EUR                8.70%       7.90%       7.10%       7.00%       6.20%       5.10%       5.50%       5.90%       5.30%

                                                              Panel C: China

USD               58.10%      65.00%      74.60%      72.40%      67.50%      71.40%      74.10%      72.40%      71.20%
JPY               20.70%      15.90%      11.80%      14.80%      17.80%      16.90%      14.50%      15.40%      16.70%
GBP                0.20%       0.20%       0.20%       0.10%       0.10%       0.10%       0.10%       0.10%       0.10%
CHF                0.00%       0.00%       0.00%       0.10%       0.10%       0.10%       0.10%       0.10%       0.10%
DEM                1.70%       1.40%       1.20%       5.20%         —           —           —           —           —
FRF                0.30%       0.30%       0.20%       0.00%         —           —           —           —           —
EUR                2.00%       1.70%       1.40%       5.20%       4.20%       4.20%       4.80%       5.70%       7.20%

                                                              Panel D: Brazil

USD               68.20%      68.00%      68.80%      74.60%      73.00%      71.20%      70.60%      73.20%      77.40%
JPY                8.60%       8.20%       7.30%       5.90%       7.30%       7.60%       8.80%       8.70%       7.00%
GBP                1.80%       2.20%       2.30%       1.70%       1.20%       1.10%       0.90%       0.60%       0.50%
CHF                0.30%       0.20%       0.30%       0.20%       0.20%       0.30%       0.30%       0.20%       0.20%
DEM                5.10%       5.70%       5.10%       6.40%         —           —           —           —           —
FRF                6.00%       4.90%       4.20%       0.00%         —           —           —           —           —
EUR               11.10%      10.60%       9.30%       6.40%       4.90%       5.80%      13.80%      12.10%       9.90%

The Table reports the currency composition of external debt for Russia, India, China and Brazil.
Currency abbreviations: US dollar (USD), euro (EUR); Swiss franc (CHF); British pound sterling (GBP); Japanese yen (JPY);
French franc (FRF); and Deutsche mark (DEM).
Source: World Bank Global Development Finance Database (2005).
Appendix Table C: Actual Trade Shares

                              1995      1996      1997      1998     1999      2000      2001      2002      2003      2004

                                                                    Panel A: Russia

United States                 6.24%    7.24%     6.56%     8.79%     8.58%     7.80%     7.66%    6.18%     4.79%     4.91%
Europe (excl. UK)            41.23%   39.03%    41.25%    39.06%    40.19%    42.32%    46.99%   43.47%    44.80%    46.81%
Japan                         3.17%    3.01%     2.85%     2.61%     2.50%     2.44%     2.72%    1.81%     2.24%     3.15%
United Kingdom                3.39%    3.34%     3.15%     3.61%     3.41%     4.04%     3.49%    3.21%     3.29%     3.27%
Switzerland                   3.58%    3.46%     3.10%     3.19%     3.68%     3.11%     1.60%    3.78%     3.33%     3.59%
Germany                      10.17%    9.26%     9.58%     9.71%    10.10%     9.59%    11.63%    9.52%     9.70%    10.14%
France                        2.09%    2.24%     2.34%     2.65%     2.33%     2.27%     2.71%    2.96%     3.07%     3.05%
Netherlands                   3.89%    3.36%     4.19%     4.23%     4.10%     3.71%     3.94%    5.41%     5.20%     7.04%

                                                                    Panel B: India

United States                13.30%   13.70%    13.84%    14.19%    13.94%    13.16%    12.95%   13.20%    12.03%    10.74%
Europe (excl. UK)            20.32%   20.43%    19.53%    19.55%    18.00%    16.18%    16.51%   15.93%    15.48%    14.38%
Japan                         6.71%    6.16%     5.40%     5.41%     5.01%     4.07%     3.98%    3.37%     3.11%     2.76%
United Kingdom                5.48%    5.79%     5.94%     5.94%     5.58%     5.69%     5.08%    4.70%     4.45%     3.88%
Switzerland                   1.62%    1.78%     3.46%     4.22%     3.61%     3.70%     0.71%    2.61%     2.59%     3.25%
Germany                       7.00%    6.72%     5.99%     5.42%     4.39%     3.92%     4.14%    3.97%     3.87%     3.57%
France                        2.12%    2.18%     2.04%     2.06%     1.92%     1.79%     2.04%    1.91%     1.73%     1.63%
Netherlands                   1.79%    2.03%     1.69%     1.63%     1.58%     1.43%     1.30%    1.29%     1.28%     1.23%

                                                                    Panel C: China

United States                14.54%   14.79%    15.08%    16.97%    17.05%    15.71%    15.80%   15.67%    14.87%    14.72%
Europe (excl. UK)            12.49%   11.59%    11.13%    12.53%    12.81%    12.07%    12.88%   12.28%    13.15%    12.93%
Japan                        20.44%   20.71%    18.71%    17.90%    18.35%    17.53%    17.22%   16.42%    15.69%    14.54%
United Kingdom                1.69%    1.75%     1.78%     2.03%     2.18%     2.09%     2.02%    1.83%     1.69%     1.71%
Switzerland                   0.48%    0.48%     0.46%     0.44%     0.47%     0.47%     0.47%    0.43%     0.42%     0.45%
Germany                       4.88%    4.54%     3.90%     4.43%     4.47%     4.15%     4.60%    4.48%     4.92%     4.69%
France                        1.60%    1.43%     1.72%     1.86%     1.86%     1.62%     1.56%    1.35%     1.58%     1.53%
Netherlands                   1.44%    1.54%     1.69%     1.85%     1.78%     1.67%     1.71%    1.71%     1.81%     1.86%

                                                                    Panel D: Brazil

United States                20.10%   20.93%    20.64%    21.68%    23.21%    22.78%    23.86%   24.06%    21.74%    19.79%
Europe (excl. UK)            24.88%   23.63%    23.64%    25.55%    25.72%    22.16%    23.75%   23.02%    22.30%    21.81%
Japan                         6.64%    5.70%     5.76%     5.05%     4.88%     4.71%     4.45%    4.17%     4.00%     3.55%
United Kingdom                2.38%    2.53%     2.37%     2.61%     2.70%     2.35%     2.54%    2.89%     2.54%     2.16%
Switzerland                   1.15%    1.21%     1.01%     1.05%     1.03%     1.53%     1.26%    1.28%     1.07%     0.92%
Germany                       7.28%    6.88%     6.76%     7.66%     7.50%     6.08%     6.47%    6.57%     6.11%     5.76%
France                        2.53%    2.24%     2.44%     3.01%     3.32%     3.13%     3.29%    3.07%     2.91%     2.85%
Netherlands                   3.53%    3.91%     3.81%     3.08%     3.15%     2.93%     2.86%    3.36%     3.78%     3.95%

The Table reports the share of trade (exports plus imports) of Russia, India, China and Brazil against the main industrial
countries relatively to the total volume of international trade.
Source: IMF Direction of Trade Statistics (2005).
