NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBALIZATION AND POVERTY
Ann Harrison
Working Paper 12347
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12347
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006

I would like to thank Pranab Bardhan, Ethan Ligon, Margaret McMillan, Branko Milanovic, Guido Porto,
Emma Aisbett, Don Davis, Alix Zwane, and two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Ann Harrison. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Globalization and Poverty
Ann Harrison
NBER Working Paper No. 12347
June 2006
JEL No. F1, O1, I3
ABSTRACT
This essay surveys the evidence on the linkages between globalization and poverty. I focus on two
measures of globalization: trade and international capital flows. Past researchers have argued that
global economic integration should help the poor since poor countries have a comparative advantage
in producing goods that use unskilled labor. The first conclusion of this essay is that such a simple
interpretation of general equilibrium trade models is likely to be misleading. Second, the evidence
suggests that the poor are more likely to share in the gains from globalization when there are
complementary policies in place. Such complementary policies include investments in human capital
and infrastructure, as well as policies to promote credit and technical assistance to farmers, and
policies to promote macroeconomic stability. Third, trade and foreign investment reforms have
produced benefits for the poor in exporting sectors and sectors that receive foreign investment.
Fourth, financial crises are very costly to the poor. Finally, the collected evidence suggests that
globalization produces both winners and losers among the poor. The fact that some poor individuals
are made worse off by trade or financial integration underscores the need for carefully targeted safety
nets.
Ann Harrison
University of California, Berkeley
329 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
harrison@are.berkeley.edu

I.

Introduction
More than 1 billion people live in extreme poverty, which is defined by the World Bank as

subsisting on less than 1 dollar a day. 1 In 2001, fully half of the developing world lived on less
than 2 dollars a day. Yet poverty rates are much lower today than twenty years ago. In the last
two decades, the percentage of the developing world living in extreme poverty has been cut in
half. While poverty rates were falling, developing countries became increasingly integrated into
the world trading system. Poor countries have slashed protective tariffs and increased their
participation in world trade. If we use the share of exports in GDP as a measure of
“globalization”, then developing countries are now more “globalized” than high income
countries. 2
Does globalization reduce poverty? Will ongoing efforts to eliminate protection and
increase world trade improve the lives of the world’s poor? There is surprisingly little evidence
on this question. 3 The comprehensive surveys by Winters et al (2004), Goldberg and Pavcnik
(2004), and Ravallion (2004) all acknowledge that they can only review the indirect evidence
regarding the linkages between globalization and poverty. There have been almost no studies
which test for the direct linkages between the two. 4

1

All the poverty estimates in this paragraph are taken from the World Bank’s official poverty website, at
http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/jsp/index.jsp. The 1 $ a day poverty line is actually $1.08 in 1993
purchasing power parity dollars.
2
See “Trade Liberalization: Why So Much Controversy”, by Ann Harrison and Helena Tang, in Growth in the
1990s: Learning from a decade of reform, edited by N. Roberto Zagha, World Bank, 2005.
3
Although there have been a number of recent studies on globalization and inequality, these volumes focus primarily
on distributional consequences of globalization, rather than poverty. There are exceptions, of course. See, for
example, Bhagwati’s new book, In Defense of Globalization (2004). Bardhan’s publications on this topic include his
(2000) ILO Nobel Peace Prize Lecture, published as “'Social Justice in a Global Economy”, as well as Bardhan (2003)
and Bardhan (2004). See also the 2005 book by Thomas Hertel and L. Alan Winters (editors), Poverty and
theWTO: Impacts of the Doha Development Agenda.
4
Winters et al (2004) write in their insightful and comprehensive survey that “there are no direct studies of the
poverty effects of trade and trade liberalization.” Goldberg and Pavcnik’s (2004a) excellent review points out that
“while the literature on trade and inequality is voluminous, there is virtually no work to date on the relationship
between trade liberalization and poverty”. The few studies which do examine the links between globalization and

2

Yet one of the biggest concerns of globalization’s critics is its impact on the poor. This
essay, and the consequent chapters which are part of the forthcoming book Globalization and
Poverty, provides an economist’s perspective on how globalization affects poverty in developing
countries. 5 By bringing together experts on both international trade and poverty, our goal is to
bridge the intellectual divide that separates the individuals who study each of these phenomena.
The fifteen studies and accompanying discussions that are part of this project ask the following
questions: how has global economic integration affected the poor in developing countries? Do
trade reforms that cut import protection improve the lives of the poor? Has increasing financial
integration led to more or less poverty? How have the poor fared during currency crises? Do
agricultural support programs in rich countries hurt the poor in developing countries? Or do such
programs in fact provide assistance by reducing the cost of food imports? Finally, does food aid
hurt the poor by lowering the price of the goods they sell on local markets?
Although the concept of “globalization” is quite broad, we focus on two aspects: (1)
international trade in goods and (2) international movements of capital--including foreign
investment, portfolio flows, and aid. Consequently, most of the chapters measure the impact of
increased exposure to trade and international capital flows on poverty. We do not address other
aspects of globalization, such as information flows, migration, or trade in services. A number of
chapters also address the linkages between these measures of globalization and inequality.
Why is it important to think about globalization’s impact on inequality in a volume
devoted to poverty? As pointed out by Besley and Burgess (2003), poverty can be reduced by

poverty typically use computable general equilibrium models to disentangle the linkages between trade reform and
poverty. While such research provides an important contribution to our understanding of the channels through which
globalization could affect poverty, it is extremely important to be able to look at actual ex post evidence of the impact
of trade and investment reforms on the poor. See the studies cited in Winters et al (2004), Ravallion (2004), Chen and
Ravallion (2000), and Hertel and Winters (2005).

3

growing the economy or through improvements in the income distribution or both. If a country
is growing slowly or not at all, then measures that improve the distribution of income will reduce
poverty. Besley and Burgess (2003) calculate that a one standard deviation reduction in
inequality in sub-Saharan African would reduce poverty by more than half. If openness to trade
is associated with increasing inequality, then the growth gains from trade could be wiped out for
those at the bottom of the income distribution. In other words, if the gains from trade are highly
unequal, then the poor may not share the benefits. Many of the studies in this volume suggest
that globalization has been associated with rising inequality, and that the poor do not always
share in the gains from trade.
The new research presented in this volume takes two different approaches: cross-country
studies and individual country studies. The cross-country studies use aggregate data to examine
the impact of globalization on the number of poor, aggregate growth rates, and inequality. The
country case studies typically use micro data for a single country to examine the impact of
globalization on the incomes of the poor. Cross-country studies are appealing because they allow
authors to generalize beyond one specific case study. Yet many countries have information on
aggregate poverty for only 2 or 3 points in time, which means that statistical tests using crosscountry data may not yield conclusive results. Consequently, most of the studies in this volume
rely on the use of micro data. These datasets typically span a number of years, including periods
before, during, and after a trade reform.
What are the lessons that emerge from the various chapters? Though the issues are
complex, some broad themes emerge.

5

The individual chapters may be downloaded from http://www.nber.org/books/glob-pov/index.html.

4

The poor in countries with an abundance of unskilled labor do not always gain from
trade reform. Many economists have used the Heckscher-Ohlin (HO) framework in international
trade to argue that trade liberalization should raise the incomes of the unskilled in labor-abundant
countries. Most researchers who use this framework to argue that globalization is good for the
world’s poor make a number of heroic assumptions. These assumptions—such as the necessity
that all countries produce all goods--are challenged in this volume. In addition, the country
studies show that labor is not nearly as mobile as the HO trade model assumes; for comparative
advantage to increase the incomes of the unskilled, they need to be able to move out of
contracting sectors and into expanding ones. Another reason why the poor may not gain from
trade reforms is that developing countries have historically protected sectors that use unskilled
labor, such as textiles and apparel.

This pattern of protection, while at odds with simple

interpretations of HO models, makes sense if standard assumptions (such as factor price
equalization) are relaxed. Trade reforms may result in less protection for unskilled workers, who
are most likely to be poor. Finally, penetrating global markets even in sectors that traditionally
use unskilled labor requires more skills than the poor in developing countries typically possess.

The poor are more likely to share in the gains from globalization when there are
complementary policies in place. The studies on India and Colombia suggest that globalization
is more likely to benefit the poor if trade reforms are implemented in conjunction with reducing
impediments to labor mobility. In Zambia, poor farmers are only expected to benefit from
greater access to export markets if they also have access to credit, technical know-how, and other
complementary inputs. The studies also point to the importance of social safety nets. In Mexico,
if poor corn farmers had not received income support from the government, their real incomes

5

would have been halved during the 1990s. In Ethiopia, if food aid had not been not well
targeted, globalization would have had little impact on the poor. The fact that other policies are
needed to ensure that the benefits of trade are shared across the population suggests that relying
on trade reforms alone to reduce poverty is likely to be disappointing.

Export growth and incoming foreign investment have reduced poverty. Poverty has
fallen in regions where exports or foreign investment is growing. In Mexico, the poor in the
most globalized regions have weathered macroeconomic crises better than their more isolated
neighbors. In India, opening up to foreign investment has been associated with a decline in
poverty. The study on Zambia suggests that poor consumers gain from falling prices for the
goods they buy, while poor producers in exporting sectors benefit from trade reform through
higher prices for their goods. In Colombia, increasing export activity has been associated with
an increase in compliance with labor legislation and a fall in poverty. In Poland, unskilled
workers—who are the most likely to be poor--have gained from Poland’s accession to the
European Union.

Financial crises are costly to the poor. In Indonesia, poverty rates increased by at least
50 percent after the currency crisis in 1997. While recovery in Indonesia has been rapid, the
Mexican economy has yet to fully recover from its 1995 peso crisis. Poverty rates in Mexico in
the year 2000 were higher than they had been ten years earlier. Cross-country evidence also
suggests that financial globalization leads to higher consumption and output volatility in lowincome countries. One implication is that low income countries are more likely to benefit from
financial integration if they also create reliable institutions and pursue macroeconomic
stabilization policies (including the use of flexible exchange rate regimes). However, foreign

6

investment flows have very different effects from other types of capital flows. While
unrestricted capital flows are associated with a higher likelihood of poverty, foreign direct
investment inflows are associated with a reduction in poverty. The poverty-reducing effects of
FDI are clearly documented in the chapters on India and Mexico.

Globalization produces both winners and losers among the poor.

It should not be

surprising that the results defy easy generalization. Even within a single region, two sets of
farmers may be affected in opposite ways. In Mexico, while some small and most medium corn
farmers saw their incomes fall by half in the 1990s, large corn farmers gained. Across different
countries, poor wage earners in exporting sectors or in sectors with incoming foreign investment
gained from trade and investment reforms; conversely, poverty rates increased in previously
protected sectors which were exposed to import competition. Within the same country or even
the same region, a trade reform may lead to income losses for rural agricultural producers and
income gains for rural or urban consumers of those same goods.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses some issues associated
with measuring both poverty and globalization. Section III discusses theoretical links between
trade and poverty outcomes. Section IV summarizes the results from the cross-country studies
while section V describes the results of the country case studies. The studies which address the
impact of capital flows on the poor are summarized in Section VI. Although the focus of this
volume is on the relationship between poverty and different measures of globalization, a number
of authors also address other possible outcomes associated with globalization; these are
described in Section VII. Since the evidence suggests that globalization creates winners as well
as losers among the poor, Section VIII discusses why globalization’s critics seem all too aware
7

of the costs of globalization and generally fail to see the benefits.

A number of research

questions remain unanswered; these are also discussed in Section VIII. Section IX concludes.

II.

Measuring Globalization and Poverty

There is an enormous literature devoted to trade and poverty measurement. For openness
to trade, the authors in this volume use both trade volumes and measures of trade policy. Most
contributors favor the use of direct policy measures, such as tariffs or quotas, over trade volumes.
Trade volumes are typically measured as shares, such as exports plus imports divided by GDP.
Although widely available, trade shares are not ideal because they are determined by trade
policies, geography, country size and macro-economic policies. Globalization of financial flows
is measured either by creating indices of policy or by using measures of actual flows. Capital
controls, which are collected by the International Monetary Fund, are examples of policy
measures; again, actual capital flows are less desirable measures of policy than capital controls
since flows are outcomes of many factors.
One important observation which emerges from the various chapters is that different
measures of globalization are associated with different poverty outcomes. How globalization is
measured determines whether globalization is good for the poor. Measures of export activity and
foreign investment are generally associated with poverty reduction, while removal of protection
(an ex ante measure of globalization) or import shares (an ex post measure) are frequently
associated with rising poverty. These different effects are consistent with short run models of
international trade (such as the specific sector model) where factors of production cannot easily
move from contracting or import-competing sectors to expanding or export oriented ones.
Poverty is typically measured by choosing a poverty line, which reflects the minimum
8

income or consumption necessary to meet basic needs. For low income countries, the World
Bank has calculated poverty lines at $1 and $2 a day. 6 Although these minimum requirements
vary across countries and over time, the $1 and $2 a day measures allow policy makers to
compare poverty across countries using the same reference point. The headcount measure of
poverty identifies the percentage of the population living in households with consumption or
income per person below the poverty line. The headcount is reported either as a percentage (the
incidence of poverty) or as the number of individuals who are poor. Another popular measure is
the poverty gap, which measures the mean distance below the poverty line as a proportion of the
poverty line.

One area of disagreement in poverty measurement is whether poverty should be
measured as the percentage of individuals who are poor (the incidence) or the absolute number
of people who are poor. While the incidence of poverty has been falling over the last twenty
years, the change in the absolute numbers of poor individuals depends on the poverty line
chosen. The number of individuals living on less than one dollar a day declined in the 1980s and
1990s, while the number of individuals living on between one and two dollars a day did not. 7
Critics of globalization frequently use the absolute number of people who are poor as their
preferred measure, while globalization’s supporters (see the discussion by Xavier Salai-i-Martin
for this volume) prefer to use the incidence of poverty. The first chapter in the volume, by
Emma Aisbett, shows that this diversity of opinion is one of the reasons that there is so much
disagreement about whether world poverty has been falling during the period of globalization.

6

Actually $1.08 and $2.15 in 1993 Purchasing Power Parity dollars.
One possible explanation is that the poor in the world are becoming better off, moving from incomes of less than one
dollar to less than two dollars per day. Yet this possibility has not been adequately explored, in large part because this
necessitates being able to follow the same poor household or individual over time.

7

9

It is important to emphasize that the poverty line itself is not fixed over time. Prasad,
Rogoff, Wei and Kose conclude their chapter with the following observation:

One has to acknowledge that poverty is fundamentally a relative measure which would
probably gain an entirely different meaning as the world economy becomes more
integrated. For example, if global growth continues at a rapid pace during the next
century, it is possible that emerging market economies, including China and India, could
attain income levels exceeding those of Americans today by the end of the century. This
implies that Malthusian notions of poverty are likely to become a distant memory in most
parts of the world as global income inexorably expands over the next century, and issues of
inequality, rather than subsistence, will increasingly take center stage in the poverty
debate.

The country case studies show that acceptable poverty lines vary across countries and through
time. As discussed in Goldberg and Pavcnik’s chapter, the $1 a day line is indicative of poverty
lines used in very poor countries, but not in middle income countries such as Colombia. The
official poverty line in Colombia is closer to three (purchasing power parity) dollars a day. In
the United States, the poverty line in 2004 was closer to thirty dollars a day. As acceptable
definitions of poverty shift over time, research on inequality and the overall distribution of
income becomes increasingly important. This is one reason why Gordon Hanson, Ethan Ligon,
Elizabeth Frankenberg and Duncan Thomas, in their chapters, report the impact of globalization
on the entire distribution of income, using non-parametric techniques.

III.

Theoretical linkages between globalization and poverty

One of the most famous theorems in international trade is the Stolper-Samuelson theorem,
which in its simplest form suggests that the abundant factor should see an increase in its real
income when a country opens up to trade. If the abundant factor in developing countries is

10

unskilled labor, then this framework suggests that the poor (unskilled) in developing countries
have the most to gain from trade.

Anne Krueger (1983) and Jagdish Bhagwati and T.N.

Srinivasan (2002) have used this insight to argue that trade reforms in developing countries
should be pro-poor, since these countries are most likely to have a comparative advantage in
producing goods made with unskilled labor.

From this perspective, expanding trade

opportunities should cut poverty and reduce inequality within poor countries.

In their chapter on the theoretical linkages between trade and poverty, Don Davis and
Prachi Mishra argue that “Stolper-Samuelson is dead”. They write eloquently that applying trade
theory to suggest that liberalization will raise the wages of the unskilled in unskilled-abundant
countries is “worse than wrong—it is dangerous.” Davis and Mishra show that such arguments
are based on a very narrow interpretation of the Stolper-Samuelson (SS) theorem. In particular,
SS only holds if all countries produce all goods, if the goods imported from abroad and produced
domestically are close substitutes, or if comparative advantage can be fixed vis-à-vis all trading
partners. As an illustration, a poor country in a world with many factors and many goods may no
longer have a comparative advantage in producing unskilled intensive goods.

This idea is easy

to understand in the context of three countries—for example, the United States, Mexico, and
China. Although Mexico might have a comparative advantage in producing low skill goods in
trade with the United States, its comparative advantage switches vis-à-vis trade with China.
Trade reform also affects the poor by changing the prices they face as consumers and
producers. Davis and Mishra develop a simple model to show that if imports and domestic
goods (produced by the poor) are non-competing, then the first order effect of a trade reform
would be to raise real incomes of the poor. Clearly, the poor gain from tariff reductions on

11

goods that they buy. If globalization raises the prices of goods produced by the poor—such as
agricultural products marketed by farmers—then poverty is also likely to decline.
Many of the authors in this volume do not use the HO model as their framework, but adopt
a specific sector framework. In the specific sector framework, workers or machines may be
“attached” to a specific sector or industry and cannot relocate easily. Consequently any reduction
in protection to sector X will lead to a fall in the incomes of workers who previously produced
goods for that sector and are unable to relocate elsewhere. The mechanism is the following: a
fall in protection is assumed to put downward pressure on the price of the previously protected
good, which in turn shifts labor demand downwards. It is important to remember, however, that
the reverse is also true: any increase in export activity in sector Y would then be beneficial to
workers attached to that sector. The specific sector model suggests that workers may gain from
globalization depending on which sectors (import-competing or exporting) they are attached to;
this is very different from the HO framework, which suggests that winners and losers from
globalization can be identified by their skill levels, regardless of where they work.

If the HO

assumption of perfect labor mobility across sectors is violated, then the specific sector model
may be the more appropriate framework, at least in the short run.
William Easterly also explores the theoretical linkages between globalization and
poverty, but in the context of a neoclassical growth model. Easterly shows that globalization
could affect the incomes of the poor in two opposite ways. If productivity levels are similar but
endowments are different, globalization should raise the incomes of the poor. Globalization, by
relaxing constraints on the movement of goods and factors, will allow factor returns to equalize
across countries. This is the “factor endowment” view. If poor countries are more endowed with
(unskilled) labor, then relaxing constraints on global trade or factor flows will lead capital to

12

flow to poor countries and per capita incomes there should rise. A second possibility is the
“productivity” view. Differences in per capita incomes may stem from exogenous productivity
differences across countries, rather than differences in endowments. This second possibility
implies that globalization will either have no impact on poverty or could exacerbate poverty, as
capital is drawn away from low productivity towards high productivity regions.
Aart Kraay, Xavier Sala-i-Martin, and Prasad and his co-authors emphasize that
globalization could raise the incomes of the poor through a third channel: by increasing long run
growth. To reconcile their perspective with Easterly’s framework, this means that increases in
trade or capital flows could increase incomes of the poor by raising productivity or through the
accumulation of capital. Imports of new goods embody new technology, which in turn raises
productivity, while incoming foreign investment provides the possibility for technology transfer.
If the income effects are fairly uniform, then the increase in aggregate income resulting from
globalization-induced productivity gains should improve the incomes of the poor.

IV.

Cross-Country Evidence

The cross-country studies present evidence on the relationship between poverty, inequality
and globalization. Easterly finds that increasing trade integration is associated with falling
inequality within developed countries and greater inequality within developing countries. His
results are consistent with the evidence presented by Branko Milanovic and Lynn Squire, who
construct their own measures of both inter-industry and inter-occupation wage inequality using
detailed information on wages across occupations and industries. Milanovic and Squire find that

13

globalization, measured using average tariffs, leads to rising inequality in poor countries and
falling inequality in rich countries.
Both Easterly and Milanovic and Squire find that increasing openness to trade is
associated with rising inequality in poor countries. Easterly argues that the evidence is
consistent with his “productivity” view, whereby exogenous differences in productivity lead
capital to flow from poor to rich countries and exacerbate inequality in poor countries.
Milanovic and Squire emphasize the lack of labor mobility and the weak power of unions to
explain why increasing openness to trade is associated with rising inequality in poor countries.
Aart Kraay in his comment on Easterly’s chapter reviews the evidence on (1) the linkages
between trade and growth, and (2) the relationship between growth and poverty. Although some
previous studies on the relationship between trade and growth have been discredited (see
Rodriguez and Rodrik (2000) and Harrison and Hanson (1999)), Kraay cites several new studies
which find that increasing openness to trade is associated with higher growth. Kraay also points
to his own work showing that growth is good for the poor, and concludes that since trade
enhances growth, which in turn reduces poverty, then globalization is good for the poor.
McMillan, Zwane and Ashraf use cross-country data to measure the impact of OECD
support policies for agriculture on poverty. The vast majority of least developed countries have
historically been net importers of food, particularly cereals, which are among the crops most
subsidized by the OECD. As net food importers, poor countries may gain from rich country
subsidies (see also Panagariya 2002, 2004, Valdes and McCalla 1999). Even within food
exporting countries, the poorest members of society may be net purchasers of food. However,
McMillan et al find no support in the cross-country analysis for the claim that OECD polices
worsen poverty in developing countries.

14

None of these studies directly examine the aggregate relationship between different poverty
measures and globalization.

Previous research on this topic, including Dollar (2001) and Dollar

and Kraay (2001, 2002), combines measures of income distribution derived from household
surveys with aggregate national income data to measure the income of the poor. Deaton (2001,
2003) suggests that using aggregate national income data to interpret cross-country correlations
between aggregate growth and poverty reduction is likely to be misleading. This is because the
observed correlation could be attributable to measurement error as well as biases in national
income statistics, which generally suggest a much higher rate of poverty reduction relative to
trends in aggregate poverty implied by household surveys.

One solution to this problem is to use measures of poverty based exclusively on household
surveys. Yet the limited time series for poverty data from these surveys makes it almost
impossible to conclude anything on the aggregate relationship between openness and poverty. I
show this in Tables 1 and 2, which report regression results on the linkages between openness,
GDP growth, and different measures of poverty from Aisbett, Harrison and Zwane (2005). I
begin by revisiting the evidence on the linkages between trade and growth; these results are
presented in Table 1. Openness to trade is measured in two different ways, as either (1) the ratio
of trade (X+M) to GDP or (2) average tariffs, defined as tariff revenues divided by imports. The
results suggest that an increase in openness—using these two measures—is associated with an
increase in aggregate income. 8

8

See Aisbett, Harrison, and Zwane (2005) for more details. To address concerns regarding endogeneity, openness is
measured either using its three year lag or the contemporaneous value instrumented using lagged values. These results
are robust to the inclusion of other controls, such as country fixed effects or policy variables likely to be correlated
with trade policies. Other extensions, using growth of GDP per capita as the dependent variable instead of income per
capita, yield similar results. Although some specifications—notably those that include country fixed effects and

15

The problems of small sample size are illustrated in columns (5) and (10) of Table 1. I redo
the basic specifications but restrict the sample to the observations for the country-years where
poverty rates could be calculated based on household surveys. In the restricted sample the link
between openness to trade and GDP per capita weakens significantly.

The weakness of the

association between openness and growth in this small sample suggests that efforts to find any
direct relationship between openness and poverty reduction using cross-country datasets are
likely to be plagued by limited data availability.

The association between measures of openness, GDP growth, and poverty is presented in
Table 2. Measures of poverty are derived from household sample surveys made available by the
World Bank. While the results are robust to the poverty measure chosen, in Table 2 we define
poverty as the percentage of households living on less than $ 1 a day in PPP terms. The evidence
in Table 2, confirming evidence presented by Besley and Burgess (2003) as well as other
researchers, suggests that growth is indeed good for the poor. We use several different measures
of income: contemporaneous income, income lagged three periods, and contemporaneous
income instrumented using annual average levels of precipitation and temperature. Across all
specifications, aggregate income or aggregate income growth (not shown here) is associated with
a reduction in the percentage of the population that is poor. 9

instrument for openness using lagged values—are not always significant at the 5 percent level, the evidence is
generally consistent with a positive relationship between openness and income or growth. The evidence is also
consistent with recent work by Lee, Ricci, and Rigobon (2004) who apply more innovative ways to address the
endogeneity of openness and continue to find a positive relationship between openness (measured using trade shares)
and growth.
9
The coefficients on real GDP per capita reported in Tables 1 and 2 are much larger than those reported by Besley
and Burgess (2003). The poverty-reducing effects of growth are larger here because any one of the following changes
alone leads to big changes in the coefficient on GDP per capita: the inclusion of time effects, a larger sample with
more years of data and more countries, the inclusion of other policy determinants of poverty, or a PPP real GDP per
capita measure. The fact that any of these modifications leads to such large changes in the coefficient on GDP per

16

Although the results presented in Tables 1 and 2 suggest a strong link from trade integration
to aggregate income, and from income growth to poverty reduction, the evidence on direct
linkages between trade shares or tariffs and poverty outcomes is quite weak. While the first
three columns of Table 2 suggest that openness to trade (measured using either trade shares or
tariffs) is associated with less poverty, this result disappears when we introduce country fixed
effects. I show this graphically in Figures 1 and 2. In Figure 1, there is a positive relationship
between globalization and poverty reduction, but this association disappears in Figure 2 with the
addition of country effects. 10

To summarize, there is no evidence in the aggregate data that trade reforms are good or bad
for the poor. 11 Yet even if we could identify a robust relationship between trade reform and
poverty reduction in the aggregate data, cross-country work remains problematic for several
reasons. First, it is difficult to find appropriate instruments for trade policy at the country level,
or to adequately control for other changes which are occurring at the same time. Second, even if
cross-country studies point to a positive relationship between globalization and overall growth,
such growth may lead to unequal gains across different levels of income. If the growth effects
on average are small and there are large distributional consequences, trade-induced growth could
be accompanied by a decline in incomes of the poor. The cross-country evidence presented by
Easterly, Milanovic, and Squire is consistent with this view: their chapters suggest that

capita suggests that—despite a strong poverty-reducing effect of growth—the exact magnitude of the effect cannot be
precisely estimated.
10
Similar results were found when using different poverty measures—such as the percentage of the poor living on less
than 2 PPP dollars per day, or the incomes of the poorest quintile or decile
11
In a comparable exercise using country-level poverty headcounts and trade shares, Ravallion (2004) reaches a
similar conclusion; he argues that there is no robust relationship between poverty and globalization in the aggregate
data. Possibly the only exception to these general conclusions is Agenor (2004), who finds that there is a nonlinear
relationship between measures of poverty and globalization. Agenor finds that at low levels, globalization appears to

17

globalization has been accompanied by increasing inequality in poor countries. Finally, even if
the cross-country evidence presented in Tables 1 and 2 overcomes this problem by directly
testing for the relationship between poverty and trade reform, there may be significant
underlying heterogeneity across different segments of the population. (see also Ravallion
(2004)). Aggregate poverty could move in one direction or remain unchanged while poverty
increases in some parts of a country and declines in others.

For all these reasons, most of the studies in this volume focus on changes in trade policy
within a particular country. These studies typically use highly disaggregated data—at the level
of the household or the enterprise, to identify the impact of trade policy. Since these studies
exploit differences in globalization across sectors or regions within the same country, they are
able to overcome the problem that trade reforms are usually introduced concurrently with other
country-wide reforms such as exchange rate stabilization or privatization. Due to the availability
of detailed household surveys documenting the existence of the poor, these surveys are also able
to successfully address the problem of lack of comparable time series data. Finally, the authors
of these studies are generally aware of the problem of the endogeneity of trade reform and are
usually able to use the panel nature of these datasets to address this issue. 12

hurt the poor, but beyond a certain threshold, it seems to reduce poverty. For earlier related studies, see Dollar and
Kraay (2001, 2002).
12
Even preferred measures of globalization, such as tariffs or capital controls, are likely to be endogenously
determined. The possible endogeneity of tariffs as well as solutions to this problem are explored in a number of the
individual chapters. Since uniformity in tariffs is frequently a goal of trade reform, tariff reductions are often
inversely linked to initial tariff levels. To achieve uniformity, policy makers must apply the largest tariff reductions
to those sectors with the highest initial protection levels. Consequently, some chapter authors use initial levels of
protection as an instrument for changes in tariffs.

18

V.

Country Case Studies

This section reviews the ten country case studies for the volume. These country studies
use household-level or firm-level data to measure (1) the impact of globalization on employment
and labor incomes of the poor and (2) the impact of globalization on poverty through changes in
the prices of goods produced and consumed by the poor.

The Impact of Globalization on Employment and Labor Incomes of the Poor Country studies on
Columbia, India, Mexico, and Poland examine the relationship between trade reform and labor
market outcomes. Goldberg and Pavcnik investigate the impact of a large reduction in average
tariffs in Colombia between 1984 and 1998 on a variety of urban labor market outcomes: the
probability of becoming unemployed, minimum wage compliance, informal sector employment,
and the incidence of poverty. Analyzing the relationship between globalization and these
different labor market outcomes is useful since poverty is highly correlated with unemployment,
informal sector employment, and non-compliance with the minimum wage.
The Colombian experience suggests that individuals in sectors with increasing import
competition are likely to become poorer, while those in sectors where exports are growing are
less likely to be poor. Import competition increases the likelihood of unemployment and
informality, and is associated with a higher incidence of poverty. Export growth is associated
with the opposite: falling informal sector employment, rising minimum wage compliance, and
falling poverty. Goldberg and Pavcnik present evidence suggesting that workers cannot easily
relocate away from contracting towards expanding sectors in the context of trade reforms,
contradicting the assumption of perfect labor mobility in the HO framework. Consistent with

19

other studies in the volume, the Colombian trade reforms suggest the importance of
complementary policies for minimizing the adverse effects of trade reform on the poor. When
trade reform is accompanied by labor market reforms which make it easier for firms to hire or
fire and ease relocation for workers, the adverse impact of tariff reductions on poverty
disappears.
This is exactly the conclusion reached by Petia Topalova, who estimates the impact of
trade reform in India on poverty. In the 1990s, India embarked on a remarkable trade reform,
reversing decades of protectionist policies which had led to average tariffs in excess of ninety
percent. Using household data which spans the period before and after the reform period,
Topalova relates changes in tariffs to changes in the incidence of poverty. In particular, she uses
the interaction between the share of a district’s population employed by an industry on the eve of
the economic reforms and the reduction in trade barriers in that industry as a measure of a
district’s exposure to foreign trade. Because industrial composition is predetermined and trade
liberalization was unanticipated, she argues that it is appropriate to causally interpret the
correlation between the changes in the levels of poverty and trade exposure.
Topalova’s chapter on India suggests that the rural poor gained less from the trade reforms
than other income groups or the urban poor. A rural district experiencing the mean level of
tariff reductions saw a 2 percent increase in poverty, accounting for a setback of about 15 percent
of India’s progress in poverty reduction over the 1990s. In other words, the progress in poverty
reduction experienced in rural India was lower in trade-affected areas, where (rural) poverty may
have fallen by an average of 11 instead of 13 percentage points between 1987 and 1999. 13 To

13

These mean poverty rates are taken from the mean poverty rates for the rural areas in the national sample surveys
for 1987 and 1999. See appendix tables in Topalova (2004). Mean poverty in the urban areas is reported separately.

20

identify the net contribution of globalization to poverty reduction in India would require
identifying first the contribution of globalization to the overall poverty reduction across all of
India during the 1990s, and then netting out the adverse impact on districts with increasing
import competition. Topalova also discusses why the rural poor gained less than other groups
from liberalization: restrictions on labor mobility in rural areas have impeded adjustment. She
finds that the negative impact of trade policy on poverty is reduced or eliminated in regions with
flexible labor laws.
While the studies on Colombia and India suggest that the gains from trade reforms were
less likely to benefit the poor, the evidence for Mexico and Poland suggests the opposite.
Gordon Hanson explores the different outcomes for individuals born in states with high exposure
to globalization versus individuals born in states with low-exposure to globalization between
1990 and 2000. He finds that the income of individuals in high-exposure states increased
relative to the income of individuals in low-exposure states. While labor incomes in the 1990s
deteriorated in both regions, caused in part by Mexico’s peso crisis in 1995, the deterioration was
much less severe in states with high exposure to globalization.
While poverty was falling dramatically in India during this period, between 1990 and
2000 poverty in Mexico increased. In the states with low exposure to globalization, poverty
increased from 32 to 40 percent; in the states with high exposure, poverty increased only slightly,
from 21 to 22 percent. If we take the difference in the increase in poverty within each region
over the 1990s, we find that poverty increased by 8 percent in low exposure states and by only 1
percent in high exposure states. The “difference-in-difference” estimator is the differential in
these two changes—ie 8 – 1 equals 7 percentage points—and is the basis for Hanson’s

Topalova also reports trends in alternative measures of poverty, including the poverty gap and changes in

21

conclusions that the incidence of wage poverty in low exposure states increased relative to
poverty in high-exposure states by approximately 7 percent.
How can we reconcile the findings on Mexico and India? As pointed out by Hanson, the
peso crisis in Mexico in 1995 is one major reason for the aggregate increase in poverty, in
contrast to India which experienced no major adverse macroeconomic shock during this period.
In addition, Hanson defines high globalization states to include those with a high proportion of
maquiladoras—production activities designated for exports—and foreign direct investment.
Topalova also finds, consistent with Hanson’s chapter, that poverty fell more in regions that
exported more or received more foreign direct investment. Consequently, both studies suggest
that export activity and foreign direct investment are correlated with beneficial outcomes for the
poor.
Goh and Javorcik examine the relationship between tariff changes and wages of workers
in Poland. Poland embarked on significant trade reforms during the 1990s, when the country
moved from a closed to a very open economy, particularly vis-à-vis the European Union. Poland
makes an excellent case study in part because changes in its tariffs can be treated as exogenous,
as they were stipulated by the Association Agreement between the European Community and
Poland signed in 1991.
Goh and Javorcik demonstrate that labor mobility is fairly restricted in Poland, placing their
analysis also in the context of a specific sector framework. Their results suggest that workers in
sectors that experienced the largest tariff declines experienced the highest increases in wages.
They present evidence showing that tariff declines led to wage increases because firms were
forced to increase productivity, and productivity increases resulted in higher wages. These

consumption.

22

micro-level results showing a positive relationship between tariff reductions and productivity
increases are consistent with the more aggregate evidence on the positive relationship between
openness to trade and aggregate growth. Their results are significantly different, however, from
some of the other studies, since they find that workers in sectors with the biggest tariff reductions
gained the most.
Impact of globalization on poverty via prices of production and consumption goods

In

many developing countries, wages are not the primary source of income for the rural poor. In
their chapter, Balat and Porto (2004) calculate that in Zambia wages accounted for only 6 percent
of income for the rural poor in 1998. Consequently, globalization could affect poverty by
affecting the prices of goods consumed by the poor (the consumption channel) and goods
produced by the poor (the production channel).

In many cases, the urban poor are net consumers of agricultural products and the rural poor
are net producers of those same products; in this case, an increase in agricultural prices caused
(for example) by a removal of export taxes could lead to an increase in urban poverty but a
decline in rural poverty. These linkages are explored to various degrees in the studies on
Ethiopia, Mexico, and Zambia. In Mexico, McMillan, Zwane and Ashraf (2005) explore the
impact of liberalizing Mexico’s corn market on the incomes of the poor rural farmers. The
evidence suggests that during the 1990s, imports of both white and yellow corn increased, and
prices of Mexican corn fell. However, they also find that the majority of the poorest corn farmers
are net consumers of corn and hence benefited from the drop in corn prices. The income from
corn production among middle income farmers who are mostly net sellers fell, both as a share of
total income and in absolute terms. The decline in income from corn production among those

23

farmers who are net sellers would have translated into an equivalent decline in real income if
farmer incomes had not been supplemented with transfers through government programs such as
PROCAMPO and PROGRESA.

In their study of Ethiopian rural grain producers, McMillan and Levinsohn explore the
impact of food aid on both consumption and production of the rural poor. This paper addresses
the concern that food aid further exacerbates poverty by depressing incomes of rural producers.
While McMillan and Levinsohn confirm that a more optimal arrangement would be to buy food
from local producers and distribute it to poor consumers 14 , they also show that the net impact of
food aid on the poor in Ethiopia has been positive. This is because the poor in Ethiopia are
primarily net consumers, rather than net producers of food, and consequently food aid has
alleviated poverty. As pointed out by Rohini Pande in her excellent discussion of this paper,
these results are contingent on food aid actually reaching the poor. Levinsohn and McMillan
argue that this is often the case.

For Zambia, Balat and Porto calculate the impact of liberalizing the market for maize,
which was heavily subsidized for both consumers and producers. They find that the resulting
price increase led to consumption losses, which were offset by domestic market liberalization.
They also measure the potential increase in income due to switching from production for home
consumption to production and wage activities associated with production of cash crops. Balat
and Porto estimate that rural Zambians would gain substantially from expanding into the
production of cash crops, particularly in the production of cotton, tobacco, and maize. However,
Balat and Porto also caution that such gains can only be achieved if other complementary

24

policies are in place. These would include extension services, infrastructure, irrigation, access to
credit, education and health services. Balat and Porto also point to the fact that Zambia needs to
have access to international agricultural markets in order to realize potential gains.

VI.

Capital Flows and Poverty

Another avenue through which globalization could affect the welfare of the poor is
through financial liberalization, which has increased the scope for capital to flow to developing
countries. For this volume, Prasad et al document that both developed and developing countries
have become increasingly open to capital flows, measured either using policy instruments such
as capital controls or ex post capital flows.
In theory, openness to capital flows could alleviate poverty through several channels. If
greater financial integration contributes to higher growth by expanding access to capital,
expanding access to new technology, stimulating domestic financial sector development,
reducing the cost of capital and alleviating domestic credit constraints, then such growth should
reduce poverty. Access to international capital markets should also allow countries to smooth
consumption shocks, reducing output or consumption volatility. Prasad et al begin by examining
the relationship between financial integration and growth. Reviewing over a dozen studies and
examining the data themselves, they find that there is no clear relationship between the two.
This suggests that the impact of financial integration on poverty—via possible growth effects—is
likely to be small. They argue that since there are no clear linkages between financial integration

14

This assumes that local purchase does not drive prices up for some poor people.

25

and growth in the aggregate cross-country evidence, direct linkages between financial integration
and poverty are also likely to be difficult to find.
They also explore another link: whether financial integration has smoothed or
exacerbated output and consumption volatility. They point out that greater macroeconomic
volatility probably increases both absolute and relative measures of poverty, particularly when
there are financial crises. Since the poor are likely to be hurt in periods of consumption
volatility, income smoothing made possible by global financial integration could be beneficial to
the poor. However, Prasad et al find that the opposite is true: financial globalization in
developing countries is associated with higher consumption volatility. They posit the existence
of a threshold effect: beyond a certain level of financial integration (50 percent of GDP),
financial integration significantly reduces volatility. However, most developing countries are
well below this threshold.
Prasad et al point out that despite the lack of evidence on any association between
financial globalization and growth, protectionism is not the answer. They suggest that if
financial globalization is approached with the right set of complementary policies, then it is
likely to be growth-promoting and also less likely to lead to higher consumption volatility.
These policies include the use of flexible exchange rates, macroeconomic stabilization policies,
and the development of strong institutions. Their definition of institutional development and
good governance includes transparency in business and government transactions, control of
corruption, rule of law, and financial supervisory capacity
Much of the increases in consumption volatility identified by Prasad et al for less
financially integrated countries occurred in the context of currency crises. How have the poor
weathered these currency crises? The justification for addressing the links between currency

26

crises and poverty outcomes in this study is simple: for many developing countries, financial
globalization has been accompanied by more frequent currency crises, which in turn have
implications for poverty. One study in the volume, by Frankenberg and Thomas, examines the
impact of such a crisis on the poor. Using longitudinal household survey data from the Indonesia
Family Life Survey (IFLS), Frankenberg and Thomas examine the immediate and medium term
effects of the East Asian crisis on multiple dimensions of well-being. In IFLS, the same
households were interviewed a few months before the onset of the crisis, a year later and again
two years after that, which provides unique opportunities for measuring the magnitude and
distribution of the effects of the crisis on the population.
Frankenberg and Thomas demonstrate that in the first year of the crisis, poverty rose by
between 50 and 100%, real wages declined by around 40% and household per capita
consumption fell by around 15%. However, focusing exclusively on changes in real resources is
complicated by the fact that measurement of prices in an environment of extremely volatile
prices is not straightforward. Moreover, it misses important dimensions of response by
households. These include changes in leisure (labor supply), changes in living arrangements
(household size and thus per capita household resources), changes in assets and changes in
investments in human capital. These responses are not only quantitatively important but also
highlight the resilience of families and households in the face of large unanticipated shocks as
they draw on a wide array of mechanisms to respond to the changes in opportunities they face.
While the volatility of bank borrowing and portfolio flows may be costly to the poor,
many of the authors in this volume emphasize the benefits from another type of inflow: foreign
direct investment. Prasad and his co-authors emphasize that the composition of capital flows can
have a significant impact on a country’s vulnerability to financial crises. They also document

27

that foreign direct investment flows are significantly less volatile than other types of flows. The
studies on Mexico, India, Poland, and Colombia all demonstrate that incoming foreign
investment is associated with a significant reduction in poverty.

VII. Measuring Other Effects of Globalization

While the primary focus of the country studies is on poverty alleviation, several of
the studies also examine other outcomes associated with globalization. Three of the country case
studies test for the relationship between globalization and inequality, complementing the crosscountry studies by Easterly, Milanovic and Squire. 15

Past studies that use micro datasets have

found that trade and capital flows are frequently associated with an increase in the relative
demand for skilled labor. 16 The country case studies on India, Poland, China, and Colombia
prepared for this volume, however, suggest that the evidence is mixed. Evidence presented by
Petia Topalova on India suggests that despite the increase in inequality in the 1990s, there is no
relationship between trade reform and inequality, using the standard deviation of log
consumption and the mean logarithmic deviation of consumption as measures of inequality.
For Colombia, Goldberg and Pavcnik show that trade reform was associated with increasing
inequality, in part because the most protected sectors prior to reform were sectors with a high
share of unskilled workers. In Poland, Goh and Javorcik suggest the reverse: trade reforms
15

As pointed out by Sala-i-Martin, Milanovic and Squire, and Aisbett in their respective chapters, debate continues on
the nature and direction of trends in inequality. Within countries, inequality is generally rising. Across countries,
inequality is stable or falling if we weight by country size, in large part because of the recent successes of China and
India in reducing poverty. As Sala-i-Martin and others have emphasized, the correct measure of global social welfare
is to use such country weights when the outcome of interest is the welfare of individuals. This is of course still a very
rough proxy since it disregards income inequality between individuals within countries. Thus access to most countries'
income or expenditure surveys is needed for an accurate picture of individual-level welfare.

28

increased the returns to unskilled workers relative to skilled workers, contributing to a decline in
inequality.
A different approach to measuring the impact of globalization on incomes is taken by Jim
Levinsohn in his contribution. Levinsohn points out that one of the challenges to analyzing the
impact of globalization is that increasing openness to trade and investment are typically
accompanied by many other changes. In South Africa, the ratio of trade to GDP increased from
44 percent to 70 percent between 1991 and 2002, and there was a two hundred fold increase in
foreign investment. These changes were accompanied by many other developments, including
the end of Apartheid, the introduction of democracy, and the HIV/AIDs epidemic. To try and
separate the impact of globalization, he reasons that one approach would be to analyze whether
the returns to speaking English increased. The evidence suggests that controlling for other
factors, the returns to speaking English did in fact increase, but only for whites. The fact that the
returns to speaking English increased only for whites and not for other races suggests that the
impact of globalization has been uneven in South Africa. This pattern of uneven gains is
consistent with the other evidence presented in the cross-country studies and several of the
individual case studies.
Another consequence of globalization, which is explored by Ethan Ligon in his study on
China, is its possible impact on household welfare by affecting household risk. Prasad and his
co-authors point out that the increase in consumption volatility possibly engendered by financial
liberalization among the less developed countries could be harmful to the poor, but do not
explicitly model the impact of increasing risk on household welfare. In China, recent increases
in urban income inequality are mirrored in increases in inequality in consumption expenditures.
16

See Hanson’s chapter for a review of this literature. His review covers micro-evidence on the relationship between

29

This connection between changes in the distribution of income and consumption expenditures
could be entirely attributable to differences in preferences or could be caused by imperfections in
the markets for credit and insurance which ordinarily would serve to equate these intertemporal
marginal rates of substitution. Ligon presumes that market imperfections drive changes in the
distribution of expenditures, and he uses data on expenditures from repeated cross-sections of
urban households in China to estimate a Markov transition function for shares of expenditures
over the period 1985-2001. He then uses this estimated function to compute the welfare losses
attributable to risk over this period, and to predict the future trajectory of inequality from 2001
through 2025. Ligon’s contribution emphasizes that the amount of risk a household faces
depends much more on its position in the consumption distribution than it does on aggregate
shocks, whatever their source. 17

VIII. Globalization’s Critics and Some Remaining Questions

Why does there continue to be so much criticism of globalization? This is the central
question of Aisbett’s chapter.

Aisbett argues that this is due to the use of different

methodologies in estimating poverty and inequality, the concerns of globalization’s critics about
the short term costs versus the longer term gains from trade reform, their rejection of a perfectly

different measures of globalization and inequality for Chile, Mexico, Colombia, and Hong Kong.
17
The contribution of globalization to the decline in poverty within China is clearly a topic that deserves further
research. Ravallion (2004) suggests somewhat provocatively that the significant reduction in poverty in China over
the last twenty years is probably not related to its phenomenal increase as a global exporter. He uses as evidence
aggregate time series data, in contrast to Wei who has access to more disaggregate information. Nevertheless,
Ravallion makes the important point that average tariffs and non-tariff barriers barely fell during the most rapid period
of poverty reduction in China. It should be evident from this discussion that the choice of aggregation and the
measure of globalization are likely to be key in resolving this debate. In addition, Wei in his discussion and in other
research employs measures of export activity or foreign investment to show that both are associated with desirable
outcomes, while Ravallion looks at overall trade shares.

30

competitive framework, and different interpretations regarding the evidence. Aisbett argues that
people have a natural tendency to weight the information they receive according to their prior
beliefs and values. Thus evidence which is objectively ‘mixed’ is quite likely to be interpreted
by one type of person as very positive, and by another as very negative. The mere fact that there
are some losers among the poor from globalization will lead people with negative priors to
believe it is negative.

The second part of Aisbett’s answer is to examine what types of beliefs and values lead
people to a more negative interpretation of the evidence on globalization and poverty. The values
which she identifies include concern over inequality, independent of poverty. In particular,
globalization’s critics feel differently about the polarization of the income distribution and
inequality in the gains that different groups receive from globalization.

As first pointed out by Kanbur (2001), critics of globalization also tend to focus on shorter
term impacts, while globalization’s proponents are more concerned about the longer term.
Critics of globalization also focus on the losses experienced by subgroups of the poor, even when
on aggregate poverty has declined. Aisbett suggests a number of explanations for this value
preference, including recent evidence from behavioral experiments.

Aisbett also argues that many people believe that the current form of globalization is based
on processes which distill both political and market power upward and away from the poor. In
particular, critics of globalization believe that corporate and commercial lobbies have
disproportionate access to the international organizations such as the WTO and IMF, and that
rich countries exploit their power within these international organizations. This belief about the

31

processes through which globalization occurs is partly what predisposes them to interpret the
available evidence negatively.

This volume seeks to address these misunderstandings and also presents the most
comprehensive evidence to date on the linkages between globalization and poverty. However, this
is a relatively new area of research for economists and many questions remain unanswered. In this
section, we draw on the new evidence uncovered in the NBER project and suggest what we
believe to be the most important areas for further research.

How do we integrate the poorest of the poor into the world trading system? One sixth of the
world’s population lives in extreme poverty. Figuring out how to lift these people out of extreme
poverty is arguably the most pressing issue. It is also the most difficult. The very poorest
individuals tend to be untouched by globalization. This is evident among the poorest Mexican corn
farmers who report that they never sell corn and among the poorest Ethiopian farmers who are net
buyers of food. The number of extreme poor in Sub-Saharan Africa has nearly doubled over the
past two decades - going from around 170 million to 310 million. Roughly half of Sub-Saharan
Africa lives in extreme poverty and this number has increased over the past two decades. SubSaharan Africa has seen very little in the way of foreign investment and still exports primarily
unprocessed agricultural products.
More research is needed to identify the critical interventions required to lift these people
out of poverty. What are the key constraints? How important is outside intervention? In light of
the scarcity of resources available, creating a ranking of which complementary investment or
reform is most needed to allow the poor to access world markets would be very useful.

32

What are the key issues in poverty measurement? As acceptable definitions of poverty shift
over time, one question which needs to be addressed by poverty researchers is why they are
focusing primarily on one aspect of the entire distribution of income. Presumably, focusing on the
entire distribution of income—and hence income inequality—should become increasingly
important. Once one focuses on the fact that poverty lines are constantly changing across countries
and also within the same country over time, it becomes puzzling why poverty researchers do not
also focus more on broader measures of income distribution as well.
In addition to explicitly focusing on the entire distribution of income, researchers also need
to focus on issues related to measuring the absolute numbers of poor versus the incidence of
poverty. As discussed by Emma Aisbett in her chapter, the incidence of poverty has generally
declined but the number of individuals who are living on less than 2 dollars a day has actually
increased. Kanbur (2001,2004) discusses this issue in more detail. Kanbur (2004) also
emphasizes the need to use other outcome measures, such as health and mortality, in assessing the
lives of the poor. Those issues are also emphasized by Duncan Thomas and Elizabeth
Frankenberg in their chapter

Why hasn’t increasing financial integration helped the poor more? One avenue through which
globalization could affect the welfare of the poor is through financial liberalization, which has
increased the scope for capital to flow to developing countries. In theory, openness to capital
flows could alleviate poverty through several channels. If greater financial integration contributes
to higher growth by expanding access to capital, expanding access to new technology, stimulating
domestic financial sector development, reducing the cost of capital and alleviating domestic credit

33

constraints, then such growth should reduce poverty. Access to international capital markets
should also allow countries to smooth consumption shocks, reducing output or consumption
volatility.
However, Eswar Prasad, Shang-Jin Wei, and Ayan Kose in their chapter suggest that the
impact of financial integration on poverty—via possible growth effects—is likely to be small.
Why hasn’t international financial integration helped the poor more? Prasad et al suggest that
there is a threshold effect: beyond a certain level of financial integration (50 percent of GDP),
financial integration significantly reduces volatility. However, most developing countries are well
below this threshold. Further research is necessary to understand why such a threshold might
exist. What prevents lower income developing countries from exploiting the benefits of
international financial integration? Is the answer that financial globalization must be approached
with the right set of complementary policies, such as flexible exchange rates, macroeconomic
stabilization policies, and the development of strong institutions? Prasad et al suggest that if there
is institutional development and good governance--including transparency in business and
government transactions, control of corruption, rule of law, and financial supervisory capacity—
then poor countries may also gain from financial integration. Yet more evidence is needed on this
question.

How have the poor weathered the currency crises of the last two decades? Evidence from the
Indonesian 1997 currency crisis shows that in the first year of the crisis, poverty rose by between
50 and 100%, real wages declined by around 40% and household per capita consumption fell by
around 15% (Frankenberg and Thomas). Yet what is remarkable is that five years later, poverty
in Indonesia is now below what it was at the start of the crisis. In contrast, between 1990 and 2000

34

poverty in Mexico increased. Although poverty increased less in Northern Mexico—the part of
the country most exposed to the forces of globalization, nevertheless poverty in Mexico was
higher in 2000 than in 1990.
These contrasting experiences suggest two questions for research. First, why was
Indonesia able to recover so much quicker than Mexico? Were the special transfer programs in
Indonesia—targeted at consumption and education of poor households—responsible for the
different experiences in addressing poverty during this decade? Or, is it because Mexico entered
into the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) just before the peso crisis? Second, are
there long term consequences to the Indonesian financial crisis for the poor? Although recovery
was rapid, households adjusted in the short run by cutting expenditures on durables, cutting health
care visits, and cutting school attendance. Will there be long term consequences to this behavior,
despite the fact that poverty rates quickly reverted back to pre-crisis levels?

Who among the poor are the winners from globalization? A number of the case studies point
to winners among the poor from globalization. These include the poor wage earners in exportcompeting sectors and in sectors or regions that are recipients of foreign direct investment.
Particularly in light of the vocal criticism leveled at globalization, these beneficiaries should be
identified and emphasized in any future research agenda on the relationship between globalization
and poverty. Of particular interest would be research that could further identify the impact of
foreign investment inflows and export growth on poverty reduction in India and China.
Although research on China is constrained by the lack of micro datasets in the public
domain, the relationship between rising inequality, falling poverty, and globalization deserves
further investigation. While some researchers, notably Kanbur (2005) have found that increasing

35

globalization is associated with higher inequality in China, others have found no relationship
(Martin Ravallion), and for the NBER volume Shang-Jin Wei reports evidence suggesting that
trade is associated with falling inequality. Differences in the approaches can be traced to different
use of openness measures (Kanbur uses aggregate data on tariffs and trade shares, while Wei uses
city-level data on exports) and different approaches.

Can we better identify the complementarities between measures of globalization and other
policies? It is increasingly evident that the poor are more likely to gain from openness to trade if
there are other complementary policies in place. A number of recent studies emphasize the
importance of complementary policies in determining the benefits or costs of trade reforms for
developing countries. For example, Freund and Bolaky (2005) show that trade reforms actually
lead to income losses in highly regulated economies.
However, much more work is needed to identify which types of policies should
accompany trade reforms. There has been little analysis to show, for example, that financial
globalization would be beneficial to developing countries if it was accompanied by flexible
exchange rate regimes or better institutions. Additional work is needed to identify whether trade
reforms introduced in conjunction with labor market reforms are more likely to reduce poverty,
and how to properly design social safety nets to accompany trade reforms. While Mexico has
been successful in targeting some of the poorest who were hurt by reforms, these programs are
expensive and additional research could identify whether this approach is realistic for the very
poorest countries.
Further research is needed to identify the source of the immobility of labor. While studies
on India and Colombia show that some of these sources are artificial—stemming from labor
36

market legislation which inhibits hiring and firing—Goh and Javorcik argue that much of the
immobility of labor in Poland is due to societal factors which discourage workers from relocating.
Further evidence, identifying the relationship between gross labor inflows and outflows and trade
reforms would be useful in this regard.
The fact that the gains or losses from trade reforms to the poor may hinge on the mobility
(or immobility) of labor needs to be more explicitly addressed in existing models of international
trade. Some models adopt assumptions of perfect factor mobility (HO), while others assume no
factor mobility (specific sector). Neither assumption is consistent with reality. In addition, many
of globalization’s critics perceive the world through the lens of imperfect competition. Yet most
trade economists assume perfect competition or zero profits, which is not consistent with reality in
at least some sectors of developing economies.
While the need for labor mobility is emphasized here, does this mean that protection to
workers should be scrapped? Clearly the answer is no. Although workers need to be able to move
from contracting to expanding sectors, dropping measures that provide rights for workers does not
seem to be the answer either. Workers in many developing countries still do not benefit from
basic health and safety regulations, and the right to organize is frequently not recognized by
governments. In many countries, workers seeking to form unions are fired or jailed, or even
worse. Striking the right balance between safeguarding worker rights and ensuring labor mobility
in order to create new jobs is difficult, but necessary.

Can we identify the dynamic effects of industrial country trade and aid policies on
developing country agriculture? Several issues explored in the forthcoming volume include the
role of industrial country policies in affecting the incidence of poverty in developing countries.

37

Those studies suggest that at least in the short run, OECD subsidies and food aid have probably
helped the poor in other countries. However, further research is needed to identify whether there
are longer term, dynamic effects. For example, even if the poor in Ethiopia are currently net
beneficiaries from food aid, there exists the possibility that over the long run food aid has
discouraged poor farmers from planting or investing, transforming them from net producers into
net consumers. Another issue which deserves further research is the impact of OECD agricultural
subsidies on poverty. While the research presented in the NBER volume suggests that the poorest
countries have been net beneficiaries of OECD agricultural subsidies because these poor countries
are net food importers, decades of OECD subsidies may have discouraged poor countries from
producing agricultural goods in the first place.
While there have been far-reaching reforms across developing countries in reducing
barriers to trade, agriculture remains protected in many countries. Both China and India have
protected agricultural sectors. In the coming decade, agriculture is likely to open up more to
competition, in both developed and developing countries. Yet the highest incidence of poverty in
developing countries is in the rural areas. What will be the impact of trade reforms targeted at the
agricultural sector on the rural poor? How can complementary measures be introduced to cushion
the negative impact ? This remains an important area for future research.

Why is there no relationship between globalization and poverty in the aggregate crosscountry data? The evidence in Figure 1 suggests that there is no significant relationship between
globalization (measured using average import tariffs) and poverty. Poverty is measured as the
percentage of households in a country living on less than $1 a day, measured in 1993 PPP dollars.
There are several possible explanations for the lack of any robust association between

38

globalization and poverty reduction in the aggregate data. One strong possibility, which is clearly
revealed in the country case studies that make use of micro data using households or firms, is that
there is too much heterogeneity in the effects of trade reforms on the poor. Since poor workers in
import-competing sectors lose from reforms, while poor workers in export-oriented sectors gain
(according to the studies by Goldberg and Pavcnik on Colombia and Topalova on India), it is not
surprising that in the aggregate these different effects are lost.
Another possibility, which is related to the fact that there are so many heterogeneous effects
of globalization on the poor, could be that cross-country data on poverty are too poor to yield
meaningful results. Angus Deaton has argued that relying on national income data to impute
poverty yields very different results from estimates based on household data. If we rely only on
World Bank estimates of poverty, which are based on household surveys, the number of
observations is very small. The World Bank poverty estimates provide only 2 or at most 3 data
points over time for any one country. Consequently, it is not surprising that cross-country
estimates using these data are so fragile.
A third possibility is that the aggregate relationship between globalization and poverty is
not significant because the costs of trade reforms have fallen disproportionately on the poor. In
light of our knowledge that openness to trade is generally associated with growth, and that sectors
hit by import competition in regions like India and Colombia have gained less from trade reforms,
the gains from trade in the aggregate have not been big enough to offset some of the adverse
distributional consequences for the poor. The lack of any robust positive association between
trade and poverty reduction could indicate that the growth gains from trade have failed to trickle
down to the poor because they simply do not participate in the benefits. This interpretation of the
results is consistent with the fact that a number of studies find that globalization is associated with

39

increasing inequality. For example, both Branko Milanovic (with Lynn Squire) and William
Easterly in their chapters for the volume find that increasing globalization is associated with
increasing inequality. Consequently, a third possibility which is consistent with the evidence so
far at the aggregate level is that the growth gains from trade have been wiped out by the adverse
distributional outcomes for the poor. Identifying whether increasing inequality associated with
globalization completely offsets any gains to the poor from the growth effects of trade should be
an important priority.

IX.

Conclusion

Many countries have made tremendous strides in reducing not only the percentage of the
population living in poverty, but also the absolute number of individuals living on less than $1 a
day.

During this period, developing countries increased their trade shares and slashed their

tariffs. If export shares are one measure of globalization, then developing countries are now more
“globalized” than high income countries. To what extent is increasing globalization responsible

for the fall in the incidence of poverty?
The first theme that emerges across the chapters is that the relationship between
globalization and poverty is complex; in many cases, the outcome depends not just on trade or
financial globalization but on the interaction of globalization with the rest of the environment.
Key complementary policies include investments in human capital and infrastructure, as well as
policies to promote credit and technical assistance to farmers, and macroeconomic stability.
Financial globalization is more likely to promote growth and poverty reduction if it is
accompanied or preceded by the development of good institutions and governance, as well as

40

macroeconomic stability (including the use of flexible exchange rates). The role of
complementary policies in ensuring that globalization yields benefits for the poor is emerging as
a critical theme for multilateral institutions (see World Bank (2005))
One related issue is that poor workers need to be able to move out of contracting sectors
and into expanding ones. The country studies on India and Colombia suggest that trade reforms
have been associated with an increase in poverty only in regions with inflexible labor laws.
Consequently, reaching any conclusions without taking into account the labor market institutions
that could undermine labor mobility may be misleading. More research is needed to identify
whether labor legislation protects only the rights of the small fraction of workers who typically
account for the formal sector in developing economies, or whether such legislation softens shortterm adjustment costs and helps the labor force share in the gains from globalization. The role of
anti-sweatshop activists in promoting the right to organize, improving working conditions, and
raising wages suggests that selective interventions may be successful (see Harrison and Scorse
(2004)).
Second, the evidence suggests that globalization leads to clearly identifiable winners.
Across several different continents, export expansion has been accompanied by a reduction in
poverty. The evidence also points to the beneficial effects of foreign direct investment. While
the macro-economic evidence suggests that FDI is a less volatile source of capital than other
types of inflows, the micro-economic evidence for India, Mexico, Poland, and Colombia
indicates that higher inflows of foreign investment are associated with a reduction in poverty.
Third, it is also possible to identify the losers from globalization among the poor. Poor
workers in import-competing sectors—who may not be able to relocate due to the existence of
inflexible labor laws—are likely to be hurt by globalization. Financial crises also affect the poor

41

disproportionately, as indicated by the cross-country evidence and the erosion of real wages
following currency crises in Indonesia and Mexico. In Mexico, some poor and most mediumincome corn farmers have been negatively affected by increasing import competition.
Fourth, simple interpretations of general equilibrium trade models such as the HeckscherOhlin framework are likely to be incorrect.

Many economists predicted that developing

countries with a comparative advantage in unskilled labor would benefit from globalization
through increased demand for their unskilled-intensive goods, which in turn would reduce
inequality and poverty. The theoretical and empirical contributions to the volume suggest that
this interpretation of trade theory is too simple and frequently not consistent with reality. The
cross-country studies document that globalization has been accompanied by increasing inequality
within developing countries. One implication is that rising inequality induced by globalization
offsets some of the gains in poverty reduction achieved via trade-induced growth.

The conclusions highlighted in these studies have several key implications for the
globalization debate.

First, impediments to exports from developing countries exacerbate

poverty in those countries. Developing countries need access to developed country markets.
The evidence shows a clear link between export activity and poverty reduction in Colombia,
Mexico, India, and Poland.

This research suggests that efforts to dismantle barriers to

developing country exports through the Doha Round or other agreements are likely to lead to
further poverty reduction. The evidence for India, Mexico, and Poland also points to a strong link
between foreign investment inflows and poverty reduction.

Second, there are losers among the poor from trade reform. In particular, this volume
identifies as losers the poor in import competing sectors following the liberalization of trade.
42

The heterogeneity in outcomes suggests that careful targeting is necessary to address the poor
who are likely to be hurt by globalization. This includes the poor in countries hit by financial
crises, as well as the smallest farmers who cannot compete with the more efficient larger farmers
or with expanding import competition. Mexico’s transfer programs played a major role in
preventing the smallest corn farmers from experiencing a large decline in income following
reforms. In Indonesia, subsidized food was distributed to many communities. Scholarships and
free public schooling introduced a year after the Indonesian crisis led to subsequent increases in
school enrollments, particularly among the poorest. Extending such subsidies to health care
visits and basic drugs might have arrested the decline in the use of health care which occurred
after the 1997 crisis.

Finally, the evidence suggests that relying on trade or foreign investment alone is not
enough.

A critical role for complementary policies is highlighted in the country studies on

Zambia, India, Colombia, Indonesia and Poland. The poor need better education, access to
infrastructure, access to credit for investing in technology improvements, and the ability to
relocate out of contracting sectors into expanding ones in order to take advantage of trade
reforms. Clearly, the concerns of globalization’s critics have been heard, but much remains to
be done.

43

Bibliography

Agenor, G. “Does Globalization hurt the poor?”, in International Economics and Economic Policy,
Springer Berlin/Heidleberg, Volume 1, Number 1, March 2004, pages 21-51.
Aisbett, Emma (2004), “Why are the Critics so Convinced that Globalization is Bad for the Poor?”,
forthcoming in Globalization and Poverty, edited by Ann Harrison, University of Chicago Press
for NBER.
Aisbett, Emma, Ann Harrison and Alix Zwane (2005), “Globalization and Poverty: What is the
Evidence?”, prepared for a conference in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati’s 70th Birthday, University
of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.
Ashraf, Nava, Margaret McMillan and Alix Zwane (2004), “My policies or yours: Have OECD
agricultural policies affected incomes in developing countries?”, forthcoming in Ann Harrison,
editor, Globalization and Poverty, University of Chicago Press for NBER.
Balat, Jorge, and Guido Porto (2004), “Globalization and Complementary Policies. Poverty Impacts
in Rural Zambia”, forthcoming in Ann Harrison, editor, Globalization and Poverty, University of
Chicago Press for NBER.
Bardhan, P. (2000), “Social Justice in a Global Economy”, ILO, available at
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/bureau/inst/papers/sopolecs/bardhan.
Bardhan, P. (2003), “International Economic Integration and the Poor” in H. Siebert (ed.), Global
Governance: An Architecture for the World Economy, Springer.

Bardhan, P. (2004), “The Impact of Globalization on the Poor”, in Brookings Trade Forum, Susan
Collins and Carol Graham, editors, The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C, pages 271-284.

44

Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess (2003), “Halving Global Poverty”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Volume 17, Number 3, Summer, pages 3-22.
Bhagwati, Jagdish (2004) In Defense of Globalization. Oxford University Press, 320 pages.
Bhagwati, J. and Srinivasan, T.N. (2002) "Trade and Poverty in the Poor Countries." AEA Papers
and Proceedings 92(2): 180-183.
Chen, S. and Ravallion, M. (2000) "How Did the World's Poorest Fare in the 1990s?" World Bank
Development Research Group Working Paper w2409.
Davis, Don and Prachi Mishra (2004), “Stolper-Samuelson is Dead And Other Crimes of Both
Theory and Data”, forthcoming in Ann Harrison, editor, Globalization and Poverty, University of
Chicago Press for NBER.
Deaton, A. (2001) “Counting the World’s Poor: Problems and Possible Solutions.” World Bank
Research Observer 16(2): 125-47.
Deaton, Angus. (2003) "Measuring Poverty in a Growing World (or measuring growth in a poor
world)." NBER Working Paper No. 9822. Available at http://papers.nber.org/papers/w9822.
Dollar, David. (2001) “Globalization, Inequality and Poverty Since 1980.” Background paper,
World Bank, Washington, DC. Available at http://www.worldbank.org/research/global.
Dollar David and Aart Kraay (2001) "Trade, Growth and Poverty." World Bank Development
Research Group Working Paper 2615. Available at
http://econ.worldbank.org/files/24986_wps2615.pdf.

Dollar, D. & Kraay, A. (2002) “Spreading the Wealth.” Foreign Affairs 81(1): 120-33.

45

Easterly, William, “Globalization, Prosperity, and Poverty”, in Ann Harrison, editor, Globalization
and Poverty, forthcoming, University of Chicago Press for NBER.
Goh, Chor-Ching, and Beata Smarzynska Javorcik (2004), “Trade Protection and Industry Wage
Structure in Poland”, forthcoming in Ann Harrison, editor, Globalization and Poverty, University
of Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goldberg, Penny, and Nina Pavcnik (2004a), “Trade, Inequality, and Poverty: What Do We Know?
Evidence from Recent Trade Liberalization Episodes in Developing Countries”, NBER Working
Paper No. 10593. Forthcoming in Susan Collins and Carol Graham, eds., Brookings Trade
Forum. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Goldberg, Penny, and Nina Pavcnik (2004b), “The Effects of the Colombia Trade Liberalization on
Urban Poverty”, forthcoming in Globalization and Poverty, University of Chicago Press.
Hanson, Gordon (2004), “Globalization, Labor Income, and Poverty in Mexico”, forthcoming in
Globalization and Poverty, edited by Ann Harrison, University of Chicago Press
Harrison, Ann, and Jason Scorse (2004), “Multinationals and Anti-Sweatshop Activism”, NBER Working
Paper.
Harrison, Ann and Gordon Hanson, “Who Gains from Trade Reform? Some Remaining Puzzles”, Journal of
Development Economics, 1999, No. 59: 125-154.
Hertel, Thomas W. and L. Alan Winters (editors), December 2005. Poverty and the WTO: Impacts of the
Doha Development Agenda. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Kanbur, Ravi (2001) "Economic Policy, Distribution and Poverty: the nature of the disagreements." World
Development 29(6): 1083-94.

46

Krueger, A. (1983) Trade and employment in developing countries, 3: Synthesis and conclusions.
University of Chicago Press.
Lee, Ha Yan, Luca Antonio Ricci, and Roberto Rigobon, “Once Again, is Openness Good for
Growth?”, NBER Working Paper 10749, September 2004.
Levinsohn, James and Margaret McMillan (2004), “Does Food Aid Harm the Poor: Household Evidence from
Ethiopia”, in Ann Harrison, editor, Globalization and Poverty, forthcoming, University of Chicago Press
for NBER.
Milanovic, Branko (2002), “True World Income Distribution, 1988 and 1993: first calculation based on
household surveys alone.” The Economic Journal 112(January): 51-92.
Milanovic, Branko and Lyn Squire (2004), “Does Tariff Liberalization Increase Inequality? Some Empirical
Evidence”, in Ann Harrison, editor, Globalization and Poverty, forthcoming, University of Chicago Press
for NBER.
Milanovic, Branko, (forthcoming), Worlds Apart: Measuring Global and International Inequality. Princeton
University Press.
Panagariya, A. (2002), "Trade liberalization and food security: Conceptual Links”, in Trade Reforms and
Food Security, Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Chapter 3, 25-42.

Panagariya, A. (2004), "Comments on subsidies and trade barriers," Copenhagen Consensus
Opponent Note.
Prasad, Eswar S., Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose (2004), “Effects of Financial
Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence.”, Forthcoming in Ann Harrison,
editor, Globalization and Poverty, University of Chicago Press for NBER.

47

Ravallion, Martin (2004), “Competing Concepts of Inequality in the Globalization Debate”, in Brookings
Trade Forum 2004, Susan Collins and Carol Graham, editors, Brookings Institution Press, Washngton,
D.C.
Ravallion, Martin (2004), “Looking Beyond Averages in the Trade and Poverty Debate”, World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper 3461, November 2004.
Rodriguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik, 2000, “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to
the Cross-National Evidence,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, edited by Ben Bernanke and
Kenneth Rogoff (Cambridge: The MIT Press).
Sala-i-Martin, X. (2002a) "The World Distribution of Income (estimated from individual country

distributions)." NBER Working Paper No. 8933. Available at http://papers.nber.org/papers/w8933.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier (2002b) "The Disturbing 'Rise' of Global Income Inequality." NBER Working
Paper No. w8904. Available at http://papers.nber.org/papers/W8094.

Thomas, Duncan and Elizabeth Frankenberg (2004), “Financial Crises and Poverty: the Case of
Indonesia”, in Ann Harrison, editor, Globalization and Poverty, forthcoming, University of
Chicago Press for NBER.
Topalova, Petia (2004), “Trade Liberalization, Poverty and Inequality: Evidence from Indian Districts”,
forthcoming in Ann Harrison, editor, Globalization and Poverty, University of Chicago Press for NBER.
Valdes, A. and A.F. McCalla (1999), "Issues, interests and options of developing countries,", presented at
“The Conference on Agriculture and The New Trade Agenda in the TWO 2000 Negotiations, October 12, Geneva.
Winters, Alan L., Neil McCulloch, and Andrew McKay (2004), “Trade Liberalization and Poverty: the
Evidence So Far”, Journal of Economic Literature XLII (March): 72-115.

48

World Bank (2005), Economic Growth in the 1990s: Learning from a Decade of Reform, The World Bank,
Roberto Zagha, editor, Washington, D.C.

49

Figure 1
(Source: Aisbett, Harrison, and Zwane (2005))

Log fraction of households living on $1 per day
-8
-6
-4
-2
0

Correlation between fraction of households living on $1 per day and average import tariff

0

.2

.4

.6

Average import tariff

Log fraction of households living on $1 per day (residuals)
-4
-2
0
2
4
6

Correlation between fraction of households living on $1 per day and average import tariff

controlling for country fixed effects

-.1

0

.1
Average import tariffs (residuals)

50

.2

.3

Table 1
Income per capita, trade shares, and import tariffs in a cross-section of countries

Dependent variable: Ln income per capita ($1993 PPP)

3-year
share

lag

trade

Reduced form
(3)
OLS
Includes
Controls

(1)
OLS
No
Controls

(2)
OLS
No
Controls

(4)
OLS
Includes
Controls

(5)
OLS
Includes
Controls

0.907

0.514

0.214

0.203

0.081

[0.036]

[0.037]

[0.038]

[0.035]

[0.074]

Trade share
Country fixed
effects
Time fxed effects
Observations
Restricted sample?

Instrumental variables
(8)
(9)
IV
IV
Includes
Includes
Controls
Controls

(6)
IV
No
Controls

(7)
IV
No
Controls

0.857
[0.057]
YES

0.426
[0.067]
YES

0.402
[0.064]
YES

0.248
[0.167]
YES

NO
3288
NO

YES
1996
NO

YES
2657
NO

YES
308
YES

NO

YES

YES

YES

YES

0.978
[0.037]
NO

NO
3294
NO

NO
3294
NO

YES
1996
NO

YES
2657
NO

YES
308
YES

NO
3288
NO

(10)
IV
Includes
Controls

Income per capita and average import tariffs in a cross-section of countries

Dependent variable: Ln income per capita ($1993 PPP)

3-year lag average
Import tariff
Average import tariff
Country fixed effects
Time fixed effects
Observations
Restricted sample?

(1)
OLS
No
Controls
-3.586
[0.377]

NO
NO
1617
NO

(2)
OLS
No
Controls
-0.721
[0.142]

YES
NO
1617
NO

Reduced form
(3)
OLS
Includes
Controls
-0.298
[0.117]

YES
YES
1261
NO

(4)
OLS
Includes
Controls
-0.137
[0.119]

(5)
OLS
Includes
Controls
-0.250
[0.281]

YES
YES
1485
NO

YES
YES
212
YES

(6)
IV
No
Controls

Instrumental variables
(7)
(8)
(9)
IV
IV
IV
No
Includes
Includes
Controls
Controls
Controls

(10)
IV
Includes
Controls

-4.830
[0.441]
NO
NO
1415
NO

-4.830
[0.441]
YES
NO
1415
NO

-1.831
[1.563]
YES
YES
189
YES

-0.635
[0.328]
YES
YES
1125
NO

-0.338
[0.379]
YES
YES
1306
NO

Restricted sample is country-year observations for which poverty (head count) data is available.
All regressions exclude OECD high-income countries. Columns (3) and (8) include controls for inflation, government expenditure in GDP, currency crises, investment in GDP, and the fraction of the population that is literate.
Columns (4), (5), (9), and (10) include controls for inflation, government expenditure, and currency crises. Huber robust standard errors in parentheses. In IV regressions, trade share instrumented using three-year lagged value
and import tariff instrumented using three-year lagged value.Source: Aisbett, Harrison and Zwane (2005).

51

Table 2
Head count poverty ($1 per day), trade shares, and import tariffs in a cross-section of countries
Dependent variable: Ln fraction of households living on less than $1 per day ($1993 PPP)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
No
Includes
Includes
No
Includes
Controls
Controls
Controls
Controls
Controls
3-year lag trade share
-1.921
-1.772
-1.517
0.418
0.685
[0.385]
[0.502]
[0.484]
[0.931]
[1.209]
Trade share
3-yr lag log income per
Capita
Country fixed effects
Time fixed effects
Observations

NO
NO
349

-2.225
[0.252]
NO
YES
284

NO
YES
325

-5.154
[1.646]
YES
YES
284

YES
NO
349

(6)
OLS
Includes
Controls
0.579
[1.086]

YES
YES
325

(7)
IV
Includes
Controls

(8)
IV
Includes
Controls

(9)
IV
Includes
Controls

(10)
IV
Includes
Controls

-2.164
[0.760]
-6.405
[2.070]
NO
YES
229

-1.767
[0.524]

-3.609
[2.240]
-0.380
[3.926]
YES
YES
229

2.261
[3.576]

NO
YES
325

YES
YES
325

Head count poverty ($1 per day) and average import tariffs in a cross-section of countries
Dependent variable: Ln fraction of households living on less than $1 per day ($1993 PPP)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
No
Includes
Includes
No
Includes
Controls
Controls
Controls
Controls
Controls
3-year lag ave. I tariff
7.543
0.418
5.606
0.811
0.741
[1.229]
[1.618]
[1.490]
[2.167]
[4.736]
Average import tariff
3-yr lag log real income
Per Capita
Country fixed effects
Time fixed effects
Observations

NO
NO
223

-1.896
[0.263]
NO
YES
202

NO
YES
217

-3.662
[1.666]
YES
YES
202

YES
NO
223

(6)
OLS
Includes
Controls
1.018
[4.305]

YES
YES
217

(7)
IV
Includes
Controls

(8)
IV
Includes
Controls

(9)
IV
Includes
Controls

(10)
IV
Includes
Controls

-1.038
[2.266]
-2.551
[1.044]
NO
YES
152

6.158
[1.801]

1.549
[22.870]
0.843
[6.771]
YES
YES
152

8.242
[22.706]

NO
YES
194

Restricted sample is country-year observations for which poverty (head count) data is available.
All regressions exclude OECD high-income countries. Columns (3) and (8) include controls for inflation, government expenditure in GDP, currency crises,
investment in GDP, and the fraction of the population that is literate. Columns (4), (5), (9), and (10) include controls for inflation, government expenditure, and
currency crises. Huber robust standard errors in parentheses. In IV regressions, trade share instrumented using three-year lagged value and import tariff
instrumented using three-year lagged value.Source: Aisbett, Harrison and Zwane (2005).

52

YES
YES
194

