                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   COMPETING WITH THE NYSE

                                         William O. Brown, Jr.
                                          J. Harold Mulherin
                                         Marc D. Weidenmier

                                         Working Paper 12343
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12343


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




The authors would like to thank Farley Grubb, Julia Ott, George Smith, Bill Silber, Richard Sylla, Eugene
White, Larry White, and seminar participants at Claremont McKenna College, Clemson, Delaware, Illinois,
Kansas, NYU, UNC-Greensboro, and Texas Tech for comments. Corresponding Author’s Address: Marc
D. Weidenmier, 500 East Ninth Street, Claremont, CA 91711. Email: mweidenmier@mckenna.edu. Fax:
(909)621-8249. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by William O. Brown, Jr., J. Harold Mulherin and Marc D. Weidenmier. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Competing With the NYSE
William O. Brown, Jr., J. Harold Mulherin and Marc D. Weidenmier
NBER Working Paper No. 12343
June 2006
JEL No. G1, G2, N2

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the stock exchange rivalry between the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the
Consolidated Stock Exchange (Consolidated) from 1885 to 1926 using a new database of bid-ask
spreads and stock data collected from The New York Times and other primary sources. The
magnitude of this important, but largely forgotten rivalry was substantial. From 1885 to 1895, the
ratio of Consolidated to NYSE volume averaged 40 percent and reached as high as 60 percent. The
market share of the Consolidated averaged 23 percent for approximately 40 years. The Consolidated
focused on the relatively liquid securities on the NYSE as measured by bid-ask spreads and trading
volume. Our results suggest that NYSE bid-ask spreads fell by more than 10 percent when the
Consolidated began to trade NYSE stocks while bid-ask spreads for our quasicontrol group of stocks
trading on the Boston Stock Exchange remain unchanged. The effect persisted over the entire history
of the stock market rivalry until a series of scandals and investigations of the Consolidated by state
regulators led to the demise of the exchange in the 1920s. The analysis suggests three conclusions:
(1) the NYSE has faced significant long-run competition (2) the NYSE may be susceptible to a
similar level of competition in the future and (3) that the Consolidated may have improved the
efficiency of stock prices by contributing to the price discovery process.

William O. Brown, Jr.
Department of Economics
Claremont McKenna College
Claremont, CA 91711
wbrown@mckenna.edu

J. Harold Mulherin
Department of Banking and Finance
University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602
mulherin@terry.uga.edu

Marc D. Weidenmier
Department of Economics
Claremont McKenna College
Claremont, CA 91711
and NBER
mweidenmier@mckenna.edu
                                    Competing with the NYSE


        For a significant part of its 213-year history, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) has

reigned as the leading stock exchange both within the United States and across the world.

Recently, ongoing changes in technology and the globalization of stock trading have given rise to

a number of competitors that threaten the NYSE’s position as the preeminent stock exchange.

Technological change has played an important role in fostering the development of alternative

trading systems (Macey and O’Hara, 1999). The globalization of trading may have large and

significant effects on financial markets (Ramos, 2003). Indeed, in the July 21, 2005, S-4 filing

related to its proposed merger with Archipelago, a rival exchange, the NYSE identifies the

growth of global capital markets and the emergence of electronic communications networks as a

significant threat to its dominant market share (p. 141).

        The recently completed merger between the two exchanges raises many questions about

the effects of head-to-head stock market competition with the NYSE. Unfortunately, prior

empirical evidence offers little insight into this important public policy question. Research

focusing on past (e.g., Branch and Freed (1977), Hamilton (1976, 1979, 1987), Tinic (1972)) and

more recent episodes (e.g., Battalio (1997), Battalio, Greene and Jennings (1997)) of direct

trading competition with the NYSE has studied relatively minor magnitudes of off-exchange

trading by regional exchanges and/or the third market. Much of this minimal competition was

often related to regulatory mandates by the Securities and Exchange Commission. (See Jarrell

(1984) and Arnold, Hersch, Mulherin and Netter (1999).)

        The lack of evidence on established NYSE competitors raises an even more fundamental

question: Is the NYSE susceptible to significant competition? Previous work by Stigler (1961,

1964) suggests that the NYSE has natural monopoly characteristics and Chowdry and Nanda

(1991) model the “winner takes most” feature of securities market trading concentration. The

empirical evidence of Demsetz (1968) and Doede (1967) finds that the NYSE has economies of



                                                  1
scale and scope in securities trading and Hasan and Malkamaki (2001) report related findings for

securities markets in the 1990s. Moreover, recent work by Barclay, Hendershott and McCormick

(2003) reports that although electronic communication networks (ECNs) have made significant

inroads against NASDAQ, the ECNs have made a much smaller dent in the trading of NYSE

listings.

            In this paper, we provide new evidence on both the viability and the nature of direct

trading competition with the NYSE. We study the Consolidated Stock Exchange, a rival stock

exchange that competed directly with the “Big Board” from 1885 to 1926. For almost 42 years,

the Consolidated was an important competitor and garnered an average annual market share

reaching as high as 60 percent of NYSE trading volume. This sustained incidence of competition

with the NYSE came at a time of significant technological change in securities trading and

thereby has direct relevance to the current competitive forces confronting the NYSE today.

            Although the Consolidated has been noted in historical research by Nelson (1907), Garvy

(1944), and Sobel (1972) and in more recent analysis of the property rights to price quotations by

Mulherin, Netter and Overdahl (1991), there is little or no systematic analysis of this exchange’s

impact on the NYSE. Indeed, in an otherwise insightful and comprehensive analysis, Doede

(1967) discounts the importance of the rival exchange due to the absence of reported data on

Consolidated trading volume (p. 27). We fill the historical and empirical void of this important

episode of stock exchange competition with newly collected data from The New York Times and

other sources.

            Our analysis focuses on the effects of competition on the bid-ask spreads for NYSE

stocks. We employ a series of complementary tests to identify the effects of stock market

competition. We first study the impact of competition on bid-ask spreads when the Consolidated

began to trade NYSE stocks in 1885. Then we analyze the effects of competition on bid-ask

spreads for approximately 40 years of the stock exchange rivalry. Our results suggest that NYSE

bid-ask spreads fell by more than 10 percent when the Consolidated began to trade NYSE stocks


                                                  2
while bid-ask spreads for our quasi-control group of stocks trading on the Boston Stock Exchange

remain unchanged. The effect persisted across the 42-year rivalry between the two exchanges

until a series of scandals and investigations by the New York State Attorney General’s Office in

the 1920s led to the demise of the Consolidated. The findings are robust to a wide variety of

changes in the empirical model and estimation technique. In addition, the empirical analysis

suggests that the Consolidated may have improved the efficiency of stock prices by contributing

to the price discovery process. Overall, our results suggest that the NYSE has faced significant

long-run competition and may be susceptible to a similar level of competition in the future.

        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 describes the trading

environment on the NYSE in the years prior to the onset of competition by the Consolidated in

1885. Section 2 reports data on the magnitude and nature of the stock market competition

provided by the rival exchange over the period 1885 to 1926. Section 3 analyzes the short and

long-run effects of competition on NYSE bid-ask quotes and tests whether the Consolidated

contributed to the price discovery process. Section 4 summarizes the results and concludes the

paper with a discussion of the implications of our findings for future studies of stock market

competition.



1. The Trading Environment at the Onset of Competition

        The Consolidated Stock Exchange was formed in early 1885 by the merger of the New

York Mining Stock and Petroleum Exchange, the New York Petroleum Exchange and Stock

Board and the Miscellaneous Securities Board. These exchanges initially specialized in mining

and petroleum securities that were not traded on the NYSE. Soon after the merger, however, the

Consolidated began trading railroad stocks and other securities listed on the NYSE. The New

York Times reported that the Consolidated decided to trade NYSE listed securities in news articles

dated January 21, 1885 and February 14, 1885. The newspapers began reporting Consolidated




                                                3
trading volume of NYSE listed securities February 17, 1885 (See the Appendix of News

articles).1

         The onset of competition from the Consolidated occurred during a period of rapid growth

in the depth and the breadth of trading on the NYSE. As reported in Table 1, in the ten years prior

to the formation of the Consolidated, trading volume steadily rose and was, on average, twice as

high in the 1880-1884 period compared to the 1875-1879 period. The number of trading days

exceeded more than 300 each year because the NYSE opened for an abbreviated session of

business on Saturday until after World War II.

         As reported in Table 2, the growth in volume was accompanied by an increase in listings

on the NYSE, as proxied by the number of NYSE-listed firms reported daily in The New York

Times. Historical records from the NYSE confirm that listings doubled on the exchange between

1875 and 1884. (See, e.g., the 1940 New York Stock Exchange Yearbook, p.49.) In addition, the

median bid-ask spread increased across all NYSE stocks as the number of securities reported in

The New York Times rose over time. However, the median spread for firms with reported trading

volume remained at 0.25 for most of the period. Railroads or Western Union were the most active

security for the sampled day in a given year. These securities always traded at the minimum tick

of one-eighth.

         Studies by Garvy (1944), Michie (1986), and Mulherin, Netter and Overdahl (1991) link

the growth in the depth and breadth of NYSE trading activity to various technological

innovations. The transatlantic cable was completed in 1866 and the stock ticker was invented in

1867. Telephones soon followed in 1878. Garbade and Silber (1978) report that financial markets

readily adopted these new technologies. Accompanying organizational innovations such as the

movement from call to continuous markets enhanced the available market for NYSE listings as

well as the capacity for the exchange to trade.

1
 For background on the formation of the Consolidated Stock Exchange, see Nelson (1907), Garvy (1944),
Sobel (1972), and Mulherin, Netter and Overdahl (1991).



                                                  4
        The innovations that enhanced the potential of the NYSE also increased the probability of

competition from existing and rival exchanges (e.g., Garvy (1944), Michie (1986), and Mulherin,

Netter and Overdahl (1991)). The Consolidated’s more than 2,000 members conducted trading on

a floor in a building a few blocks from Wall Street at the corner of Broad and Beaver Streets.

Because the NYSE, the New York Mining Stock and Petroleum Exchange and other predecessors

had gentlemen’s agreements not to engage in direct trading competition, the Consolidated at its

inception possessed stock tickers linked to the NYSE and thereby had ready access to the

information required to engage in the trading of NYSE listings.

        The Consolidated attracted trading in NYSE listings by charging lower commissions,

offering odd lot trading, and allowing a longer settlement period. The rival exchange even

functioned as the primary New York market when it opened one-half hour before the NYSE for a

period beginning in July 1912. Commission rates on the Consolidated averaged 1/16th of the par

value of a stock or half the brokerage commission charged by the NYSE. However, the NYSE

had several loopholes that allowed members to bypass its high brokerage fees. Members that

bought and sold stock between each other were charged rates as low as 1/32nd of par value and

deals between brokers on the floor of the exchange could go as low as 1/50 percent of a stock’s

par value. The discount on commissions was extended to all partners of an NYSE firm even if

they did not own a seat on the exchange. The discount policy led to the creation of ever larger

stockbroking firms (Michie, 1986). The Consolidated also dealt in odd lots, executing trades of

only 10 shares as opposed to the NYSE that required an order size of at least 100 shares.2 In

addition, the Consolidated had a two-week settlement period as opposed to the daily settlement

period for the NYSE. The payment system used by the Big Board often exacerbated financial

crises as bankers and brokers had little time to take countermeasures to avoid a crisis. Following a



2
  Ott (2004) shows that odd lot trading accounted for as much as 40 percent of the business of NYSE
members by 1921. She also provides historical evidence that NYSE member firms often sold odd lots to
retail customers at stale prices and that such trading was a highly profitable business for NYSE members.


                                                     5
significant decline in stock prices, brokers might not be able to raise significant capital to repay

their margin loans to banks.

        The New York Stock Exchange immediately responded to the Consolidated’s decision to

trade Big Board stocks. The NYSE implemented a series of measures in 1885 and 1886 to limit

the Consolidated’s ability to gain market share. The NYSE passed a resolution mandating that

400 of its members drop their affiliation with the Consolidated (Mulherin, Netter, and Overdahl,

1991). In 1888, the New York Stock Exchange even suspended one of its members for

conducting business with the rival exchange, although this measure did not eliminate trading

between the two rivals as some brokers continued to conduct business and arbitrage price

differences on the two exchanges. The New York Times often printed articles that discussed

various aspects of competition between the two exchanges. In a February 27, 1891 article “A

Wall Street Quarantine,” the newspaper reported that the NYSE passed a resolution to limit

competition from the Consolidated.


“After a lull, the old battle between the Stock Exchange and its youthful neighbor on the other
side of New Street has broken out again... At the meeting of its Governors Tuesday a resolution
was passed which was not made public until yesterday. It is a stringent order, and it reads in this
way: Resolved, That all communications between this Exchange and the Consolidated Stock and
Petroleum Exchange, or any part of the building thereof, by means of messengers or clerks, or in
any other manner, directly or indirectly, is detrimental to the interests and welfare of this Exchange,
and is hereby prohibited.”


The NYSE also established an unlisted department that traded only “speculative” stocks listed on

the Consolidated. Although this measure primarily covered mining and other less important

securities, it signaled the NYSE’s intention to limit competition from the rival exchange.

        The Big Board also challenged the Consolidated’s use of its ticker. The rival exchange

purchased ticker service from the Commercial Telegram Company, one of two firms --the second

firm was the Gold and Stock Telegraph Company-- the NYSE contracted to collect and

disseminate stock quotes. This set off a 15-year court war between the two exchanges. The NYSE

maintained that it owned the property rights to the price quotes, while the Consolidated believed


                                                  6
that price quotes were public property. Although the courts ruled in 1887 that stock quotes were

private property, they also ruled that the NYSE did not own the price quotes as long as they hired

firms to collect and disseminate the quotes. Since the Commercial Telegram Company did not

answer the NYSE’s complaint, the courts also granted the firm an injunction that prevented the

NYSE from removing the ticker from the floor of the Consolidated. Court rulings prompted the

NYSE to change its operating procedures and to alter the nature of its long-term contracts with

firms that provided ticker service. In 1892, the NYSE began to collect stock quotes and transmit

stock quotes to the Gold and Stock Telegraph Company. The telegraph firm then supplied price

quotes to NYSE customers. The NYSE also removed tickers from members that gave

nonmembers access to the price quotes. The courts established that the NYSE owned the price

quotes in 1899 when they ruled that the Big Board could remove its ticker from the office of a

Consolidated broker (Mulherin, Netter, and Overdahl, 1991).3 Although the courts ruled that the

NYSE could remove tickers from the offices of Consolidated brokers or other individuals they

chose not to do business with, the rival exchange continued to have access to the NYSE ticker

through the court injunction granted in 1887.



2. The Magnitude and Nature of the Stock Market Rivalry

        The rivalry between the Consolidated and the NYSE lasted from 1885 to 1926. Table 3

provides estimates of the magnitude of the 42-year rivalry between the NYSE and the

Consolidated Stock Exchange from 1885-1926. We report the annual volume of common stock

on the NYSE, the annual volume of NYSE-listed stocks on the Consolidated, and the ratio of

Consolidated volume to NYSE volume. (See the Data Appendix for data sources.) The data show

that the Consolidated quickly gained a significant share of the trading volume of NYSE-listed

securities. In the first ten years of its existence, the ratio of Consolidated to NYSE volume

3
  The Appendix of News articles provides a sketch of the ongoing competition. Nelson (1907), Garvy
(1944) and Sobel (1972) provide historical treatments of the rivalry. Mulherin, Netter and Overdahl (1991)
emphasize the legal disputes over property rights to NYSE price quotations.


                                                    7
averaged 40 percent. By 1894, the Consolidated traded as much as 60 percent of NYSE volume.4

Over the course of the stock exchange rivalry, the Consolidated averaged 23.48 percent of NYSE

volume. As late as 1921, the ratio of Consolidated to NYSE volume was 25.87 percent.

         The rivalry ended in February 1926 with the demise of the Consolidated. Garvy (1944)

and Sobel (1972) point to accusations of fraud and the prosecution of the Consolidated by the

Attorney General of the State of New York under the auspices of the Martin Act of 1921.5

William Silkworth, President of the Consolidated Stock Exchange in the early 1920s, allegedly

misused a rescue fund in early 1922 for his own personal gain after asking member firms of the

exchange to contribute to the fund. A few months later, one of the Consolidated’s leading and

most respected brokerage houses, Edward M. Fuller & Company declared bankruptcy. Silkworth

was accused of embezzling funds from the brokerage house even though he denied any wrong-

doing. Although Silkworth was subsequently exonerated of the charges, a Fuller executive

pleaded guilty to fraud. The Consolidated continued to trade securities after the scandals and even

introduced reforms to eliminate corruption on the exchange.6 However, the historical evidence

suggests that the reputation of the exchange had been irreparably damaged. News reports at the

time (see the Appendix of News Articles) indicate that attempts to revive the rival exchange

ended with the revelation that the Consolidated did not possess the right to the tickers


4
  The data collected from The New York Times contain total volume for listed and unlisted securities but the
NYSE only reports data for listed securities. As a result, our total volume data for the NYSE undercounts
total volume for the period between 1888 and 1910 for the NYSE, when the NYSE closed its unlisted
securities department. The total volume of unlisted securities is relatively small with the exception of
American Sugar, which was a component of the Dow Industrial Average. We have NYSE volume data for
American Sugar for the last day of the month from April 1894 until 1926. These data suggest that Table 3
may overstate the Consolidated’s total volume relative to the NYSE by three percent to eight percent from
1893 to 1902 when American Sugar was among the most actively traded securities on both exchanges. This
discrepancy does not affect our formal analyses which are conducted on individual securities where we
have the actual data from both exchanges.
5
  The Martin Act has recently been used by Eliot Spitzer to indict Wall Street brokers and executives in the
recent wave of corporate scandals.
6
  Ott (2004) shows that politics played an important role in the collapse of the Consolidated. She argues
that the NYSE engaged in a public relations campaign from 1913 until 1929 and captured the New York
State Attorney General’s Office which investigated the Consolidated for stock fraud and wash sales. Ott
concludes that a public relations campaign by the NYSE was quite successful and that the Big Board
managed to avoid significant federal and state regulation until the New Deal.


                                                     8
transmitting NYSE price quotes in early 1927. Doede (1967) also notes that the emergence of the

New York Curb Exchange in the early twentieth century (later the American Stock Exchange),

which adopted a more amicable and non-competitive relation with the NYSE, also led to a

weakening of the Consolidated’s position after 1909.

           Table 4 presents some information on the nature of the 42-year stock market rivalry

between the NYSE and the Consolidated. We collected trading data from a single day for each

year between 1885 and 1926. Table 4 reports data on the number of NYSE firms listed, the

number of NYSE firms with positive trading volume, and the number of NYSE-listed firms with

trading volume on the Consolidated. (See the Data Appendix for specific dates and sources.) As

reported in Table 4, the Consolidated tended to trade only a subset of NYSE listings on a given

day. From 1885 to 1926, the Consolidated traded a median of 18 percent of NYSE listings. The

median fraction of NYSE listings with volume that also traded on the Consolidated was 33

percent.

           Table 5 provides evidence that the Consolidated tended to trade the relatively liquid

NYSE listings. For a single day in each year between 1885 and 1926, the table reports the median

bid-ask spread on the NYSE. While the median absolute (relative) bid-ask spread for all NYSE

stocks with quotes averages $1.00 (2.08 percent) over the entire time period, the median absolute

(relative) spread of the NYSE listings that also traded on the Consolidated averages $0.25 (0.53

percent). This is also lower than the average absolute (relative) spread of $0.75 (1.60 percent) for

stocks with volume on the NYSE but not on the Consolidated. The tendency for a rival exchange

to trade relatively more liquid NYSE listings resembles the results found from studies of modern-

day markets (e.g., Easley, Kiefer and O’Hara (1996), Battalio (1997)).

           Table 6 provides additional evidence that the Consolidated tended to trade relatively

liquid NYSE listings. For a single day in each of the sample years, the table reports the most

heavily traded security on both the NYSE and the Consolidated. For 21 of the 42 years (50

percent of the time), the most heavily traded security on the NYSE was also the most heavily


                                                 9
traded on the Consolidated. In only five of the 42 years was the most heavily traded security on

the NYSE not in the top five in trading on the Consolidated. The most heavily traded security on

both exchanges tended to trade at the minimum bid-ask spread of one-eighth, providing further

evidence that the Consolidated emphasized relatively liquid NYSE listings.

        The fact that the Consolidated, like many current-day NYSE competitors, tended to trade

relatively more liquid securities poses some complications in identifying the effect of competition

on the NYSE. As noted in the initial research on bid-ask spreads by Demsetz (1968, p. 45),

measures of competition are likely to be associated with the rate of transactions across securities.

Similarly, Tinic (1972, p. 88) notes that any measure of inter-exchange competition might also

proxy for long-run trading activity. Such concerns were certainly present in the early analysis of

NYSE bid-ask spreads and exchange competition that tended to be cross-sectional studies over a

short time interval.

        To estimate the effect of stock market competition initiated by the Consolidated, we

perform a series of complementary tests. We begin with a natural experiment in which we study

the effect of the onset of competition on NYSE bid-ask spreads. This experiment implicitly treats

the onset of the Consolidated as an exogenous event. Boehmer and Boehmer (2003) have a

similar research design in their recent study of the NYSE entry into the market of Exchange

Traded Funds (ETFs). We then perform a panel study of the effect of the Consolidated on NYSE

bid-ask spreads over the entire 42-year rivalry of the two exchanges. Such analysis resembles

Wahal’s (1997) recent work on the effects of dealer competition on NASDAQ and avoids the

critique of the early studies of the NYSE that focused on short periods of time.



3. Empirical Evidence

        A. The Onset of Stock Market Competition

        Our empirical analysis of stock market competition begins with the Consolidated’s

decision to trade NYSE stocks. This event provides a natural experiment to study the behavior of


                                                10
bid-ask spreads in the period before and after the rival exchange directly competed with the

NYSE. To investigate this question, we estimate a series of regressions using NYSE bid ask-

spreads as the dependent variable for a one-year period before and after the initiation of trading in

NYSE listings by the Consolidated in February 1885. The regression analysis controls for firm-

specific factors such as trading volume, price level, and return volatility that prior studies have

found to affect bid-ask spreads (Demsetz 1968, Tinic 1972, Branch and Freed, 1977). The basic

model can be written as:



        SPREADit= α0 + β1VOLit + β2CLOSEit+ β3STDEVi + β4COMPt + εit,                        (1)



where SPREADit is either the natural log of the absolute bid-ask spread or relative spread

[(bid+ask)/(bid+ask/2)] for security i on day t. The volume and closing price variables, VOLit and

CLOSEit, are measured as the natural log of the NYSE daily volume and closing price for security

i on day t. Volatility, STDEVi, is defined as the standard deviation of the natural log of security

i’s return over the entire sample period. To determine the effect of stock market competition,

COMPt is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in the period beginning with the initiation

of trading of NYSE listed stocks by the Consolidated on February 17, 1885. The white noise error

term is given by εit. Bid-ask spreads for the empirical analysis are collected from The New York

Times. The newspaper also reported trading volume, but not information on bid-ask spreads for

the Consolidated. Silber (2005) reports a similar non-reporting of data on NYSE competitors by

major financial newspapers in his analysis of the closure of stock markets from the end of July to

December 1914 following the outbreak of World War I.

        The time period for the analysis is 60 weeks before and 60 weeks after the onset of

Consolidated competition. This time interval is determined in part by data availability. As noted

in the Data Appendix, our firm-level data on volume and bid-ask spreads come from The New

York Times. The newspaper temporarily discontinued reporting NYSE bid-ask spreads in mid-


                                                 11
April 1886. To have a continuous database, we use the interval from February 17, 1885, to April

9, 1886, for the Consolidated period. We use a comparable interval prior to the onset of off-

exchange trading of NYSE listings as our pre-Consolidated time period.

           We sampled data from Friday trading in each of the 60 weeks before and the 60 weeks

after the onset of competition by the Consolidated. If Friday was not a trading day, we sampled

from an adjacent day. For each day, we collected data on the closing price, volume, and bid-ask

spreads of all NYSE common stocks reported in The New York Times. Our analysis focuses on

NYSE-listed firms with non-zero trading volume, although our results are robust to including

NYSE firms with zero trading volume on a given business day.7 For the same time interval, we

also collected control variables reflecting aggregate market conditions such as aggregate NYSE

volume, the concentration of NYSE trading, and broker call rates.

           The first panel in Table 7 provides summary statistics for the pre- and Consolidated

periods. The sample contains 7,036 observations. This includes all companies with at least 12

observations of reported trading volume and bid-ask spreads on the NYSE. The mean absolute

bid-ask spread and relative bid-ask spread are 0.685 and 2.78 percent respectively. The individual

daily security volume ranges from five shares to 171,516 shares and averages 5,251 shares. The

mean closing price is $52.89. The standard deviation of returns for the average security is 7.10

percent per week over the sample period. The number of observations that occur in the

Consolidated period accounts for 53.4 percent of the total observations.

           Table 7 also reports summary data on the control variables that we use in our robustness

analysis. The mean aggregate weekly trading volume for all securities on the NYSE during the

week is 1,990,360 shares. The mean share of total volume was 1.69 percent for securities with

NYSE volume and the average concentration ratio for the four highest volume NYSE securities is

55.5 percent, indicating that NYSE volume was highly concentrated among the most active



7
    The robustness checks are available from the authors upon request.


                                                      12
securities over the sample period. The concentration of trading in securities markets has been

noted in modern day markets by Easley, Kiefer, O’Hara and Paperman (1996).

         The second and third panels in Table 7 separately report the data for the pre- and

Consolidated periods. The data suggest an average decline in both absolute and relative bid-ask

spreads. For the remaining firm specific and market-wide variables, there does not appear to be a

discernible trend or pattern in the data. For example, the average of individual NYSE security

volume declines while the average NYSE stock price is relatively flat. The average of NYSE total

weekly volume rises while the average broker call rate falls. In addition, we have examined the

distribution of the spreads across the two periods. There appears to be a shift in the entire

distribution toward lower spreads and not a change in clustering around the odd eighths (e.g.

Christie and Schultz (1994)). For example, the proportion of spreads that is at $0.5 or less

increases from 65.8 percent of the sample in the pre-period to 70.3 percent in the post-period.

         Figure 1 graphs the average weekly bid-ask spread over the sample period for the NYSE

and a group of the leading regional exchanges (Baltimore, Boston and Philadelphia).8 The graph

is suggestive in two important ways. First, the decline in bid-ask spread is not part of a larger

trend of lower bid-ask spreads on the NYSE but is specific to the post-Consolidated period.

Secondly, the lower bid-ask spread seems to be confined to the NYSE and not the regional

exchanges. It is important to note that while the regional exchanges did trade some NYSE listed

securities at this time, the majority of stocks trading on these exchanges were not listed on the Big

Board and did not face direct competition from the Consolidated.




8
  The Commercial and Financial Chronicle reported bid-ask spreads for some stocks on the regional
exchanges that did not have trading volume for that particular day. For consistency, the average bid-ask
spread for the NYSE is the average for all securities and includes some stocks that did not have any trading
volume so the data in this figure are not directly comparable to those in later tables. For a couple of weeks
when The Commercial and Financial Chronicle did not report bid-ask spreads for the regional markets, we
interpolated the average bid-ask spread using the week before and after the missing observations. The
Boston Exchange accounts for over 90 percent of the observations in Figure 1. For our formal analysis, we
are forced to focus on the Boston Exchange due to the lack of sufficient observations with trading volume
on the other regional exchanges.


                                                     13
         In addition, we present summary statistics in Table 8 for securities with volume on the

NYSE. The descriptive statistics are broken down into two groups: stocks traded by the

Consolidated and securities not traded by the rival exchange. For the entire sample period,

companies that the Consolidated traded accounted for 4,823 out of the 7,036 observations or 68.5

percent of the sample. However, the average volume of securities traded by the Consolidated was

over 17 times higher than the NYSE listings that they did not trade. The companies that the

Consolidated traded accounted for over 97 percent of the total trading volume over the full

sample period. In addition to having lower volumes and lower bid-ask spreads in both the full

period and the pre-Consolidated securities, the securities traded by the Consolidated tended to

have lower average closing prices and higher volatility.

        If we examine the change from the pre-Consolidated period to the Consolidated period

for each group, then it is clear that the bid-ask spreads and relative bid-ask spreads fall for each

group. The decline in spreads for the group with Consolidated trading is consistent with

competition and the decline in the group without Consolidated trading is consistent with potential

competition. On the other hand, the mean bid-ask spread for the regional exchanges did not

experience a similar decline with the onset of stock market competition between the two New

York exchanges. In addition, the group with Consolidated trading experienced a decline in the

average NYSE volume of almost 15 percent (8,102 shares vs. 6,883 shares) while the volume for

those without Consolidated trading increased by 25 percent in the period of competition (382

shares vs. 478 shares). Table 9 reports the results for the estimation of our basic model over the

pre- and Consolidated period. We report four specifications that examine the determinants of the

absolute and relative bid-ask spreads that omit and include company fixed effects. Column A of

Table 9 reports the model with the absolute bid-ask spread as the dependent variable. The results

indicate that the absolute spread is positively related to the closing price, negatively related to

individual security volume, and positively related to the standard deviation of returns. All

coefficients are significant at the one percent level of significance.


                                                  14
        The dummy variable for the presence of Consolidated trading indicates that absolute

spreads are negatively related to the onset of competition from the Consolidated exchange. The

coefficient on the Consolidated dummy is also significant at the one percent level. The results

suggest that the bid-ask spreads were approximately 11.6 (e-.123-1) percent lower in the

Consolidated period.

        In Column B of Table 9, we include company specific fixed effects to capture

unobserved heterogeneity across firms. This necessitates excluding the standard deviation

variable because it does not vary by observation across an individual security. The coefficients on

security volume and the Consolidated dummy remain negative and significant at the one percent

level and the coefficient estimate rises to 14.3 percent. The closing price is now negatively and

significantly related to absolute spreads after controlling for fixed effects.

        Column C of Table 9 reports the results using the relative spread as the dependent

variable. Higher security volume, higher closing prices, and higher volatility are all negatively

and significantly related to the relative spread. The presence of the Consolidated results in a

reduction in relative spreads of approximately 11.3 (e-.120-1) percent. We obtain similar results

when we control for company specific fixed effects in Column D.

        The ideal test of the effects of the Consolidated would be to have a control group of

actively traded securities on the NYSE that had some prohibition on Consolidated trading.

Without such a control group, we estimate models similar to those presented in Table 9 for the

Boston Stock Exchange in order to determine whether or not the results are driven by overall

changes in equity markets during this time period. The Boston Stock Exchange serves the

purpose as a quasi-control group because it predominantly traded different stocks in the same

industry --railroad and telephone stocks-- that did not trade on the Big Board. Moreover, the New

York financial press regularly printed a list of stock prices on the Boston Stock Exchange. The

regional exchange therefore provides a test of whether a railroad or telephone specific shock can

account for the statistically significant decline in NYSE bid-ask spreads with the Consolidated’s


                                                  15
decision to trade NYSE listed stocks. The empirical results for Boston, presented in Table 9A,

indicate a similar relationship between spreads and control variables. However, the dummy

variable for the presence of Consolidated trading is never significantly different than zero.

Although the coefficient for competition is negative for Boston, it is less than half the size of the

competition coefficient for the NYSE. This suggests that the observed relationship between

Consolidated trading and NYSE spreads was the result of competition.

        While the analysis in Table 9 controls for individual security effects across the pre- and

Consolidated time periods, it is possible that changes in overall market conditions rather than the

existence of the Consolidated led to lower bid-ask spreads. We control for overall market

conditions with several variables including aggregate NYSE volume, the concentration of trading

volume, and the broker call rate. Our measure of aggregate volume, WVOLt, is NYSE weekly

volume for a given observation (the sum of total NYSE volume for the day included in the

sample and the five previous days of trading). Davis, Neal and White (2005) find that higher total

volume on the NYSE increases bid-ask spreads if the “Big Board” has reached its capacity

constraint for trading stocks. We also include the concentration ratio of volume for the four

highest volume firms, CONCt, to account for the fact that high volume securities have lower bid-

ask spreads – if trading becomes more concentrated in high volume securities, then bid-ask

spreads should fall. We also include the ratio of a security’s NYSE volume to total NYSE volume

on that day, SHAREit, to control for the extent to which the Consolidated was trading only the

most active NYSE securities. Finally, we include the broker’s call rate as a measure of the cost of

carrying an inventory of securities. The white noise error term is given by εit. The extended model

can be written as:

        SPREADit = α0+ β1VOLit + β2CLOSEit+ β3STDEVi + β4COMPt + β5WVOLit + β6CALLt

        + β7SHAREit + β8CONCt + εit                                                         (2)

        In Table 10 we report the results of estimating the model with the additional control

variables. While each of these additional variables is generally significant in the regression, they


                                                 16
have little effect on the other variables or the overall fit of the model. The exception is the

individual security volume measure. The individual security volume variable is no longer

significantly different from zero because the variable is highly correlated with total NYSE

volume.

          In all the specifications reported in Table 10, the presence of competition from the

Consolidated is associated with a reduction in absolute and relative spreads of approximately 13

percent. The Consolidated dummy is significant at the one percent level in the four different

specifications. Moreover, the impact of the Consolidated on spreads is remarkably consistent

across the specifications presented in Tables 9 and 10 and indicates that the introduction of the

Consolidated is associated with a non-trivial reduction in bid-ask spreads on the NYSE. Table

10A reports an analysis of bid-ask spreads for the Boston Exchange using additional control

variables. Again, we find that bid-ask spreads on the regional exchange did not significantly

decline when the Consolidated Stock Exchange began to trade NYSE-listed stocks.

          The baseline results are also consistent across a series of robustness checks not reported.

We obtained similar findings when we included every security from The New York Times rather

than focusing only on securities with positive NYSE volume on a given day. We also estimated

the model after excluding securities that appeared only in the pre- or Consolidated period and

have also restricted the sample to only those firms that consistently traded in both periods,

something akin to a matched panel. The results are unaffected by these changes. The results are

also robust to excluding securities with closing prices of $1 or less and $5 or less. Finally, we

obtain similar results if we exclude securities trading at the binding spread of one-eighth.



B. The Effects of Long-Run Competition

          As a complement to the short-run analysis, we also study the long-run effect of

competition on NYSE bid-ask spreads. We estimate a panel regression of NYSE bid-ask spreads

on variables proxying for competition from the Consolidated, firm-specific variables that affect


                                                 17
spreads, and other variables that control for market conditions over time. The New York Times’

brief lapse in reporting trading volume of NYSE stocks on the Consolidated from April through

August 1886 limits our long-run analysis to the period September 1886 to February 1926. We

sampled data from the last trading day of each month for the analysis. We collected firm-specific

information on bid-ask spreads, trading volume on the NYSE, and trading volume of NYSE

stocks bought and sold on the Consolidated Stock Exchange (if any). We also collected data on

NYSE total monthly volume and the closing monthly broker call rate as additional control

variables for the empirical analysis.

        We focus our analysis on the common stocks in the Dow Jones Indices. We use the

original Dow Jones Index with 12 stocks from September 1886 until October 1896, when the

index is divided into the 20 stock Dow Jones Railroad Index and the 12 stock Industrial Index.

We collected data from The New York Times for each security in the index at a given point in

time and rely on Farrell (1972) for changes in the composition of the indices.

        We employ the same empirical analysis used in Section 2 where the natural log of the

absolute or relative spread is a function of a security’s volume, its closing price, individual

security volatility and competition. The only difference in the specification is that we now

employ two different measures for the competition variable. The first is an estimate of the

Consolidated’s fraction of the volume of trading in a given NYSE listing, defined as

[Consolidated Volume/(NYSE Volume + Consolidated Volume)]. Since this variable is measured

in logs, we replace all zeros with a small positive value before taking the natural log for the

observations where the Consolidated’s share is zero. The basic tenor of the results remains

unchanged by including shares with a zero value. The second measure of competition is a dummy

variable that takes a value of one if a security traded on the Consolidated on a given day. The two

measures of competition have a pair wise correlation of 0.95, so we do not use them in the same

regression.




                                                18
        Table 11 reports the summary statistics for the data used in the analysis of the effects of

the Consolidated over time. The absolute bid-ask spread averages 0.414 and the relative bid-ask

spread averages 0.627 percent. These bid-ask spread values are lower than those reported for all

NYSE stocks in Table 5, which reflects the fact that the firms in the Dow Jones Indices are

relatively liquid. Individual daily security volume on the NYSE averages 10,626 shares, the

closing price averages $88.239, and individual security return volatility over the entire sample

period averages 11.348.

        The Consolidated’s share of total volume per security averages 11.21 percent, but ranges

from zero to 99.5 percent. For the dataset of firms from the Dow Jones Index, the Consolidated

traded in an average of 74.8 percent of the sample on a given day. Table 11 also reports summary

statistics on the control variables used in the analysis. NYSE total monthly volume averages 14.7

million shares. A security’s share of trading volume averages 3.742 percent and the concentration

of trading in the four most heavily traded securities averages 63 percent. The broker’s call rate

averages four percent.

        Table 12 reports the estimates of the basic model of the effects of the Consolidated over

time. The first two columns report the model with the absolute bid-ask spread as the dependent

variable. The first column has the natural log of Consolidated share as the measure of

competition, while the second column has the simple Consolidated dummy as the measure of

competition. Both the Consolidated share variable and the dummy variable for the presence of

any Consolidated trading are negatively and significantly related to bid-ask spreads at the one

percent level. A one percent increase in the share of the Consolidated volume results in a 3.6

percent decline in the absolute and relative bid-ask spreads and the presence of Consolidated

trading reduces the bid-ask spread by about 20 (e-.225-1) percent. The coefficients of volume,

price level, and security volatility all have the expected signs and are significantly different from

zero. The next two columns report the basic model with the relative bid-ask spread as the

dependent variable. Again, the two measures of competition are negatively and significantly


                                                 19
related to bid-ask spreads on the NYSE. The coefficients of the other variables have the expected

signs and are significantly different from zero.

        Table 12 also presents the results when we control for security specific fixed effects and

year effects. Here the variable for individual security volatility is omitted because it is estimated

over the entire sample period for a given firm. The results are generally robust to changing the

specification of the model with the Consolidated share variable producing a 2.8 percent to 3.0

percent reduction in spreads and the presence of Consolidated trading producing a decline in

spreads of approximately 15 (e-.163 -1) percent.

        We also estimate the extended model --given in equation (2)-- that incorporates

additional control variables to capture general market conditions. Table 13 presents the empirical

results using the additional control variables with and without fixed effects. The competition

variables always have a negative and statistically significant effect on spreads. Hence, both the

presence and magnitude of competition by the Consolidated is associated with narrower bid-ask

spreads on the NYSE over time.

        As a complement to our long-run analysis, we also conducted an “event study” analysis

of the effects of the initiation of trading by the Consolidated in a particular stock. To conduct this

test, we searched for securities from our sample of Dow Index stocks that had distinct trading on

the NYSE before also trading on the Consolidated. We then estimated the change in bid-ask

spreads of the securities after the initiation of trading by the Consolidated. Unfortunately, most

stocks that were in the Dow Indices tended to have heavy trading on both the NYSE and the

Consolidated during the course of our sample period.

        We identified four securities that fit our criterion: AT&T, Colorado Fuel & Iron, and the

Texas Company. We use these four stocks and estimate our baseline model where the dummy

variable for the Consolidated is equal to one after the Consolidated initiates trading. We find that

the initiation of Consolidated trading is significantly related to a decline in spreads, which is

consistent with our other analysis. However, the results only reflect a small sample of stocks.


                                                   20
C. The End of the Consolidated

           Another test of the effects of stock market competition is to examine how bid-ask spreads

changed when the Consolidated ceased to be an important competitor. However, the gradual

decline of the rival exchange --as opposed to an abrupt halt of trading on the Consolidated--

makes it difficult to identify the effects of the removal of competition on bid-ask spreads.

Nevertheless, we attempt to provide some insight into this question by using the resignation of

William Silkworth, President of the Consolidated Stock Exchange, on June 25, 1923 as a key

event that signaled the demise of the rival exchange. At this time, the New York State Attorney

General also closed several brokerage houses affiliated with the Consolidated. The NYSE began

considering measures to enforce its ownership of the price quotes by removing its tickers from

the Consolidated. If we re-estimate the long-run models presented in Tables 12 and 13 and restrict

the sample to the period after Silkworth resigns, the two competition variables are not statistically

significant in the baseline or extended models. The results suggest that the Consolidated ceased

to be a significant competitor after June 1923.9

           The mean bid-ask spreads also increase from $0.41 to $0.45 in the post-Silkworth period

with the fraction of absolute spreads at $0.5 or less decreasing from 83.7 percent of the sample to

77.9 percent of the sample. The data suggest that the rise in bid-ask spreads is of similar

magnitude to the decline in spreads observed at the initiation of Consolidated trading. We also

re-estimated the baseline and extended models over the 40-year panel, replacing our measures of

competition with a dummy variable that takes the value of one after June 1923 and the value of

zero for the earlier months. The results presented in Tables 14 indicate that bid-ask spreads

increased after June 1923. The results for the baseline model indicate a positive and significant

coefficient on the post-Silkworth dummy for both absolute and relative spreads. The coefficient

on the end-of-competition variable in the models without company fixed effects is remarkably

9
    These results are available from the authors on request.


                                                       21
similar in size --albeit with a different sign-- than we reported for the initiation of Consolidated

trading. The results with fixed effects produce smaller relative coefficients, but still indicate that

the demise of the Consolidated was accompanied by a statistically significant increase in bid-ask

spreads.

           The results are not as robust for the extended model. The coefficient estimates are

statistically significant but the coefficient estimates are smaller when we do not control for

company specific fixed effects. The results are positive but not statistically significant when we

control for company specific factors. However, it is important to note that these results are

achieved without a well defined end date for the Consolidated. As noted earlier, the

Consolidated’s share of total volume was decreasing in the second half of the sample period and

as such one would expect its end would produce smaller effects than its beginning. The fact that

the onset of competition was associated with a large rise in the Consolidated’s market share while

the demise of the exchange coincided with a gradual decline in market share makes finding any

result at the end of the exchange less likely.

           Overall, we interpret the empirical analysis as strong evidence that head-to-head

competition between the Consolidated and the NYSE lowered bid-ask spreads on the Big Board.

NYSE bid-ask spreads fell with the onset of competition and increased when the Consolidated

ceased to be an important competitor. Moreover, the coefficients on the two competition variables

in the 40-year panel models are quite consistent across the different specifications, suggesting that

the analysis does not suffer from an omitted variable. For an omitted variable to explain the

results, it would have to cause NYSE bid-ask spreads to suddenly fall in 1885, rise from 1923

until February 1926, and be uncorrelated with the two measures of competition in the 40-year

panel model. This seems unlikely given the historical and empirical evidence.

D. Price Discovery

           Beginning July 7, 1912, the Consolidated opened 30 minutes (9:30AM) before the

NYSE. The Consolidated used a call market to establish opening prices in this period. The


                                                 22
practice of early opening continued until July 30, 1914, when both exchanges closed with the

outbreak of World War I. When the two rival exchanges reopened on December 12, 1914, the

Consolidated apparently resumed trading at 10:00AM given that the financial press no longer

reported trading activity on the rival exchange in the half hour before the start of NYSE trading.

This two-year window provides an opportunity to test whether the Consolidated contributed to

the price discovery process given that we lack detailed transaction level data to perform a more

rigorous analysis. We employ a technique used by Silber (2006) to determine the extent to which

opening prices on the Consolidated contained new information that would be incorporated into

NYSE opening prices. Our variant of Silber’s model can be written as follows:



NYSEOPENit = α0 + β1NYSECLOSEit-1 + β2CONSOLIDATEDOPENit + εit                   (3).



Equation (3) tests whether opening prices on the Consolidated predict opening prices on the

NYSE after controlling for closing prices on the Big Board from the previous day. We collected

weekly data for Friday’s opening price and Thursday’s closing price for all stocks that traded on

the Consolidated and the NYSE. Then we matched stocks with a Friday opening price on the

NYSE, NYSEOPENit, with securities that had a Friday opening price on the Consolidated,

CONSOLIDATEDOPENit, and a Thursday closing price for the NYSE, NYSECLOSEit. The

estimated coefficients along with robust standard errors are presented below. The model was

estimated with 3,604 observations.



NYSEOPENit = -0.006 + 0.304NYSECLOSEit-1 + 0.695CONSOLIDATEDOPENit
               (0.006) (0.032)                   (0.032)   R2 = 0.99

The slope coefficients are significant at the one percent level. The coefficient for the opening

price of the Consolidated is more than two times larger than the coefficient on NYSE closing




                                               23
prices for the previous day. This suggests that the Consolidated contributed to the price discovery

process and was more than a free-riding exchange that traded off NYSE bid-ask quotes.

         As a robustness check, we also estimate the model in returns where it is written as:


NYSERETURNit = α0 + β1CONSOLIDATEDRETURNit + εit                           (4)


where NYSERETURNit = log(NYSEOPENit) - log(NYSECLOSEit-1) and

CONSOLIDATEDRETURNit = log(CONSOLIDATEDOPENit) - log(NYSECLOSEit-1). The

estimated coefficients and standard errors are:



NYSERETURNit = -0.0003 + 0.277 CONSOLIDATEDRETURNit + εit
                (0.001)    (0.043)     R2 = 0.123



The coefficient on the Consolidated return is significant at the 1 percent level. The point estimate

on the Consolidated variable implies that the change between the NYSE closing price and the

Consolidated opening price accounts for just over 50 percent of the total overnight return for a

security on the NYSE. Again, this suggests that the Consolidated was capable of some form of

price discovery. One concern with the results is that many stocks that traded on the NYSE also

traded in London during the overnight period. If this were true, then opening stock prices on the

Consolidated may just reflect information generated in the London market. To address this

concern, we identified the securities that traded in London from The Economist and The Times.

Excluding stocks that traded on the London market did not change the empirical results.10

Moreover, the analysis also indicates that approximately 5 percent of the securities that traded on

the Consolidated did not trade on the London market or the NYSE on a given day. Although these




10
  If we exclude the stocks that also traded in London, then the coefficient on the Consolidated in equation
(3) drops to 0.611 and rises to .294 in equation (4). The coefficient estimates are still significant at the one
percent level.


                                                       24
securities generally had trading volumes of less than 100 shares, it provides additional evidence

that the Consolidated functioned as a primary market for some securities.



4. Summary and Conclusion

        In this paper we study the magnitude, nature, and effects of the rivalry between the

NYSE and the Consolidated Stock Exchange. The Consolidated competed directly with the

NYSE for 42 years and garnered an annual market share as high as 60 percent of the Big Board’s

listings. The Consolidated focused on the relatively more liquid NYSE listings as measured by

bid-ask spreads and trading volume. Both the onset of competition by the Consolidated and the

trading on the Consolidated over time are associated with narrower bid-ask spreads on the NYSE.

        This episode of a sustained, established rivalry with the NYSE suggests that historical

perceptions about the NYSE should be revisited. The large market share obtained by the

Consolidated over a lengthy period of time indicates that the NYSE has not been impervious to

competition. This stands in marked contrast to conventional wisdom (e.g., Doede (1967)) that the

NYSE was historically a natural monopoly. Similarly, a recent history of the NYSE states, “But

for most of the New York Stock Exchange’s existence it has so dominated securities markets that

it can be said to have faced no real competition.” (Blume, Siegel and Rottenberg (1993, p.25).

Such perceived structural features of the NYSE should be reconsidered given the length and

depth of the rivalry from the Consolidated.

        The nature of the competition by the Consolidated also has important lessons for today’s

securities markets. Consistent with modern day competitors, the Consolidated focused its rivalry

on the relatively more liquid listings of the NYSE (, e.g., Easley, Kiefer and O’Hara (1996),

Battalio (1997).) We also find that the NYSE responded to competition by narrowing its bid-ask

spreads. Our estimates indicate that the onset of head-to-head competition was associated with

more than a 10 percent reduction in NYSE bid-ask spreads while bid-ask spreads for our quasi-

control group of stocks on the Boston Stock Exchange did not significantly change. The effect


                                               25
persisted for the duration of the 42-year rivalry between the two exchanges until a series of

scandals and investigations by the New York State Attorney General’s Office led to the demise of

the Consolidated. The results also suggest that the Consolidated may have improved the

efficiency of stock prices by contributing to the price discovery process.

        A more general lesson from the Consolidated rivalry is the resiliency of the NYSE. The

Big Board survived the onslaught of a significant competitor. The reaction to the Consolidated is

but one of the many responses by the NYSE to changing conditions in securities markets over

time. Banner (1998) discusses the early success of the NYSE. Garvy (1944) details how the

NYSE facilitated a merger in the mid-19th century to maintain its competitive position. Jarrell

(1984) describes the rise of institutional investors and the other forces at play in the removal of

fixed brokerage commissions on the NYSE in the mid-1970s. The merger between Archipelago

and the NYSE may prove to be one more example of the Big Board’s resiliency.




                                                26
References

Arnold, Tom, Phillip Hersch, J. Harold Mulherin and Jeffry Netter, 1999, Merging Markets,
        Journal of Finance 54:3, 1083-1107.

Banner, Stuart, 1998, The origin of the New York Stock Exchange, Journal of Legal Studies 27:1,
        113-140.

Barclay, Michael J., Terrence Hendershott and D. Timothy McCormick, 2003, Competition
        among Trading Venues: Information and Trading on Electronic Communication
        Networks, Journal of Finance 58:6, 2637-2665.

Battalio, Robert H., 1997, Third market broker-dealers: cost competitors or cream skimmers?,
        Journal of Finance 52:1, 341-352.

Battalio, Robert H., Jason Greene and Robert Jennings, 1997, Do competing specialists and
        preferencing dealers affect market quality?, Review of Financial Studies10:4, 969-993.

Blume, Marshall E., Jeremy J. Siegel and Dan Rottenberg, 1993, Revolution on Wall Street: The
       rise and decline of the New York Stock Exchange, (New York: W W Norton & Co Inc).

Boehmer, Beatrice and Ekkehart Boehmer, 2003, Trading your neighbor’s ETFs: Competition or
      fragmentation?, Journal of Banking and Finance 27:9, 1667-1703.

Branch, Ben and Walter Freed, 1977, Bid-asked spreads on the AMEX and the big board Journal
        of Finance 32:1, 159-163.

Chowdry, Bhagwan and Vikram Nanda, 1991, Multimarket trading and market liquidity, Review
      of Financial Studies 4:3, 483-511.

Christie, William G. and Paul H. Schultz, 1994, Why do NASDAQ Market Makers Avoid Odd-
        Eighth Quotes?, Journal of Finance 49:5, 1813-1840.

Consolidated Stock Exchange Annual Report, various years.

Davis, Lance, Larry Neal and Eugene White, 2005, “The Highest Price Ever: The Great NYSE
        Seat Sale of 1928-1929 and Capacity Constraint, Working Paper Rutgers University.

Demsetz, Harold 1968, The cost of transacting, Quarterly Journal of Economics 82:1, 33-53.

Doede, Robert William, 1967, The monopoly power of the New York Stock Exchange,
       Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.

Easley, David, Nicholas M. Kiefer and Maureen O’Hara, 1996, Cream-Skimming or Profit-
        Sharing? The Curious Case of Purchased Order Flow, Journal of Finance 51:3, 811-833.

Easley, David, Nicholas M. Kiefer, Maureen O’Hara and Joseph B. Paperman, 1996, Liquidity,
        Information, and Infrequently Traded Stocks, Journal of Finance 51:4, 1405-1436.

Farrell, Maurice L., 1972, The Dow Jones Averages, 1885-1970 (New York: Dow Jones Books).



                                               27
Garbade, Kenneth D. and William L. Silber, 1978, Technology, communication and the
       performance of financial markets: 1840-1975, Journal of Finance 33:3, 819-832.

Garvy, George, 1944, Rivals and Interlopers in the History of the New York Security Market,
       Journal of Political Economy 52:2, 128-143.

Hamilton, James L., 1976, Competition, scale economies, and transaction cost in the stock
       market, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 11:5, 779-802.

Hamilton, James L., 1978, Marketplace organization and marketability: NASDAQ, the stock
       exchange, and the national market system, Journal of Finance 33:2, 487-503.

Hamilton, James L., 1979, Marketplace fragmentation, competition, and the efficiency of the
       stock exchange, 34:1 Journal of Finance 34:1, 171-187.

Hamilton, James L., 1987, Off-Board trading of NYSE-listed stocks: the effects of deregulation
       and the national market system, Journal of Finance 42:5, 1331- 1345.

Hasan, Iftekhar and Markku Malkamaki, 2001, Are expansions cost effective for stock
        exchanges? A global perspective, Journal of Banking and Finance 25:12, 2339-2366.

Jarrell, Gregg A., 1984, Change at the exchange: The causes and effects of deregulation, Journal
         of Law & Economics 27:3, 273-312.

Macey, Jonathan R. and Maureen O’Hara, 1999, Regulating Exchanges and Alternative Trading
       Systems: A Law and Economics Perspective, Journal of Legal Studies 28:1, 17-54.

Michie, Ranald C., 1986, The London and New York stock exchanges, 1850-1914, Journal of
        Economic History 46:1, 171-187

Mulherin, J. Harold, Jeffry M. Netter and James A. Overdahl, 1991, Prices are property: the
       organization of financial exchanges from a transaction cost perspective, Journal of Law
       and Economics 34:2, 591-644.

Nelson, Samuel A., 1907, The Consolidated Stock Exchange of New York: Its history,
        organization, machinery, and methods. Reprinted in Wall Street and the Security
        Markets, Vincent Carooso and Robert Sobel (eds.), (New York: Arno Press, 1975).

Ott, Julia, 2004, The “Free and Open” “People’s Market”: Public Relations at the New York
         Stock Exchange, 1913-1929. Business and Economic History 2, 1-43.

Pirrong, Craig, 2001, Third markets and the second best, Working Paper, University of Houston.

Ramos, Sofia B., 2003, Competition between Stock Exchanges: A Survey, working paper, HEC-
       University of Lausanne.

Rust, John and George Hall, 2003, Middlemen versus market makers: a theory of competitive
        exchange, Journal of Political Economy 111:2, 352-403.

Silber, William, 2005, What happened to liquidity when World War I shut the NYSE? Journal of
        Financial Economics 78:3, 685-701.


                                               28
Sobel, Robert, 1972, AMEX: A history of the American Stock Exchange 1921-1971 (New York:
        Weybright and Talley).

Stigler, George J., 1961, The Economics of Information, Journal of Political Economy 69:3, 213-
         225.

Stigler, George J., 1964, Public Regulation of the Securities Markets, Journal of Business 37:2,
         117-142.

Tinic, Seha M., 1972, The economics of liquidity services, Quarterly Journal of Economics 86:1,
        79-93.

Tinic, Seha M. and Richard R. West, 1972, Competition and the pricing of dealer service in the
        over-the-counter stock market, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 7:3, 1707-
        1727.

Wahal, Sunil, 1997, Entry, exit, market makers, and the bid-ask spread, Review of Financial
       Studies 10:3, 871-901.

Washington Notes, 1914, Journal of Political Economy 22:8, 791-797.




                                                29
Data Appendix

        In this Appendix, we describe the sources for and the availability of the main variables in

our analysis: Aggregate New York Stock Exchange trading volume, aggregate Consolidated Stock

Exchange trading volume, average New York Stock Exchange bid-ask spreads, as well as firm-

specific data on NYSE bid-ask spreads, NYSE volume, and the volume on the Consolidated Stock

Exchange of NYSE listings.



Aggregate New York Stock Exchange Trading Volume

        Aggregate trading volume for the New York Stock Exchange comes from two sources, the

New York Times and the website of the NYSE. For the years 1875 through 1887, the data are hand

collected on a daily basis from the New York Times. For 1888 to 1926, the data are taken from the

website of the NYSE. The data for 1926 are for January and February only. The only interruption in

the data is the period from July 31, 1914, through December 11, 1914, when the NYSE closed

during World War 1.



Aggregate Consolidated Stock Exchange Trading Volume

        Data on aggregate trading volume for the Consolidated Stock Exchange are hand collected

from the New York Times. The data begin on February 17, 1885, when the New York Times

separately reports NYSE-listed stocks within the volume for the New York Mining Exchange. As of

Monday March 9, 1885, the New York Times reports the sales of NYSE-listed stocks under the

name of the Consolidated Petroleum Exchange Board. For a brief time in 1886, the New York Times

does not report the trading of NYSE-listed stocks on the Consolidated Exchange. The lapse in

reporting occurs between April 15, 1886 and September 4, 1886. The last day the New York Times

reports trading volume for the Consolidated Stock Exchange is February 16, 1926.



Average New York Stock Exchange Bid-Ask Spreads


                                               30
          Bid-ask spread data for the New York Stock Exchange are taken primarily from the New

York Times. The Commercial and Financial Chronicle serves as a secondary source for certain

years when the New York Times did not report bid-ask spreads.

          Our analysis of NYSE bid-ask spreads reports average estimates for a single day for the

years 1875 to 1926. The date chosen for analysis tended to be at the end of January or the beginning

of February of a given year, although there were some exceptions based on data availability.

Appendix Table A sketches the dates and sources for this data. For 1875 to 1881, the New York

Times reports bid-ask spreads for Saturday trading on the following Monday. These data on spreads

are matched with the data for Saturday trading volume that is reported in the Sunday New York

Times.

          Beginning on May 24, 1882, the New York Times reports NYSE bid-ask spreads on a

daily basis. The data on daily bid-ask spreads continue through April 14, 1886. Between April 15,

1886, and May 12, 1893, the New York Times does not report bid-ask spreads for the NYSE. In this

time interval, we gather bid-ask spread data from the Commercial and Financial Chronicle. The

bid-ask spread data are reported for Thursday trading and are matched with the appropriate trading

volume data from the New York Times.

         On May 13, 1893, the New York Times resumes reporting of NYSE bid-ask spreads

on a daily basis. These data are used through February 1926.


Firm-Specific Data

         We also employ firm specific data on NYSE bid-ask spreads, NYSE volume, and the

volume of NYSE-listings on the Consolidated Stock Exchange. The data are taken from the

New York Times.




                                                31
Appendix Table A. Overview of Average Bid-Ask Spread Data
Year   Calendar Date           Day of Week            Data Source
1875   January 23              Saturday               New York Times
1876   January 22              Saturday               New York Times
1877   January 27              Saturday               New York Times
1878   January 26              Saturday               New York Times
1879   February l              Saturday               New York Times
1880   February 2              Saturday               New York Times
1881   January 29              Saturday               New York Times
1882 May 26                    Friday                 New York Times
1883 January 26                Friday                 New York Times
1884 January 18                Friday                 New York Times
1885   March 31                Tuesday                New York Times
1886   January 29              Friday                 New York Times
1887   February 3              Thursday               Commercial and Financial Chronicle
1888   February 2              Thursday               Commercial and Financial Chronicle
1889   February 14             Thursday               Commercial and Financial Chronicle
1890   February 13             Thursday               Commercial and Financial Chronicle
1891   February 19             Thursday               Commercial and Financial Chronicle
1892   February 18             Thursday               Commercial and Financial Chronicle
1893   June 30                 Thursday               New York Times
1894   January 31              Wednesday              New York Times
1895   January 31              Thursday               New York Times
1896   January 31              Friday                 New York Times
1897   January 29              Friday                 New York Times
1898   January 31              Monday                 New York Times
1899   January 31              Tuesday                New York Times
1900   January 31              Wednesday              New York Times
1901   January 31              Thursday               New York Times
1902   January 31              Friday                 New York Times
1903   January 30              Friday                 New York Times
1904   January 29              Friday                 New York Times
1905   January 31              Tuesday                New York Times
1906   January 31              Wednesday              New York Times
1907   January 31              Thursday               New York Times
1908   January 31              Friday                 New York Times
1909   January 29              Friday                 New York Times
1910   January 31              Monday                 New York Times
1911 January 31                Tuesday                New York Times
1912 January 31                Wednesday              New York Times
1913   January 31              Friday                 New York Times
1914   January 30              Friday                 New York Times
1915   January 29              Friday                 New York Times
1916   January 31              Monday                 New York Times
1917 January 31                Wednesday              New York Times
1918 January 31                Thursday               New York Times
1919   January 31              Friday                 New York Times
1920   January 30              Friday                 New York Times
1921   January 31              Monday                 New York Times
1922   January 31              Tuesday                New York Times
1923   January 31              Wednesday              New York Times


                                           32
1924   January 31   Thursday        New York Times
1925   January 30   Friday          New York Times
1926   January 29   Friday          New York Times




                               33
Appendix of News Articles

This Appendix provides background from news articles on the New York Stock Exchange, the
Consolidated Stock Exchange, and the rivalry between the two exchanges. The news articles
are presented in chronological order.


"The Stock Brokers Latest Trouble," New York Times, December 11, 1877.

The recently established "bucket-shops," or blackboard exchanges, where stock gambling on
margins from ½ percent upward and in sums as low as $5 is allowed, have increased so rapidly
and have been doing so large a business as to cause great annoyance to the smaller class of
brokers from the New York Stock Exchange, who naturally suspect them of drawing away a
goodly portion of their legitimate customers.


"War Against the Bucket Shops," New York Times, September 3, 1884.

Members of the Stock Exchange propose to institute an organized warfare against the "bucket
shops," which are alleged to thrive only because of their ability to get prompt stock quotations
from the Exchange board room... Efforts will be made to protect members of the Exchange by
preventing the news of the board room from falling into the hands of persons who are not
members of the Exchange.


"The Exchanges at Odds," New York Times, January 21, 1885.

The action of the Mining Stock and National Petroleum Exchange in requesting its Governing
Committee to amend the constitution so that securities listed in the Stock Exchange may be dealt
in has caused much comment. About 230 members of the Stock Exchange are members of the
Mining Board. The by-laws of the Stock Exchange prohibit members of that organization from
belonging to any other New-York Exchange in which stocks and bonds (except unlisted
securities) are dealt in.


"A Rival to the Stock Exchange," New York Times, February 14, 1885.

The announcement by the President of the New-York Mining Stock and National Petroleum
Exchange yesterday that hereafter all securities listed on the Stock Exchange would be dealt in by
members of the first-named Exchange were greeted by mingled applause and groans.... Some of
the members of the Stock Exchange were very indignant at what they were pleased to call "a
breach of faith" on the part of the Mining Board. The fact was recalled that two to three years ago
an official letter was sent to the Stock Exchange from the Mining Board that under no
circumstances would listed securities be traded in that last-named Exchange and inviting Stock
Exchange men to join the newer body.

"Stock Exchange Rivalry," New York Times, February 15, 1885.

A petition was circulated in the board room of the Stock Exchange yesterday asking the
Governing Committee to set apart that portion of the floor now used for loan transactions for the
purpose of trading in fractional lots of listed stocks, oil certificates, and miscellaneous securities.


                                                  34
That proposition is made in retaliation for the action of the Mining Board in undertaking to deal
in securities which are on the stock Exchange list


"Competition in Tickers," New York Times, March 11, 1885.

Including the Commercial Telegram Company, there are now three companies organized in this
city to distribute stock and other quotations. The Gold and Stock Company has about 1,600
instruments in New York alone which are used exclusively for stock quotations.


"A Broker to be Tried for Violating a Stock Exchange Rule," New York Times, March 11, 1887.

James G. Hamilton, a member of the Stock Exchange since 1879, will be put on trial by the
Governing Committee Thursday of next week for violating a rule which the Governing
Committee is anxious to see rigidly enforced. For the express purpose of preventing what it is
alleged Mr. Hamilton has done, the Governing Committee, March 24 of last year, adopted the
following resolutions: That the members of this Exchange be forbidden to have direct or indirect
telegraphic or telephonic communication with the Consolidated Stock and Petroleum Exchange
and that the Committee of Arrangements be directed to enforce this rule.


"Quotations Public Property," New York Times, May 8, 1887.

There was jubilee on the Consolidated Stock and Petroleum Exchange yesterday, news arriving
that Judge Dykeman, at White Plains, had decided the long-fought battle over tickers and
quotations in favor of the Consolidated Exchange and against the Stock Exchange... The Stock
Exchange sought to keep a ticker company from supplying the stock market quotations to the
Consolidated Exchange; the latter institution, fighting for its very life, obtained an injunction
forbidding the ticker company's cessation of service and forbidding the Stock Exchange's
interference.


"Broker Morris Suspended," New York Times, May 24, 1888.

The report of the special committee of the Governing Committee of the Stock Exchange in the
case of Walter S. Morris was submitted yesterday. It dealt elaborately with the testimony on the
charges that Morris violated his obligations as a member of the Stock Exchange by having
business relations with a member or members of the Consolidated Exchange... The report
sustained the charges and with its adoption the Governing Committee voted to suspend Morris
from the Exchange for one year.

"Stock Exchange Hits Little Board," New York Times, May 21, 1909.

The Stock Exchange authorities made public yesterday resolutions which will cut off its members
from all business relations with Consolidated Stock Exchange houses... For twenty years the Stock
Exchange has prohibited direct communications between the two exchanges or their members, and
perhaps the most active efforts of the successive governing bodies of the Stock Exchange since that
date have been directed toward the enforcement of this rule, but there has never before been
anything in the Stock Exchange constitution to prevent ordinary business relations between houses
of the two exchanges.


                                                35
“No Unlisted Stocks After Next April,” New York Times, July 22, 1909.

The unlisted Department of the New York Stock Exchange, which has been the refuge for many
companies showing a diffidence about publishing annual statements of their financial condition,
was abolished yesterday by an announcement issued by the Stock Exchange authorities to take
effect on April 1, 1910.


“Big Exchange wins Little Board Suit,” New York Times, September 5, 1909.

The New York Stock Exchange won a victory yesterday in its fight with the Consolidated
Exchange when Supreme Court Justice Crane of Brooklyn refused to restrain the big board
from enforcing its rule forbidding its members to deal with members of the other Exchange,
on pain of suspension or expulsion.


"Asks Little Board to Open Earlier," New York Times, June 19, 1912.

The new administration of the Consolidated Stock Exchange, which went into office last month, has
“thrown its hat into the ring” in Wall Street, and, according to a circular letter sent to members by
President M.E. de Aguero, they ought to start right in expanding. The first proposal ...is to begin
business at 9:30 A.M. instead of 10 o’clock. … “It will demonstrate beyond question that we are
not dependent on Stock Exchange quotations as we will have a primary market for half an hour
daily.


"Little Board Calls Stocks," New York Times, July 19, 1912

For the first time in recent years, the system of “calling” stocks for trading was used yesterday when
the Consolidated Stock Exchange opened for trading at 9:30 instead of 10 o’clock … Only the
most active stocks on the list, some seventeen issues, are included in the call.


"Signs Exchange Bills," New York Times, May 13, 1913

Three Stock Exchange Bills were signed by Gov. Sulzer today. … The third prohibits the New
York Stock Exchange from discriminating against members of other Exchanges. This last bill was
asked for by the New York Consolidated Exchange.


"Exchanges on Good Terms," New York Times, June 26, 1913.

The Board of Governors of the New York Stock Exchange, at their last meeting yesterday before
the Summer recess, rescinded those sections of the constitution of the Exchange which forbade
members to have any dealings with the Consolidated Stock Exchange. This is in accord with the
law past by the Legislature early last month ….


"Asks State Inquiry Into Bucket Charge,” New York Times, April 28, 1923.


                                                 36
Henry W. Sykes, a lawyer, who said he was acting for a group of lawyers interested in many recent
failures of brokerage firms, yesterday sent a letter to Attorney General Carl Sherman requesting a
conference with him with a view to impressing him with the need for an immediate investigation of
allegations that the Consolidated Stock Exchange was the headquarters of bucket shop operations.


"State Opens War on Stock Frauds; Closes 10 Concerns,” New York Times, June 9, 1923.

The State of New York stepped into the bucket shop situation yesterday. Attorney General Carl
Sherman said he would wipe out as many of the financial highway man as were on his blacklist and
then go after others. … Mr. Sherman announced his intention to take part in investigations now
being carried out by the Curb and Consolidated Exchange into the business methods of some of
their members.


"May Cut Off Ticker Service," New York Times, June 16, 1923.

The Law Committee of the New York Stock Exchange is discussing ways and means of
discontinuing its ticker service which furnishes the Consolidated Exchange with the quotations
established on the floor of the "big board".... The question of supplying the Consolidated with the
ticker service as is supplied to its members and other brokerage firms has been a bone of contention
between the two organizations for more than thirty years. About thirty years ago the Stock
Exchange authorities attempted to remove the tickers from the floor of the Consolidated, which
protested and took the matter to court. A permanent injunction was granted prohibiting the Stock
Exchange from cutting off the ticker service. This injunction has been in force ever since although
several attempts have been made to have it vacated... While opinion is virtually unanimous in Stock
Exchange circles that the Consolidated would not survive if the Stock Exchange removed the
tickers many members favor immediate discontinuance because of the recent sensational
developments and bucket shop failures.


"Silkworth Resigns from Consolidated and Sells His Seat," New York Times, June 26, 1923.

William S. Silkworth, President of the Consolidated Stock Exchange, yesterday resigned to take
effect today... The resignation of Mr. Silkworth and the severing of his connection with the
Consolidated Stock Exchange of New York marks another milestone in the long series of
disagreements between members of the Exchange and its officials, which have developed in the
investigation of member brokers of that organization, a large number of whom have been thrown
into bankruptcy.


"To Start Trading in 80 Mining Stocks," New York Times, June 1, 1925.

The Consolidated Stock Exchange of New York will start trading today the shares of eighty
mining companies which have been admitted to the Exchange’s list.


"U.S. Inquiry Begun into Tax Dodging by Stock Brokers," New York Times, June 27, 1925.




                                                37
The Internal Revenue Bureau of the Treasury Department has launched a searching investigation,
it was learned yesterday, to determine whether the Federal Government has lost hundreds of
thousands of dollars in the last two years from the failure of some members of the Consolidated
Stock Exchange to place tax stamps on stock transfers as required by law.


"Plans to Reform Exchange Trading," New York Times, December 31, 1925.

Following postponement yesterday of State Attorney General Albert Ottinger's investigation
under the Martin Act of stock brokerage houses in this city, Assistant Attorney General Keyes
Winter, in charge of the inquiry before Supreme Court Justice John Ford, declared his purpose
not to "abolish" the Consolidated Stock Exchange, but to place upon that organization "such
restriction as would prevent its facilities from being used for improper and illegal purposes."


“May Extend Inquiry into Stock Loans,” New York Times, January 7, 1926.

In the course of inquiry into certain alleged practices of members of the Consolidated Stock
Exchange yesterday, Supreme Court Justice Ford interrupted the testimony to ask Deputy
Attorney General Keyes Winter why similar action was not being taken in the case of the
members of the New York Stock Exchange. Mr. Winter replied that … “if information indicating
irregularities among members of the New York Stock Exchange is brought out at the present
hearings, the inquiry will be broadened to take in the big exchange.”
Mr. Winter’s statement followed a declaration by Justice Ford that he could see no difference
“between the big exchange and the little one” except that the former had a “better financial
standing and a greater prestige.”


"Injunction Curbs the Consolidated's Trading Practices," New York Times, February 5, 1926.

On application of Attorney General Albert Ottinger, Supreme Court Justice John Ford granted
yesterday a temporary injunction to refrain the Consolidated Stock Exchange from continuing
certain practices alleged by the Attorney General to be illegal.


“Consolidated May Consent to Close: New Group at Helm” New York Times, February 11, 1926.

With a court hearing, in which it will be decided by Supreme Court Justice John Ford whether a
receiver shall take charge of the affairs of the Consolidated Stock Exchange impending a group of
five members literally seized control off the Exchange yesterday. … This action followed the
resignation of Thomas B. Maloney, President of the Exchange, to take place Feb, 15, and the
withdrawal from the case of former Governor Charles S. Whitman.


“Consolidated Asks to Close Exchange,” New York Times, March 19, 1926.

A majority of the members of the Consolidated Stock Exchange have signed a petition circulated
on the floor of the Exchange, for dissolution, and it is now expected that this will take place
voluntarily within the next few days. There are 108 signatures to the petition, a clear majority of
the members in good standing.



                                                38
“Consolidated Aims at State Control,” New York Times, March 24, 1926.

Complete details of a plan for reorganization of the Consolidated Stock Exchange … were made
public yesterday …. The plan contains nineteen provisions that would regulate the Exchange in a
drastic manner...


“Consolidated Tries New Trading Rules,” New York Times, March 31, 1926.

… No Figures were available as to the volume of trading. Several members reported that very
little trading was done, because it was virtually impossible to for a floor trader to transact
business under the drastic stipulations.


“Consolidated Stock Exchange Home Sold, $10,000,000 Skyscraper to Displace It,” New York
Times, June 23, 1926.

A.E. Lefcourt has purchased the property of the Consolidated Stock Exchange at Broad and
Beaver Streets for $1,400,000 …President Phillip Evans of the Consolidated is understood to be
planning to take quarters for that institution in the new building.


“Denies Exchange is Out of Business,” New York Times, September 1, 1926.

The statement by Special Deputy Attorney General Keyes Winter, in charge of the State Bureau
for the Prevention of Fraud, that Attorney General Albert Ottinger has “put out of business that
notorious gambling shop, the Consolidated Stock Exchange,” was challenged by Phillip Evans,
President of the exchange, who denied that it was out of business, and cited and cited the fact that
new quarters had been engaged at 14-16 Pearl Street.


"Want Tickers out of Consolidated," New York Times, September 26, 1926.

The Consolidated Stock Exchange, sadly weakened in strength as the result of action by the State
Attorney General, is now in danger of losing its stock tickers, it was learned yesterday. .. The
latest blow was in the form of a message from the New York Stock Exchange to the Western
Union Telegraph Company announcing it no longer approved of the sending of Stock Exchange
quotations on the ticker to the Consolidated.


“Trading Resumed by Consolidated,” New York Times, February 3, 1927.

After several months of inactivity the Consolidated Stock Exchange has resumed business on a
limited scale. Four or Five floor traders and as many commission houses are doing business. The
volume of transactions, while small, is slowly increasing, it was said at the Exchange’s executive
offices. The three tickers which the New York Stock Exchange and Western Union Telegraph
Company are seeking by judicial proceedings to have removed from the headquarters of the
Consolidated at 14-16 Pearl Street are being used.




                                                39
"Consolidated Finds It Gave up Tickers," New York Times, February 25, 1927.

Philip Evans has resigned as President of the Consolidated Stock Exchange after a stormy
administration following the discovery that this institution, through a strange error, had been
operating thirty-five years on the mistaken assumption that it was protected by a court decree in
the use of its most essential facilities - the tickers of the New York Stock Exchange. The
Consolidated learned, while engaged in defending a suit brought by the New York Stock
Exchange to compel the Western Union Telegraph Company to remove the tickers, that a
permanent injunction obtained in 1887, which has been the basis of its resistance in the present
litigation, was vacated in 1891 by an agreement between the attorneys for the Consolidated and the
New York Stock Exchange... The immediate effect is to deal a severe blow to the Consolidated's
case, probably to force the dissolution of the Exchange and to write the final chapter in a series of
law suits between the "big" and "little" exchanges extending over a period of forty years.




                                                 40
   Figure 1: Absolute Bid-Ask Spreads on the NYSE and Regional Exchanges around the
            Initiation of Consolidated Trading (January 11, 1883 - April 9, 1886)


This figure reports the reported absolute bid-ask spreads for all securities on the New York Stock
Exchange and the universe of stocks trading on a selected set of the leading regional exchanges
(Baltimore, Boston, and Philadelphia) for the period from 1875 to 1884. Absolute bid-ask spread
is the closing bid-ask spread for a given day. Data are taken from the New York Times.
________________________________________________________________________




                                                                                                                                                            Regionals                                NYSE
 4.5




                                                                                                                                                                                           Consolidated Begins Trading
                                                                                                                                                                                             NYSE Listed Securities


   3




 1.5




   0
       18840111
                  18840208
                             18840307
                                        18840404
                                                   18840502
                                                              18840529
                                                                         18840627
                                                                                    18840725
                                                                                               18840822
                                                                                                          18840919
                                                                                                                     18841017
                                                                                                                                18841114
                                                                                                                                           18841212
                                                                                                                                                      18850109
                                                                                                                                                                 18850206
                                                                                                                                                                            18850306
                                                                                                                                                                                       18850403
                                                                                                                                                                                                  18850501
                                                                                                                                                                                                             18850529
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        18850626
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   18850724
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              18850821
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         18850918
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    18851016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               18851113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          18851211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     18860108
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                18860205
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           18860305
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      18860402




________________________________________________________________________




                                                                                                                                                                 41
Table 1. NYSE Trading Volume: 1875 to 1884.

This table reports data on trading volume (shares of common stock) on the New York Stock
Exchange for the period from 1875 to 1884. Data are taken from the New York Times.
________________________________________________________________________

Year           Annual Total            Daily Average          # Trading Days

1875           52,784,010               173,632                       304

1876           39,893,720               131,229                       304

1877           49,423,658               162,045                       305

1878           39,863,540               131,130                       304

1879           73,545,245               241,925                       304

1880           94,825,866               309,888                       306

1881           112,549,315              371,450                       303

1882           112,860,374              373,710                       302

1883           95,482,244               316,166                       302

1884         95,391,386           312,759                  305
________________________________________________________________________




                                             42
Table 2. NYSE Bid-Ask Spreads: 1875 to 1884.

This table reports data on bid-ask spreads on the New York Stock Exchange for 1875 to 1884. One day from each year is sampled. See the Data Appendix for the
specific dates. Spread is the median closing bid-ask spread for a given date. Relative is the closing bid-ask spread in percentage terms [(ask-bid)/((ask+bid)/2)].
Most heavily traded stock is the firm with the greatest number of shares traded on a given date. Data are from the New York Times.
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

                  All firms with quotes                        Firms with quotes and volume

Year              # obs    Spread Relative                     # obs    Spread            Relative                   Most heavily traded stock            Spread

1875              26       0.25     0.40%                      26       0.25              0.40%                      Western Union                        0.125

1876              32       0.25     0.47%                      26       0.1875            0.39%                      Lake Shore                           0.125

1877              32       0.50     0.94%                      20       0.25              0.72%                      Lake Shore                           0.125

1878              37       0.50     1.03%                      20       0.25              0.64%                      Lake Shore                           0.125

1879              37       0.50     0.64%                      28       0.25              0.59%                      Delaware Lackawanna                  0.125

1880              80       0.50     0.66%                      64       0.4375            0.66%                      New York Lake Erie                   0.125

1881              85       0.25     0.75%                      73       0.25              0.51%                      Ontario and Western                  0.125

1882              102      0.75     1.39%                      60       0.25              0.72%                      Wabash preferred                     0.125

1883              100      0.50     1.20%                      64       0.25              0.48%                      Union Pacific                        0.125

1884         112    0.75  2.33%               66    0.25         0.77%               Western Union                                                        0.125
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________                                                     __




                                                                                43
Table 3. NYSE and Consolidated Trading Volume, 1885 to 1926.

 Year       NYSE Volume      Consolidated Volume     NYSE + Consolidated       Consolidated/NYSE
 1885        82,396,922          7,179,424              89,576,346                  8.71%
 1886       100,152,905         19,933,994             120,086,899                 19.90%
 1887        83,412,220         33,322,181             116,734,401                 39.95%
 1888        62,864,152         28,589,377              91,453,529                 45.48%
 1889        61,939,633         27,907,618              89,847,251                 45.06%
 1890        58,221,462         29,514,779              87,736,241                 50.69%
 1891        64,422,981         27,398,721              91,821,702                 42.53%
 1892        80,424,189         33,309,819             113,734,007                 41.42%
 1893        68,203,618         27,667,558              95,871,176                 40.57%
 1894        33,052,099         20,123,341              53,175,440                 60.88%
 1895        51,897,895         17,790,338              69,688,233                 34.28%
 1896        41,655,649         15,224,526              56,880,175                 36.55%
 1897        63,636,575         18,588,519              82,225,094                 29.21%
 1898        86,188,403         21,593,599             107,782,002                 25.05%
 1899       120,731,589         34,287,305             155,018,894                 28.40%
 1900       102,194,172         32,339,253             134,533,425                 31.64%
 1901       221,808,064         50,560,361             272,368,425                 22.79%
 1902       162,930,210         38,186,239             201,116,448                 23.44%
 1903       137,717,237         37,886,155             175,603,392                 27.51%
 1904       157,582,668         44,305,509             201,888,177                 28.12%
 1905       211,502,002         46,967,181             258,469,183                 22.21%
 1906       221,739,160         42,579,119             264,318,278                 19.20%
 1907       156,874,644         44,557,893             201,432,537                 28.40%
 1908       165,221,723         39,274,667             204,496,390                 23.77%
 1909       197,818,514         30,056,626             227,875,139                 15.19%
 1910       161,436,368         27,609,700             189,046,068                 17.10%
 1911       125,006,647         18,892,837             143,899,484                 15.11%
 1912       132,689,097         14,712,271             147,401,368                 11.09%
 1913        82,949,155         12,172,827              95,121,982                 14.68%
 1914*       47,421,197         5,970,339               53,391,536                 12.59%
 1915       172,496,804         12,353,951             184,850,755                  7.16%
 1916       232,633,124         20,018,974             252,652,098                  8.61%
 1917       184,767,325         20,306,104             205,073,428                 10.99%
 1918       142,392,667         11,298,003             153,690,671                  7.93%
 1919       315,181,380         28,669,666             343,851,046                  9.10%
 1920       228,049,127         27,267,772             255,316,899                 11.96%
 1921       172,922,936         44,728,185             217,651,121                 25.87%
 1922       260,276,700         48,665,596             308,942,296                 18.70%
 1923       236,132,478         26,790,253             262,922,731                 11.35%
 1924       283,592,481         21,088,295             304,680,776                  7.44%
 1925       463,924,822         20,003,142             483,927,964                  4.31%
 1926**      61,636,700            783,494              62,420,194                  1.27%

 mean       145,192,802          26,916,083             172,108,886                23.48%
 median     135,203,167          27,504,210             154,354,782                22.50%
 maximum    463,924,822          50,560,361             483,927,964                60.88%
 minimum      33,052,099            783,494              53,175,440                  1.27%

* markets closed from August until mid-December ** January and February only
Source: NYSE and New York Times




                                                44
Table 4. Comparison of the Number of Stocks Traded on the NYSE and Consolidated: 1885 to 1926

This table reports the number of NYSE-listed stocks traded on the NYSE and the Consolidated Exchange for 1885 to 1926. One day
from each year is sampled. See the Data Appendix for specific dates and data sources. All NYSE is the number of NYSE listings on a
given date with reported bid-ask quotes. NYSE with Volume is the number of NYSE listings on a given date with quotes and positive
trading volume on the NYSE. Consolidated with Volume is the number of NYSE listings with volume on the Consolidated Exchange.
______________________________________________________________________________________

          All  NYSE with                   Consolidated                     Consolidated as percent of
Year      NYSE Volume                      With Volume                      All NYSE         NYSE with Volume

1885      114        55                    18                               16%                   33%
1886      117        72                    24                               21%                   33%
1887      98         72                    33                               34%                   46%
1888      127        78                    39                               31%                   50%
1889      130        96                    41                               32%                   43%
1890      160        80                    30                               19%                   38%
1891      140        59                    21                               15%                   36%
1892      146        99                    55                               38%                   56%
1893      145        82                    39                               27%                   48%
1894      149        78                    25                               17%                   32%
1895      144        79                    24                               17%                   30%
1896      167        90                    29                               17%                   32%
1897      168        77                    20                               12%                   26%
1898      195        136                   34                               17%                   27%
1899      209        155                   38                               18%                   25%
1900      221        151                   40                               18%                   26%
1901      229        158                   44                               19%                   28%
1902      223        134                   37                               17%                   28%
1903      254        121                   49                               19%                   40%
1904      255        128                   53                               21%                   41%
1905      255        176                   48                               19%                   27%
1906      265        161                   49                               18%                   30%
1907      277        151                   35                               13%                   23%
1908      269        111                   35                               13%                   32%
1909      263        149                   61                               23%                   41%
1910      270        139                   53                               20%                   38%
1911      280        153                   51                               18%                   33%
1912      289        155                   50                               17%                   32%
1913      333        147                   44                               13%                   30%
1914      311        160                   51                               16%                   32%
1915      254        138                   51                               20%                   37%
1916      347        214                   76                               22%                   36%
1917      399        227                   63                               16%                   28%
1918      397        220                   73                               18%                   33%
1919      412        189                   65                               16%                   34%
1920      488        247                   88                               18%                   36%
1921      548        273                   145                              26%                   53%
1922      584        329                   198                              34%                   60%
1923      669        406                   201                              30%                   50%
1924      741        441                   208                              28%                   47%
1925      773        507                   276                              36%                   54%
1926      863        565                   127                              15%                   22%

                                    Median        18%            33%
______________________________________________________________________________________



                                                               45
Table 5. NYSE Bid-Ask Spreads: 1885 to 1926.

This table reports median bid-ask spreads for the NYSE for the 1885 to 1926 period. One day from each year is sampled. See the Data
Appendix for specific dates and sources. All NYSE with Quotes is the spread for all NYSE listings with quotes on a given date.
Volume, not Consolidated is the spread for NYSE listings with volume on the NYSE but not on the Consolidated Exchange. Volume,
also Consolidated is the spread for NYSE listings with volume on both the NYSE and the Consolidated Exchange.
______________________________________________________________________________________
       All NYSE with Quotes         Volume, not Consolidated     Volume, also Consolidate
Year   # obs Spread Relative        # obs Spread Relative        # obs Spread Relative

1885      114        1.00       3.93%                 37         0.75       2.93%                 18         0.125      0.30%
1886      117        0.75       2.17%                 48         0.50       1.39%                 24         0.125      0.46%
1887      98         0.75       1.43%                 39         0.75       1.40%                 33         0.25       0.46%
1888      127        0.875      1.90%                 39         0.75       1.76%                 39         0.375      1.09%
1889      130        0.625      1.58%                 55         0.75       1.85%                 41         0.25       0.51%
1890      160        1.00       2.67%                 50         1.00       2.57%                 30         0.25       0.61%
1891      140        1.00       2.63%                 38         0.75       1.73%                 21         0.25       0.60%
1892      146        0.75       1.60%                 44         0.813      1.60%                 55         0.375      0.65%
1893      145        1.50       4.44%                 43         1.00       3.05%                 39         0.375      0.89%
1894      149        1.00       3.60%                 53         0.50       2.14%                 25         0.25       0.72%
1895      144        0.938      3.26%                 55         0.50       2.30%                 24         0.25       0.65%
1896      167        1.00       3.21%                 61         0.625      2.11%                 29         0.25       0.48%
1897      168        1.00       3.64%                 57         0.50       1.94%                 20         0.25       0.46%
1898      195        0.50       2.30%                 92         0.50       1.60%                 34         0.188      0.41%
1899      209        0.50       1.35%                 117        0.50       1.31%                 38         0.25       0.39%
1900      221        0.75       1.68%                 111        0.50       1.38%                 40         0.25       0.46%
1901      229        0.50       1.26%                 114        0.50       0.93%                 44         0.125      0.34%
1902      223        0.75       1.28%                 97         0.50       0.80%                 37         0.125      0.32%
1903      254        1.00       1.75%                 72         0.50       1.18%                 49         .025       0.35%
1904      255        1.00       2.74%                 75         0.75       1.63%                 53         0.25       0.56%
1905      255        0.75       1.46%                 128        0.50       1.26%                 48         0.125      0.29%
1906      265        0.75       1.32%                 112        0.50       0.73%                 49         0.125      0.28%
1907      277        1.00       2.22%                 116        0.75       1.38%                 35         0.125      0.32%
1908      269        1.50       4.38%                 76         1.00       2.16%                 35         0.125      0.50%
1909      263        0.875      1.80%                 88         0.50       1.18%                 61         0.25       0.51%
1910      270        1.00       2.28%                 86         0.75       1.16%                 53         0.375      0.72%
1911      280        0.75       1.53%                 102        0.50       0.71%                 51         0.25       0.41%
1912      289        1.00       2.14%                 105        1.00       1.60%                 50         0.25       0.47%
1913      333        1.25       2.41%                 103        0.75       1.26%                 44         0.25       0.44%
1914      311        1.00       2.00%                 109        0.75       0.92%                 51         0.25       0.47%
1915      254        1.00       2.69%                 87         1.00       2.15%                 51         0.375      0.90%
1916      347        1.00       1.87%                 138        0.75       1.57%                 76         0.25       0.62%
1917      399        1.00       1.94%                 164        1.00       1.63%                 63         0.25       0.55%
1918      397        1.125      2.96%                 147        0.75       2.02%                 73         0.25       0.57%
1919      412        1.00       2.67%                 124        0.75       1.47%                 65         0.375      0.77%
1920      488        1.00       2.02%                 159        0.75       1.33%                 88         0.375      0.67%
1921      548        1.00       3.17%                 128        0.875      1.24%                 145        0.375      1.24%
1922      584        0.875      2.73%                 131        0.875      2.37%                 198        0.375      1.11%
1923      669        0.75       1.89%                 205        0.75       1.60%                 201        0.375      0.90%
1924      741        0.50       1.77%                 233        0.50       1.68%                 208        0.25       0.87%
1925      773        0.625      1.41%                 231        0.625      1.18%                 276        0.25       0.78%
1926      863        0.50       1.23%                 438        0.50       0.96%                 127        0.25       0.60%

Median        1.00    2.08%                0.75   1.60%                 0.25   0.53%
______________________________________________________________________________________




                                                               46
Table 6. Most Heavily Traded Stock: 1885 to 1926.

This table reports the most heavily traded stock on the NYSE and the Consolidated Exchange in the 1885 to 1926 period. One day
from each year is sampled. See the Data Appendix for specific dates. For the most heavily traded stock on a given exchange, the table
also reports the rank in volume on the rival exchange and the bid-ask spread of the stock on the NYSE.
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________


                                                NYSE                                                            NYSE
Year       NYSE                  Rank on Consol Spread                       Consolidated          Rank on NYSE Spread

1885       Delaware Lackawanna              9          0.125                 Chicago Milwaukee                8          0.125
1886       Delaware Lackawanna              3          0.125                 Chicago Milwaukee                2          0.125
1887       Philadelphia & Reading           3          0.125                 Lake Shore                       6          0.25
1888       Chicago Milwaukee                2          0.125                 Philadelphia & Reading           2          0.25
1889       Delaware Lackawanna              1          0.25                  Delaware Lackawanna              1          0.25
1890       American Sugar                   1          0.125                 American Sugar                   1          0.125
1891       Chicago Rock Island              1          0.25                  Chicago Rock Island              1          0.25
1892       Philadelphia & Reading           2          0.125                 NY & New England                 7          0.125
1893       Louisville & Nashville           16         0.25                  Chicago Milwaukee                2          0.125
1894       American Sugar                   1          0.125                 American Sugar                   1          0.125
1895       Chicago Gas                      2          0.125                 Chicago Milwaukee                2          0.125
1896       Philadelphia & Reading           2          0.125                 American Sugar                   2          0.25
1897       Northern Pacific pref            7          0.125                 American Sugar                   2          0.125
1898       Chesapeake & Ohio                23         0.125                 American Sugar                   11         0.125
1899       American Sugar                   1          0.125                 American Sugar                   1          0.125
1900       American Sugar                   1          0.25                  American Sugar                   1          0.25
1901       Southern Pacific                 1          0.125                 Southern Pacific                 1          0.125
1902       Southern Pacific                 4          0.125                 Amalgamated Copper               2          0.25
1903       Erie                             1          0.125                 Erie                             1          0.125
1904       Pennsylvania                     3          0.125                 US Steel pref                    2          0.25
1905       Union Pacific                    3          0.125                 US Steel pref                    6          0.125
1906       Amalgamated Copper               1          0.125                 Amalgamated Copper               1          0.125
1907       Reading                          1          0.125                 Reading                          1          0.125
1908       Reading                          1          0.125                 Reading                          1          0.125
1909       Reading                          2          0.125                 Union Pacific                    3          0.125
1910       Reading                          3          0.125                 US Steel                         2          0.125
1911       US Steel                         1          0.125                 US Steel                         1          0.125
1912       US Steel                         1          0.125                 US Steel                         1          0.125
1913       American Can                     3          0.125                 Reading                          3          0.125
1914       US Steel                         1          0.125                 US Steel                         1          0.125
1915       Reading                          1          0.125                 Reading                          1          0.125
1916       US Steel                         1          0.125                 US Steel                         1          0.125
1917       US Steel                         1          0.125                 US Steel                         1          0.125
1918       US Steel                         1          0.125                 US Steel                         1          0.125
1919       US Steel                         1          0.125                 US Steel                         1          0.125
1920       Baldwin Locomotive               1          0.125                 Baldwin Locomotive               1          0.125
1921       General Asphalt                  2          0.125                 Mexican Petroleum                3          0.50
1922       Studebaker Corp                  2          0.125                 Island Oil & Transport           17         0.25
1923       US Steel                         4          0.125                 California Petroleum             5          0.125
1924       General Motors                   5          0.125                 Studebaker Corp                  3          0.125
1925       Independent Oil & Gas            37         0.25                  Radio Corp of America            9          0.125
1926       Sinclair Oil                     1          0.125                 Sinclair Oil                     1          0.125

              Median         1.5    0.125                               1.5    0.125
______________________________________________________________________________________




                                                                47
Table 7. Summary Statistics of Pre- and Consolidated Period (December 28, 1883 - April 9, 1886)

This table reports the sample statistics for the trading data from the NYSE in the 120 weeks surrounding the initiation of trading of
NYSE listed securities on the Consolidated Stock Exchange. One day, usually Friday, from each week is sampled. Absolute bid-ask
spread is the closing bid-ask spread for a given day. The relative bid-ask spread is the closing bid-ask spread in percentage terms
[(ask-bid)/((ask+bid)/2)]. The individual security volume is the total NYSE volume for the security for a given day. The individual
security closing price is the NYSE closing price for that day. Individual security volatility is the standard deviation of a given
security’s return over the entire sample period. The NYSE total weekly volume is the total volume for all securities for a given day and
the previous five days of trading. A security’s share of total volume is that security’s total NYSE volume for a given day divided by
the total NYSE volume for that day. The concentration ratio is the sum of the volume for the four securities with the highest volume
on a given day divided by the total NYSE volume for that day. The broker’s call rate is the closing weekly call rate for the week for
which other data are taken. The presence of Consolidated trading takes a value of one for all observations in the 60 weeks after
February 17, 1885 and is zero for the observations in the 60 weeks before Feb 17, 1885. There are 7,036 observations for all variables.



                                                                                   Standard
 Variable                                         Mean            Median           Deviation       Minimum         Maximum

                                                                  Full Sample (n = 7,036)
 absolute bid-ask spread                  0.685                        0.375     0.936      0.125                     20.000
 relative bid-ask spread (%)              2.776                        1.067     5.004      0.090                    133.333
 individual security volume               5,251                          600    13,032          5                    171,516
 individual security closing price       52.893                      41.375     40.133      0.250                    150.000
 individual security volatility (%)       7.099                        6.303     4.759      1.282                     24.887
 NYSE total weekly volume             1,990,360                   1,919,794 715,420       714,709                  4,500,137
 security's share of total volume (%)     1.689                        0.192     4.064      0.001                     45.729
 concentration ratio (%)                 55.516                       56.507     9.821     32.723                     80.660
 broker's call rate (%)                   2.040                        2.000     1.086      1.000                      9.500
 Presence of Consolidated trading (%)    53.681                      100.000 49.867         0.000                    100.000

                                                                  Pre-Consolidated Period (n = 3,259)
 absolute bid-ask spread                              0.758           0.375     1.063        0.125        20.000
 relative bid-ask spread (%)                          3.040           1.130     5.246        0.095       133.333
 individual security volume                           5,790             550    14,671            5       171,516
 individual security closing price                   52.876          42.500    39.872        1.000       148.500
 individual security volatility (%)                   7.023           6.126     4.829        1.282        24.887
 NYSE total weekly volume                         1,899,926       1,876,306 556,089       869,380     3,404,115
 security's share of total volume (%)                 1.815           0.183     4.449        0.001       44.899
 concentration ratio (%)                             59.483          58.949     7.655       43.066        80.660
 broker's call rate (%)                               2.098           1.750     1.305        1.000         9.500

                                                                  Consolidated Period (n = 3,777)
 absolute bid-ask spread                              0.622           0.375     0.806        0.125                    10.000
 relative bid-ask spread (%)                          2.548           1.036     4.775        0.090                   100.000
 individual security volume                           4,786             600    11,411             5                  114,230
 individual security closing price                   52.907          40.125    40.362        0.250                   150.000
 individual security volatility (%)                   7.165           6.383     4.689        1.282                    24.887
 NYSE total weekly volume                         2,068,391       1,932,515 820,739       714,709                  4,500,137
 security's share of total volume (%)                 1.579           0.204     3.697        0.001                    45.729
 concentration ratio (%)                             52.093          53.551    10.189       32.723                    72.868
 broker's call rate (%)                               1.990           2.000     0.851        1.000                     5.500




                                                                  48
    Table 8. Summary Statistics of Pre- and Consolidated Period for Companies with and without
                   Consolidated Volume (December 28, 1883 - April 9, 1886)

This table reports the sample statistics for the trading data from the NYSE in the 120 weeks surrounding the initiation of trading of
NYSE listed securities on the Consolidated Stock Exchange. One day, usually Friday, from each week is sampled. Absolute bid-ask
spread is the closing bid-ask spread for a given day. Individual Security Volume (both exchanges) is the sum of the NYSE and
Consolidated volume for the day. All other variables are defined as in Table 7.



                                                                                         Standard
 Variable                                                   Mean            Median       Deviation       Minimum          Maximum

                                                        Full Period, Firms without Consolidated Trading (n = 2,213)
 absolute bid-ask spread                                    1.292       1.000       1.329      0.125         20.000
 relative bid-ask spread (%)                                0.039       0.020       0.060      0.001          1.333
 individual security volume (NYSE)                            436         200         843          5         12,710
 individual security closing price                        63.626       52.000      44.810      1.000        150.000
 individual security volatility (%)                         0.066       0.064       0.046      0.013          0.164

                                                         Full Period, Firms with Consolidated Trading (n = 4,823)
 absolute bid-ask spread                                    0.407        0.250      0.473       0.125          7.000
 relative bid-ask spread (%)                                0.023        0.008      0.044       0.001          1.000
 individual security volume (NYSE)                          7,460        1,200     15,229           5       171,516
 individual security closing price                        47.969       38.875      36.765       0.250       139.375
 individual security volatility (%)                         0.073        0.061      0.048       0.017          0.249

                                    Pre-Consolidated Period, Firms without Consolidated Trading (n = 976)
 absolute bid-ask spread                         1.505        1.000       1.526      0.125         20.000
 relative bid-ask spread (%)                     0.046        0.023       0.074      0.001          1.333
 individual security volume (NYSE)                 382          200         723          5         12,710
 individual security closing price              66.101       62.000     44.476       1.000       148.500
 individual security volatility (%)              0.063        0.040       0.047      0.013          0.164

                                    Pre-Consolidated Period, Firms with Consolidated Trading (n = 2,283)
 absolute bid-ask spread                         0.439        0.250       0.528      0.125          6.500
 relative bid-ask spread (%)                     0.024        0.008       0.038      0.001          0.435
 individual security volume (NYSE)               8,102         1200      17,006          5       171,516
 individual security closing price              47.223       38.500      36.301      1.125       131.500
 individual security volatility (%)              0.073        0.061       0.049      0.017          0.249

                                    Consolidated Period, Firms without Consolidated Trading (n = 1,237)
 absolute bid-ask spread                        1.124       0.875        1.122      0.125        10.000
 relative bid-ask spread (%)                    0.033       0.018        0.046      0.001         0.560
 individual security volume (NYSE)                478         200          926          5        10,610
 individual security closing price             61.673      47.375       44.994      1.250       150.000
 individual security volatility (%)             0.069       0.065        0.045      0.013          0.164

                                    Consolidated Period, Firms with Consolidated Trading (n = 2,540)
 absolute bid-ask spread                       0.378        0.250      0.415       0.125          7.000
 relative bid-ask spread (%)                   0.022        0.007      0.048       0.001          1.000
 individual security volume (NYSE)             6,883        1200      13,409           5       114,230
 individual security closing price           48.638       39.000      37.171       0.250       139.375
 individual security volatility (%)            0.073        0.063      0.048       0.017          0.249
 individual security volume (both exchanges) 7,764          1,288     15,724           5       158,790




                                                                  49
    Table 9. The Effect of Consolidated Trading on the NYSE in the Pre- and Consolidated Period
                                             (December 28, 1883 - April 9, 1886)

This table reports the results from the estimation of the following model:

SPREADit = α+ β1VOLit + β2CLOSEit+ β3STDEVi + β4COMPt + εit


where SPREAD is either the natural log of the absolute or the relative spread as defined in Table 7. COMP is a dummy variable that
takes on a value of one for all observations in the 60 weeks after February 17, 1885 and the value of zero for the observations in the 60
weeks before Feb 17, 1885. The other variables are as defined as in Table 7 and are measured in natural logs. Robust standard errors
are in parentheses. *** significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.


                                                    (A)             (B)               (C)                                (D)
                                                                     dependent variable
                                              natural log of  natural log of    natural log of                     natural log of
                                              absolute spread absolute spread relative spread                      relative spread

 natural log of                                 -0.33586*                -0.12926*                -0.33594*              -0.13263*
 individual security volume                      (0.004)                  (0.006)                  (0.004)                (0.006)

 natural log of                                 0.37037*                 -0.18592*                -0.61892*              -1.14973*
 individual security closing price               (0.018)                  (0.028)                  (0.018)                (0.030)

 natural log of                                 0.30886*                                          0.31914*
 individual security volatility                  (0.027)                                           (0.027)

 presence of Consolidated trading               -0.12286*                -0.15396*                -0.11957*              -0.15141*
                                                 (0.017)                  (0.014)                  (0.017)                (0.014)

 constant                                       0.94278*                 0.69467*                 0.93105*               0.58464*
                                                 (0.048)                  (0.100)                  (0.048)                (0.102)

 company fixed effects included                     no                        yes                     no                     yes

 Observations                                      7036                       7036                   7036                   7036
 R-squared                                        0.484                      0.662                  0.730                  0.821




                                                                  50
        Table 9A. Bid-Ask Spreads on the Boston Exchange in the Pre- and Consolidated Period
                                             (December 28, 1883 - April 9, 1886)

This table reports the results from the estimation of the following model:

SPREADit = α+ β1VOLit + β2CLOSEit+ β3STDEVi + β4COMPt + εit


where SPREAD is either the natural log of the absolute or the relative spread as defined in Table 7. COMP is a dummy variable that
takes on a value of one for all observations in the 60 weeks after February 17, 1885 and the value of zero for the observations in the 60
weeks before Feb 17, 1885. The other variables are as defined as in Table 7 and are measured in natural logs. Robust standard errors
are in parentheses. *** significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.


                                                   (A)              (B)                           (C)                   (D)
                                              natural log of  natural log of                natural log of         natural log of
                                              absolute spread absolute spread               relative spread        relative spread

 natural log of                              -0.15331*               -0.06678*              -0.15295*              -0.06833*
 individual security volume                    (0.009)                 (0.012)                (0.009)                (0.012)

 natural log of                              0.25599*                -0.14621**             -0.73991*              -1.11075*
 individual security closing price             (0.018)                 (0.072)                (0.018)                (0.074)

 natural log of                              0.18668*                                       0.18710*
 individual security volatility                (0.032)                                        (0.032)

 presence of Consolidated trading 0.02561                            -0.04206               0.02616                -0.04542
                                    (0.036)                            (0.032)                (0.036)                (0.032)

 constant                                    -0.87186*               -0.26897               -0.88955*              -0.39137
                                               (0.086)                 (0.248)                (0.085)                (0.256)

 company fixed effects included                  no                      yes                    no                     yes

 Observations                                   1490                   1490                   1490                    1490
 R-squared                                      0.321                  0.555                  0.676                  0.788




                                                                  51
 Table 10. The Effect of Consolidated Trading on the NYSE with Additional Control Variables
        in the Pre- and Consolidated Period (December 28, 1883 - April 9, 1886)

This table reports the results from the estimation of the following model:

SPREADit = α0+ β1VOLit + β2CLOSEit+ β3STDEVi + β4COMPt + β5WVOLit + β6CALLt+ β7SHAREit + β8CONCt + εit


where SPREAD is either the natural log of the absolute or the relative spread as defined in Table 7. COMP is a dummy variable that
takes on a value of one for all observations in the 60 weeks after February 17, 1885 and the value of zero for the observations in the 60
weeks before Feb 17, 1885. The other variables are as defined as in Table 7 but measured in natural logs. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. *** significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.



                                                     (A)           (B)              (C)            (D)
                                                                     dependent variable
                                              natural log of  natural log of   natural log of natural log of
                                              absolute spread absolute spread relative spread relative spread

 natural log of                               -0.03040               -0.01599               -0.03273             -0.01756
 individual security volume                    (0.037)                (0.030)                (0.037)              (0.030)

 natural log of                               0.34837*               -0.22584*              -0.64069*            -1.18756*
 individual security closing price            (0.018)                 (0.031)                (0.018)              (0.032)

 natural log of                               0.26885*                                      0.27951*
 individual security volatility                (0.028)                                       (0.027)

 presence of Consolidated trading             -0.13701*              -0.14301*              -0.13426*            -0.14095*
                                               (0.019)                (0.015)                (0.019)              (0.015)

 natural log of                               -0.13450*              -0.05527               -0.13276*            -0.05847***
 NYSE total weekly volume                      (0.042)                (0.034)                (0.042)              (0.034)

 natural log of                               0.078839*              0.10096*               0.07516*             0.09574*
 broker's call rate                            (0.025)                (0.020)                (0.025)              (0.021)

 natural log of                               -0.31150*              -0.12448*              -0.30922*            -0.12604*
 security's share of total volume              (0.037)                (0.030)                (0.037)              (0.030)

 natural log of                               -0.24564*              -0.02298               -0.24746*            -0.02571
 concentration ratio                           (0.055)                (0.045)                (0.055)              (0.046)

 constant                                     -0.87057**             0.52022                -0.89392**           0.40550
                                               (0.452)                (0.361)                (0.450)              (0.365)

 company fixed effects included                   no                     yes                    no                   yes

 Observations                                    7036                  7036                  7036                  7036
 R-squared                                      0.497                  0.665                 0.737                 0.823




                                                                  52
 Table 10A. Bid-Ask Spreads on the Boston Exchange in the Pre- and Consolidated Period with
 Additional Control Variables (December 28, 1883 - April 9, 1886)

This table reports the results from the estimation of the following model:

SPREADit = α0+ β1VOLit + β2CLOSEit+ β3STDEVi + β4COMPt + β5WVOLit + β6CALLt+ β7SHAREit + β8CONCt + εit


where SPREAD is either the natural log of the absolute or the relative spread as defined in Table 7. COMP is a dummy variable that
takes on a value of one for all observations in the 60 weeks after February 17, 1885 and the value of zero for the observations in the 60
weeks before Feb 17, 1885. The other variables are as defined as in Table 7 but measured in natural logs. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. *** significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.



                                                      (A)          (B)              (C)            (D)
                                                                     dependent variable
                                              natural log of  natural log of   natural log of natural log of
                                              absolute spread absolute spread relative spread relative spread

 natural log of                              -0.08044*               -0.06019*              -0.08121*              -0.06386*
 individual security volume                   (0.027)                 (0.023)                (0.027)                (0.023)

 natural log of                              0.24642*                -0.19220*              -0.74943*              -1.15548*
 individual security closing price            (0.018)                 (0.071)                (0.018)                (0.074)

 natural log of                              0.17002*                                       0.17055*
 individual security volatility               (0.032)                                        (0.032)

 presence of Consolidated trading -0.05717                           -0.05778               -0.05559               -0.05925
                                   (0.043)                            (0.036)                (0.043)                (0.036)

 natural log of                              0.15802*                0.12918*               0.16034*               0.13063*
 broker's call rate                           (0.054)                 (0.045)                (0.054)                (0.045)

 natural log of                              -0.08298*               -0.01223               -0.08179*              -0.00981
 security's share of total volume             (0.028)                 (0.024)                (0.028)                (0.024)

 natural log of                              0.04528                 0.10317                0.04598                0.10415
 concentration ratio                          (0.078)                 (0.066)                (0.078)                (0.066)

 constant                                    -1.59436*               -0.19482               -1.60330*              -0.30323
                                              (0.249)                 (0.295)                (0.248)                (0.300)

 company fixed effects included                  no                     yes                    no                     yes

 Observations                                  1490                    1490                  1490                    1490
 R-squared                                     0.337                   0.561                 0.684                   0.79




                                                                  53
Table 11. Summary Statistics of Long-Term Competition between the Consolidated and NYSE
                       (September 1886 – February 1926)

This table reports the sample statistics for the trading data for the firms in the Dow Jones Industrial Average beginning in September
1886, and the Dow Jones Railroad Index beginning in October 1896. One day, usually the last day of the month, from each month is
sampled. Absolute bid-ask spread is the closing bid-ask spread for a given day. The relative bid-ask spread is the closing bid-ask
spread in percentage terms [(ask-bid)/((ask+bid)/2)]. The individual security volume is the total NYSE volume for the security for a
given day. The individual security closing price is the NYSE closing price for that day. Individual security volatility is the standard
deviation of a given security’s return over the entire sample period. NYSE total monthly volume is the total volume for all securities for
a given month. A security’s share of total volume is that security’s total NYSE volume for a given day divided by the total NYSE
volume for that day. The concentration ratio is the sum of the volume for the four securities with the highest volume on a given day
divided by the total NYSE volume for that day. The broker’s call rate is the closing monthly call rate for the month for which other
data is taken. The Consolidated share of total volume is the total volume for security i on the Consolidated divided by the total volume
on the Consolidated for security i plus the total volume on security i on the NYSE for a given day. The presence of Consolidated
volume takes on a value of one for all observations where the Consolidated had trading volume and 0 otherwise. There are 12,389
observations for each variable.



                                                                                          Standard
 Variable                                                    Mean            Median       Deviation       Minimum          Maximum

 absolute bid-ask spread                     0.414                           0.250            0.453           0.125            10.500
 relative bid-ask spread (%)                 0.627                           0.378            0.846           0.051            18.182
 individual security volume                 10,626                           2,700           26,069               4           489,444
 individual security closing price          88.239                          87.000           45.867           1.250           400.000
 individual security volatility (%)         11.348                           7.314           13.053           2.634            76.841
 NYSE total monthly volume              14,700,000                      12,898,720        9,304,893       1,667,854        79,600,000
 security's share of total volume (%)        3.742                           1.071            7.070           0.001            79.004
 concentration ratio (%)                    63.010                          63.017           13.348          29.036            94.550
 broker's call rate (%)                      4.023                           3.500            3.499           0.875            40.000
 consolidated share of total volume (%)     11.210                           6.593           13.682           0.000            99.514
 presence of Consolidated volume (%)        74.816                         100.000           43.409           0.000           100.000




                                                                   54
Table 12. Long-Term Effects of Consolidated Trading on the NYSE (Sept. 1886 – Feb. 1926)

     This table reports the results from the estimation of the following model:

     SPREADit = α+ β1VOLit + β2CLOSEit+ β3STDEVi + β4COMPt + εit


where SPREAD is either the natural log of the absolute or the relative spread as defined in Table 10. We measure competition, COMP, in two different ways. The natural log of Consolidated share is the total
volume for security i on the Consolidated divided by the total volume on the Consolidated for security i plus the total volume on security i on the NYSE for a given day. The Consolidated presence takes on a value
of one for all observations where the Consolidated had trading volume and 0 otherwise. The other variables are as defined as in Table 10 but measured in natural logs. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.

                                         (A)            (B)           (C)           (D)          (E)       (F)       (G)                    (H)           (I)            (J)          (K)            (L)
                                                                                                         dependent variable
                                       ln of          ln of         ln of         ln of         ln of     ln of     ln of                  ln of         ln of          ln of         ln of         ln of
                                       absolute       absolute      relative      relative      absolute absolute relative                 relative      absolute       absolute      relative      relative
                                       spread         spread        spread        spread        spread    spread    spread                 spread        spread         spread        spread        spread

natural log of individual              -0.21695* -0.21903* -0.21947* -0.22155* -0.18295* -0.18412* -0.18636* -0.18747* -0.16065* -0.16013* -0.16495* -0.16451*
security volume                        (0.0040) (0.0040) (0.0040) (0.0040) (0.0043) (0.0043) (0.0043) (0.0044) (0.0044) (0.0045) (0.0046) (0.0046)

natural log of individual              0.27164* 0.26994* -0.70855* -0.71021* 0.21868* 0.22057* -0.74160* -0.73978* 0.17654* 0.17266* -0.77143* -0.77521*
security closing price                 (0.0111) (0.0112) (0.0117) (0.0118) (0.0147) (0.0149) (0.0171) (0.0170) (0.0163) (0.0164) (0.0212) (0.0212)

natural log of individual              0.05315* 0.04583* 0.06055* 0.05335*
security volatility                    (0.0095) (0.0095) (0.0096) (0.0096)

natural log of                         -0.03648*                    -0.03584*                   -0.02959*                    -0.02884*                   -0.02813*                    -0.02767*
Consolidated Share                     (0.0024)                     (0.0024)                    (0.0025)                     (0.0025)                    -0.0025                      -0.0025

Consolidated Presence                                 -0.22538*                   -0.22123*                     -0.16667*                  -0.16274*                    -0.16706*                   -0.16363*
                                                      (0.0167)                    (0.0167)                      (0.0173)                   (0.0173)                     -0.01705                    -0.01707

Constant                               -0.69104* -0.36935* -0.73574* -0.41966* -0.83500* -0.58953* -0.97651* -0.73724* -1.26154* -1.02688* -1.44305* -1.21240*
                                       (0.0499) (0.0460) (0.0503) (0.0466) (0.0633) (0.0618) (0.0702) (0.0686) (0.0972) (0.0961) (0.1072) (0.1062)

company fixed effects                  no             no            no            no            yes             yes          yes           yes           yes            yes           yes           yes
year fixed effects                     no             no            no            no            no              no           no            no            yes            yes           yes           yes
Observations                           12,389         12,389        12,389        12,389        12,389          12,389       12,389        12,389        12,389         12,389        12,389        12,389
R-squared                              0.353          0.349         0.545         0.543         0.430           0.427        0.599         0.597         0.470          0.469         0.626         0.625




                                                                                                           55
Table 13. Long-Term Effects of Consolidated Trading on the NYSE with Additional Control Variables
This table reports the results from the estimation of the following model:
SPREADit = α0+ β1VOLit+ β2CLOSEit+ β3STDEVi + β4COMPt + β5MVOLit + β6CALLt + β7SHAREit + β8CONCt + εit
where SPREAD is either the natural log of the absolute or the relative spread as defined in Table 10. The Consolidated share is the total volume for security i on the Consolidated divided by the total volume on the
Consolidated for security i plus the total volume on security i on the NYSE for a given day. The Consolidated presence takes on a value of one for all observations where the Consolidated had trading volume and 0
otherwise. The other variables are as defined as in Table 10 but measured in natural logs. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.

                                            (A)            (B)          (C)            (D)           (E)            (F)       (G)              (H)            (I)           (J)           (K)            (L)
                                                                                                                 dependent variable
                                          ln of         ln of          ln of         ln of         ln of          ln of     ln of             ln of         ln of           ln of         ln of         ln of
                                          absolute      absolute       absolute      relative      relative       relative  absolute          absolute      absolute        relative      relative      relative
independent variable                      spread        spread         spread        spread        spread         spread    spread            spread        spread          spread        spread        spread

natural log of individual                 -0.17163* -0.16730* -0.17323* -0.16899* -0.12102* -0.11860* -0.12460* -0.12225* -0.03750* -0.03475* -0.03739* -0.03475*
security volume                           (0.0091) (0.0091) (0.0091) (0.0091) (0.0092) (0.0092) (0.0092) (0.0093) (0.0115)          (0.0115) (0.0115) (0.0116)

natural log of individual                 0.25740* 0.25308* -0.72177* -0.72598* 0.17115* 0.17011* -0.78547* -0.78648* 0.18527*                                              0.18174* -0.76230* -0.76573*
security closing price                    (0.0111) (0.0112) (0.0120) (0.0120) (0.0148) (0.0149) (0.0185) (0.0184) (0.0164)                                                  (0.0165) (0.0209) (0.0209)

natural log of individual                 0.05138* 0.04418* 0.05905* 0.05197*
security volatility                       (0.0095) (0.0095) (0.0097) (0.0097)

natural log of                            -0.03397*                    -0.03336*                   -0.02635*                    -0.02578*                   -0.02569*                     -0.02517*
Consolidated Share                        (0.0024)                     (0.0024)                    (0.0025)                     (0.0025)                    (0.0025)                      (0.0025)

Consolidated Presence                                   -0.21967*                    -0.21530*                    -0.15151*                   -0.14815*                     -0.15406*                   -0.15025*
                                                        (0.0167)                     (0.0167)                     (0.0172)                    (0.0172)                      (0.0170)                    (0.0170)

natural log of NYSE                       0.05505* 0.06073* 0.04935* 0.05489* 0.06297* 0.06682* 0.05296* 0.05673* -0.02178                                                  -0.02082 -0.02545 -0.02452
total monthly volume                      (0.0118) (0.0119) (0.0119) (0.0119) (0.0124) (0.0124) (0.0127) (0.0127) (0.0168)                                                  (0.0169) (0.0169) (0.0169)

natural log of                            0.11581* 0.11461* 0.11649* 0.11530* 0.09263* 0.09179* 0.09344* 0.09262* 0.03226** 0.03301* 0.03272* 0.03347*
broker's call rate                        (0.0098) (0.0098) (0.0098) (0.0098) (0.0095) (0.0095) (0.0095) (0.0095) (0.0127)  (0.0127) (0.0127) (0.0127)

natural log of security's                 -0.05743* -0.06298* -0.05838* -0.06387* -0.07701* -0.08054* -0.07667* -0.08012* -0.14557* -0.14809* -0.15052* -0.15301*
share of total volume                     (0.0094) (0.0094) (0.0094) (0.0094) (0.0097) (0.0097) (0.0097) (0.0097) (0.0122)          (0.0122) (0.0123) (0.0123)




                                                                                                            56
natural log of          -0.10021* -0.09361* -0.11102* -0.10454* -0.07848* -0.0690** -0.09084* -0.08156* -0.17458* -0.17638* -0.17506* -0.17681*
concentration ratio     (0.0277) (0.0277) (0.0278) (0.0279) (0.0276) (0.0275) (0.0279) (0.0278) (0.0380)          (0.0380) (0.0381) (0.0381)

constant                -1.79533* -1.64571* -1.76539* -1.61850* -2.20573* -2.07753* -2.20081* -2.07542* -2.42718* -2.25285* -2.60369* -2.43335*
                        (0.1641) (0.1643) (0.1637) (0.1639) (0.1688) (0.1692) (0.1685) (0.1691) (0.2641)          (0.2650) (0.2684) (0.2694)

company fixed effects   no       no        no        no        yes         yes      yes       yes       yes       yes       yes       yes
year fixed effects      no       no        no        no        no          no       no        no        yes       yes       yes       yes
Observations            12,389   12,389    12,389    12,389    12,389     12,389   12,389    12,389    12,389     12,389    12,389    12,389
R-squared               0.374    0.372     0.560     0.559     0.448      0.446    0.611     0.610     0.479      0.478     0.633     0.632




                                                                     57
Table 14. Long-Term Effects of Consolidated Trading on the NYSE and the End of The Consolidated
This table reports the results from the estimation of the following models:

        SPREADit = α+ β1VOLit + β2CLOSEit+ β3STDEVi + β4COMPt + εit

        SPREADit = α0+ β1VOLit+ β2CLOSEit+ β3STDEVi + β4COMPt + β5MVOLit + β6CALLt + β7SHAREit + β8CONCt + εit

where SPREAD is either the natural log of the absolute or the relative spread as defined in Table 10. The Post-Silkworth Resignation takes on a value of one for all months after June 1923 and 0 otherwise. The other
variables are as defined as in Table 10 but measured in natural logs. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.

                                                           (A)                (B)         (C)            (D)          (E)                  (F)              (G)                  (H)
                                                                                                            dependent variable
                                                           ln of              ln of      ln of           ln of       ln of                ln of             ln of               ln of
                                                           absolute           relative   absolute        relative    absolute             relative          absolute            relative
          independent variable                             spread             spread     spread          spread      spread               spread            spread              spread

          natural log of individual                        -0.24906* -0.25103* -0.20055* -0.20351*                        -0.17231*       -0.17376*         -0.12661*           -0.12984*
          security volume                                  (0.0035)  (0.0035)  (0.0040)  (0.0041)                         (0.0096)        (0.0096)          (0.0094)            (0.0095)

          natural log of individual                        0.28670*           -0.69376* 0.22904*         -0.73150*        0.27033*        -0.70907*         0.17715*            -0.77954*
          security closing price                           (0.0112)           (0.0116)  (0.0150)         (0.0169)         (0.0113)        (0.0118)          (0.0152)            (0.0184)

          natural log of individual                        0.04205*           0.04964*                                    0.03936*        0.04725*
          security volatility                              (0.0096)           (0.0096)                                    (0.0096)        (0.0097)

          Post-Silkworth                                   0.11246*           0.11071*   0.06212*        0.06006*         0.05118**       0.05134**         0.00142             0.00394
          Resignation                                      (0.0193)           (0.0192)   (0.0192)        (0.0192)         (0.0221)        (0.0220)          (0.0214)            (0.0214)

          natural log of NYSE                                                                                             0.03405*        0.02847**         0.06387*            0.05331*
          total monthly volume                                                                                            (0.0130)        (0.0130)          (0.0135)            (0.0137)

          natural log of                                                                                                  0.11541*        0.11614*          0.09219*            0.09312*
          broker's call rate                                                                                              (0.0100)        (0.0099)          (0.0096)            (0.0096)

          natural log of security's                                                                                       -0.08875*       -0.08926*         -0.08894*           -0.08856*
          share of total volume                                                                                           (0.0098)        (0.0098)          (0.0099)            (0.0099)




                                                                                                           58
natural log of                                                    -0.08731*   -0.09812*   -0.06244**   -0.07464*
concentration ratio                                               (0.0282)    (0.0284)    (0.0279)     (0.0282)

constant                -0.39366* -0.44353* -0.62722* -0.77398*   -1.53799*   -1.50993*   -2.14374*    -2.13434*
                        (0.0460)  (0.0463)  (0.0621)  (0.0681)    (0.1747)    (0.1743)    (0.1784)     (0.1783)

Company Fixed Effects   no        no        yes       yes         no          no          yes          yes
Observations            12389     12389     12389     12389       12389       12389       12389        12389
R-squared               0.339     0.536     0.423     0.594       0.362       0.552       0.442        0.607




                                                        59
