                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE LENDING CHANNEL IN EMERGING ECONOMIES:
                          ARE FOREIGN BANKS DIFFERENT?

                                              Marco Arena
                                           Carment Reinhart
                                           Francisco Vázquez

                                          Working Paper 12340
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12340


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




The authors thank, without implicating, Gastón Gelos, Meral Karasulu, Liliana Rojas-Suárez, John Shea,
Roland Straub, and participants at the Second Meeting of the Latin American Financial Network. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research, the International Monetary Fund, or the World Bank. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2006 by Marco Arena, Carmen Reinhart and Francisco Vázquez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Lending Channel in Emerging Economics: Are Foreign Banks Different?
Marco Arena, Carmen Reinhart and Francisco Vázquez
NBER Working Paper No. 12340
June 2006
JEL No. E51, G21

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper assembles a dataset comprising 1,565 banks in 20 Asian and Latin American countries
during 1989-2001 and compares the response of the volume of loans, deposits, and bank-specific
interest rates on loans and deposits, to various measures of monetary conditions, across domestic and
foreign banks. It also looks for systematic differences in the behavior of domestic and foreign banks
during periods of financial distress and tranquil times. Using differences in bank ownership as a
proxy for financial constraints on banks, the paper finds weak evidence that foreign banks have a
lower sensitivity of credit to monetary conditions relative to their domestic competitors, with the
differences driven by banks with lower asset liquidity and/or capitalization. At the same time, the
lending and deposit rates of foreign banks tend to be smoother during periods of financial distress,
albeit the differences with domestic banks do not appear to be strong. These results provide weak
support to the existence of supply-side effects in credit markets and suggest that foreign bank entry
in emerging economies may have contributed somewhat to stability in credit markets.

Carmen M. Reinhart
University of Maryland
School of Public Policy
Department of Economic
4105 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
creinhar@umd.edu
                                        I. INTRODUCTION


Foreign bank entry into emerging market economies has become an important component of

financial globalization since the mid-nineties. Facilitated by financial liberalization and the need

to recapitalize banking systems in the aftermath of financial crises, the volume of cross-border

mergers and acquisitions (M&As) targeting banks in emerging markets surged from about US$6

billion between 1990-1996, to almost US$50 billion—roughly one-third of the global amount—

between 1997-2000 (BIS 2004). The increase in foreign bank presence in emerging markets has

been uneven, entailing significant changes in the structure of bank ownership in many recipient

countries such as Mexico, where the share of banking system assets controlled by foreign

institutions increased from 2 percent in 1990 to 82 percent in 2004.

The speed and depth of foreign bank entry has potentially important implications for financial

and macroeconomic stability in recipient countries, and arguments have been made in both

directions. On the one hand, it has been argued that foreign banks could play a stabilizing role on

the supply of credit and deposits through upstream financing from their mother companies and

reputation effects, particularly during periods of financial distress. On the other, foreign banks

might be quick to pull out from emerging markets and could transmit external shocks into host

countries. Empirical evidence on the implications of foreign bank entry for financial and

macroeconomic stability in emerging markets, however, is limited to a paper by Dages,

Goldberg, and Kinney (2000) analyzing the behavior of domestic and foreign banks in Mexico

and Argentina during the Tequila crisis, and a paper by Detragiache and Gupta (2004), using

data for Malaysia during the Asian crisis. Overall, these two papers find mild support to the first

view. On the other hand, evidence from the 2002 crisis in Argentina seems to be more mixed,



                                                  2
with some foreign banks opting to exit in the context of a broader international asset relocation,

and others reducing their lending activities in line with the behavior of domestic banks.

At a more general level, the view that banks may play a non-trivial role in the transmission of

shocks into credit markets, via supply-side effects, has received considerable attention in the

literature of monetary policy transmission. Early work includes Bernanke and Blinder (1988),

Kashyap, et al. (1993), Bernanke and Gertler (1995), Kashyap and Stein (1995). The basic idea is

that financial constraints on banks impair their ability to offset negative shocks to deposits with

alternative financing sources, generating supply-side effects in credit markets, and amplifying

economic fluctuations. While the evidence seems to be broadly consistent with this proposal,

identifying suitable proxies for unobserved financial constraints on banks has been a key

challenge.

This paper builds on the idea that differences in bank ownership can serve as a proxy for

unobserved financial constraints on banks, and combined with other observable bank

characteristics (such as asset liquidity and capitalization) to identify changes in credit supply. To

implement this, it uses a panel dataset of 1,565 banks in 20 Asian and Latin American countries

during 1989-2001 and tests for systematic differences in the sensitivity of loans, deposits, and

bank-specific lending and deposit rates, to various measures of monetary conditions, across

domestic and foreign banks. It also looks for systematic differences in the behavior of domestic

and foreign banks during tranquil times and periods of financial distress, exploiting various

definitions of banking and currency crises available in the literature. The regions studied here are

relevant to the issues at hand, as they endured several financial crisis during the 1990s. In




                                                  3
addition, Latin America concentrated 48 percent of all cross-border M&A targeting banks in

emerging markets between 1991-2005, followed by Asia, with an additional 36 percent.

The results indicate that domestic and foreign banks behave roughly similarly along the

dimensions considered, providing only weak support to the existence of supply-side effects in

credit markets. In particular, loan and deposit growth are highly sensitive to economic activity, in

a manner that does not differ significantly across domestic and foreign banks. At the same time,

periods of tighter monetary conditions are associated with lower loan and deposit growth, with

foreign banks displaying a somewhat lower sensitivity. This finding is driven by banks with

relatively less liquid assets and/or lower capitalization, suggesting that it is not entirely

attributable to potential differences in the characteristics of the borrowers and depositors of

foreign banks. The results also show slight differences in the cross-sectional behavior of interest

rates. Lending and deposit rates of foreign banks tend to react less during periods of financial

distress. Taken together, these results indicate that foreign bank participation in emerging

economies has not lead to increased instability in credit markets, and may have even played a

beneficial effect.

The main contributions of the paper are as follows. First, it adds to the literature on the effects of

foreign bank entry on financial stability, exploiting a comprehensive bank-level panel dataset

that covers the main Latin American and emerging Asian countries during the nineties. The

paper tracks the evolution of bank ownership by crossing the sample of banks with a complete

list of mergers and acquisitions during the sample period. Second, it adds to the literature on the




                                                   4
lending channel outside the United States, particularly in emerging markets1 by exploiting

differences in bank ownership to identify supply-side effects in credit markets. As a by-product,

the paper provides a novel dataset on reserve requirements for the countries in the sample using

information from central bank reports.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II places the paper in the context of the

literature. Section III discusses the methodology and the hypotheses tested, as well as potential

endogeneity problems and sources of bias. Section IV describes the data. Section V compares the

response of selected financial variables (including loan growth, deposit growth, and bank-level

lending and deposit rates) to various measures of monetary conditions, across domestic and

foreign banks. Section VI focuses more closely on the response of loan growth to monetary

conditions across domestic and foreign banks after splitting the sample by capitalization and

liquidity levels. Section VII explores for systematic differences in the behavior of domestic and

foreign banks during tranquil and crises periods. Section VIII concludes.


                                    II. RELATED LITERATURE

Most studies comparing the behavior of domestic and foreign banks in emerging economies

focus on the efficiency effects of foreign bank entry.2 An incipient strand of the literature, to

1
  Studies in this area include: Edwards and Vegh (1997), who address the role of banks in the
transmission of nominal shocks in Mexico and Chile, Agung (1998) who examines Indonesia, a
volume edited by the BIS (1998) that looks at the lending channel in a sample of developing
countries, and a cross-country study by Vázquez (2001).
2
 The evidence seems to indicate that competitive pressures caused by foreign entry have led to
improvements in banking system efficiency; for example, Barajas, Steiner, and Salazar (2000),
Claessens and Glaessner (1999), Claessens, Demirgüç-Kunt, and H. Huizinga (2001), and
Crystal, Dages, and Goldberg (2001).




                                                  5
which this paper belongs, looks at the effects of foreign bank entry on financial stability and the

response of credit markets to domestic and external shocks. Dages, Goldberg, and Kinney (2000)

compared the behavior of bank lending across domestic and foreign banks in Mexico and

Argentina during the Tequila crisis and concluded that foreign banks exhibited stronger and less

volatile loans growth than domestic banks, but differences in asset quality, rather than

ownership, appeared to be decisive in explaining the behavior of bank credit. Using data for

Malaysia, Detragiache and Gupta (2004), found evidence that foreign banks with sufficient

international diversification played a stabilizing role during the Asian crisis, while the behavior

of foreign banks with operations concentrated in Asia was roughly similar to the behavior of

domestic banks.

This paper is also related to the literature on the lending channel of monetary transmission,

which focuses on the potential role of banks propagating shocks via loan-supply effects. The

basic hypothesis is that capital market imperfections may prevent (at least some) banks from

freely substituting away a negative shock to deposits with other sources of funding. In

consequence, financially-constrained banks may optimally choose to cut lending in response to a

shock to deposits, thereby affecting the availability of funds to bank-dependent firms. The chief

obstacle in testing the lending channel is disentangling whether the response of credit to

monetary shocks originates from loan demand—as implied by interest rate channels—or from

changes in loan supply.

To get around the identification problem, empirical studies now generally resort to bank-level

data, testing for cross-sectional differences in the response of bank lending to monetary shocks

across banks with different degrees of financial constraints. Since financial constraints are not




                                                 6
directly observable, they have been usually proxied by bank characteristics such as liquidity,

size, and capitalization (for example, Jayaratne and Morgan (2000), Kishan and Opiela (2000),

Kashyap and Stein (2000)). Financial constraints have been also proxied by bank ownership.

Houston et al. (1997) explored the role of internal markets in banking in the U.S. and found that

the loan growth of bank subsidiaries is sensitive to the financial position of their holding

companies. A similar approach was implemented by Ashcraft (2000), who exploited a panel

database of U.S. banks and used bank affiliation with multi-bank holding companies to proxy for

financial constraints. In the international context, Peek and Rosengren (1997) looked at data on

Japanese banks operating in the United States and found that binding risk-based capital

requirements associated with the Japanese stock market decline of end-1980s translated into a

decline in lending by their U.S. branches.

This paper follows a similar approach, exploiting the presence of internal capital markets as a

source of cross-sectional variation between domestic and foreign banks. To the extent that

foreign banks are less financially-constrained than domestic banks, comparing the sensitivity of

loan growth to monetary conditions across domestic and foreign banks may identify supply-side

effects in credit markets. This test, however, hinges on the validity of two assumptions. First, all

else equal (i.e., capitalization, asset liquidity, and other bank characteristics), foreign banks have

to be less financially-constrained than domestic, either because they can resort to funding from

their parent institutions, or because they enjoy a more stable deposit base. Second, the loan

demand facing domestic banks cannot be systematically different than the loan demand of

foreign banks.




                                                  7
This identification strategy is implemented with the use of bank-level fixed effects regressions,

splitting the sample of banks between domestic and foreign with the use of a dummy variable. A

baseline exercise compares the response of selected balance sheet components to monetary

conditions across domestic and foreign banks, after controlling for changes in loan demand,

proxied by GDP growth, and observable bank characteristics such as size, liquidity and

capitalization. A second, more restrictive set of tests further explores systematic differences in

the response of loan growth to monetary conditions across domestic and foreign banks, in the

subsets of banks with lower liquidity and capitalization with respect to other banks in the same

country. Lastly, a third test uses various definitions of currency, banking and debt crises and

compares the behavior of domestic and foreign banks throughout crises and tranquil periods.

A few comments are convenient to place this paper in context. While the literature on the lending

channel focuses on the role of banks in the transmission of monetary policy to the credit market,

this paper takes a broader approach. It studies the effects of changes in monetary conditions on

the credit market, regardless of whether changes are induced, or not, by monetary policy. This

difference in emphasis is necessary since the paper focuses on emerging markets, where

monetary conditions are typically affected by an open capital account. Consequently, monetary

conditions here not only include money market rates, as usual in the lending channel literature,

but also international interest rates and the change of the foreign exchange rate, exploiting the

uncovered interest parity condition. The justification for the latter is straightforward, since

currency depreciation increases the opportunity cost of holding bank deposits denominated in

local currency, affecting their stability. Monetary conditions in this paper also include reserve

requirements which are safely ignored in the lending channel literature as they are not longer




                                                  8
used as a monetary policy tool in the United States. In contrast, reserve requirements as still are a

commonly used policy instrument in many emerging markets.3


                                                 III. METHODOLOGY

A series of tests were implemented to explore the response of selected balance sheet and income

statement components to changes in monetary conditions, across domestic and foreign banks,

after controlling for some observable bank characteristics. More specifically, the tests comprised

six separate specifications sharing the general form:

                                          r                                 q
                       yi , c , t = α i + ∑ β s xc , t − s + ρzi , c , t −1 + ∑ δ s mc ,t − s + uit   [1]
                                         s =1                              s =1

where i=1,...,N refers to individual banks (panels), c=1,...,C to countries, and t=1,...,Ti to the time

dimension (the sample is unbalanced, so Ti varies across banks). The constants, αi, are the bank-

level fixed effects.

Each specification used a different (bank-level) dependent variable, yict. A first set of regressions

employed quantity-related dependent variables: LOAN GROWTH, DEPOSIT GROWTH, the ratio of net

LOANS TO DEPOSITS.     A second set of regressions employed price-related dependent variables:

LENDING RATES, DEPOSIT RATES,             and LENDING MINUS DEPOSIT SPREADS. Loan and deposit growth

were computed by first differencing the logarithm of the corresponding series, measured in

constant (1995) local currency units. Bank-specific lending and deposit rates were estimated by

combining information from income statements and balance sheets. Specifically, lending rates


3
  Reinhart and Reinhart (1999) provide a discussion of the use and effects of reserve
requirements in a small open economy.




                                                                  9
were obtained by dividing interest revenues over average loan volume, and deposit rates were

obtained by dividing interest expenses over average deposit volume. The spreads between

lending and deposit rates were computed as the difference between these two. Admittedly, these

variables are noisy indicators of the target series, as interest revenues include interests received

from investments, while interest expenses are affected by interests paid on liabilities other than

deposits. These, however, seem to be the best available indicators of bank-specific interest rates.

The vector x contains country-level variables, aimed to control for changes in loan demand. Here

the specification includes GDP GROWTH, also measured in 1995 local currency. The vector z

contains bank-level characteristics to control for financial constraints. Following a standard

practice in the monetary transmission literature, three indicators were used: a measure of bank

size, an indicator of asset liquidity, and an indicator of bank capitalization. Regarding bank size,

the presumption is that bigger banks face lower external finance premiums and are thus better

equipped to substitute away a negative shock to deposits with other sources of financing. To

eliminate possible trends in bank SIZE, the estimation uses a relative measure, computed as the

difference between the log of assets of a bank in a given year (in 1995 local currency) and the

average computed over all banks in the same country and year:


                   Sizei, c,t = ln( Assetsi, c,t ) −
                                                       ∑i∈c ln( Assetsi,c,t )   , for c=1,...,C
                                                               N c, t

Where Nct stands for the number of banks in country c in year t. Therefore, the resulting measure

is a normalized variable with zero mean for each country and year. The second variable, asset




                                                         10
LIQUIDITY,   was computed as the proportion of liquid assets to total assets.4 The inclusion of this

variable follows the presumption that banks with more liquid assets are better positioned to meet

loan demand in the face of unexpected shocks to deposits. The third variable, CAPITALIZATION,

was defined as equity capital over total assets. The presumption is that better-capitalized banks

tend to pay lower risk premiums on non-insured debt and, therefore, face lower financing

restrictions. These two variables were normalized with respect to the sample averages of each

country. For example, the transformation applied to liquidity was:


                           Liquidityi , c ,t = Liquidityi , c ,t −
                                                                     ∑ ∑ Liquidity
                                                                       t   i         i ,c,t

                                                                               Nc
Where Nc is the number of observations in country c over the whole period. Capitalization was

treated similarly. Potential endogeneity problems and sources of bias associated with these

variables are discussed below.

Going back to the specification, the vector m contains two measures of monetary conditions.

First, the evolution of liquidity in the banking system was captured by the interest rates on short-

term lending between financial institutions, MONEY MARKET RATES. Second, the evolution of

required reserves was tracked with RESERVE REQUIREMENTS, an indicator variable constructed on

the basis of central bank reports (see Appendix 1 to 3 for details). This indicator was allowed to

vary on a scale from 1 to 5, with a larger number indicating higher reserve requirements.5 A



4
    Liquid assets include cash and reserves, government bonds, and other marketable securities.
5
 The indicator relied on judgment, as the structure of reserve requirements can be quite
complicated (i.e., they can be defined on marginal vs. average deposits, and differentiated by
deposit types).




                                                         11
comparison between these two variables on a country-by-country basis suggests that they convey

complementary information on monetary conditions (Figures 1 and 2).

As a robustness check, an alternative set of monetary conditions were used exploiting the

uncovered interest parity. In particular, MONEY MARKET RATES were replaced by two variables:

the yearly percent change of the average market exchange rate, DEPRECIATION, and the three-

month U.S. Treasury bill rate, T-BILL. The inclusion of these two variables follows from the fact

that all countries studied here are small open economies, and the stability of bank deposits may

be influenced by developments in the foreign exchange market.

In all the regressions, the target parameters are the coefficients of the monetary conditions (i.e.,

the δ’s). Differences across domestic and foreign banks were tested by interacting each

explanatory variable with a dummy FOREIGN, which equals one for foreign banks and zero for

domestic. An additional, more restrictive test was also implemented by further splitting the

sample by bank characteristics. In particular, dummy variables were created to separate banks

with lagged capitalization above the 75th percentile with respect to the sample of banks operating

in the same country. Similarly, another set of dummy variables was created to separate banks

with lagged liquidity above the 75th percentile with respect to the rest of banks in the same

country. As a by-product, the coefficients associated with GDP growth (the β’s) also allow to

explore for systematic differences in the cyclical behavior of the selected endogenous variables,

across domestic and foreign banks.

Separate regressions were estimated for Asia and Latin America on the notion that differences in

macroeconomic performance and banking practices between these two regions render the

population parameters different. It is well recognized, for example, that foreign bank entry into



                                                 12
emerging markets has led to the emergence of "regional evolvers", that is, banks that use their

relative advantages in a region (i.e., historic and cultural links with host countries) to focus their

international expansion, as in the case of Spanish banks in Latin America and Japanese banks in

East Asia.




                                           A. Expected Results

Consider the set of regressions dealing with quantity-related endogenous variables (i.e., loans

and deposits). The first specification provides a test for the sensitivity of LOAN GROWTH to

changes in monetary conditions. Under the lending channel hypothesis, financially-constrained

banks are expected to be more sensitive to monetary conditions, implying that the coefficients

associated with domestic banks are higher in absolute value (i.e., more negative) than those for

foreign banks. The second specification further explores for differences in the sensitivity of

DEPOSIT GROWTH     to monetary conditions across domestic and foreign banks. If banks have the

capacity to adjust their deposit rates to partially offset a negative shock to deposits, the lending

channel hypothesis would imply a lower sensitivity of deposits to monetary conditions for more

financially-constrained banks—as they are less capable to substitute them with other sources of

funds. The third specification is a combination of the previous two. It checks for the sensitivity

of LOAN TO DEPOSIT ratios to changes in monetary conditions. The lending channel hypothesis

implies that the associated coefficient has to be non-significant for more financially-constrained

banks, and positive for less financially-constrained banks, since the later would tend to finance a

lower proportion of loans with customer deposits in response to tighter monetary conditions.




                                                  13
Consider now the models with price-related endogenous variables (i.e., deposit rates, lending

rates, and lending minus deposit spreads). The lending channel hypothesis implies that

financially-constrained banks display a larger response of lending and deposit rates to monetary

conditions. Moreover, the lending minus deposit spread is expected to increase under tighter

monetary conditions for financially-constrained banks. This is because, in response to a negative

shock to deposits, banks would try to resort to alternative forms of financing, increasing their

premium on non-insured debt and, by cost minimization, their equilibrium deposit rates. This

increase would tend to be translated more than proportionally into lending rates due to the tax-

like effect of reserve requirements on insured deposits and the cost of maintaining precautionary

liquid assets.


                             B. Sources of Bias and Endogeneity Problems

As with any reduced-form estimations, there are potential endogeneity problems and bias

associated with the use of bank characteristics (i.e., size, liquidity, and capitalization). Regarding

size, there is possible joint determination since a bank may actually become larger precisely

because of large deposit (and loan) growth. Regarding capitalization, a financially-constrained

bank may choose to be more capitalized, eroding the usefulness of this indicator as a measure of

financial constraints. In fact, as shown below, balance sheet data indicates that capitalization

decreases systematically with bank size, suggesting that it may be a poor indicator of financial

constraints on banks. A similar problem arises with the use of liquidity ratios. A bank may

optimally choose to have a more liquid asset structure to compensate for higher financial

constraints. Again, it is unclear whether a less liquid asset structure is a clear-cut indicator of




                                                  14
higher financial constraints. To reduce these endogeneity problems, the regressions use lagged

values of bank-level characteristics.

A related problem, spurious correlation induced by mean-reversion may arise from the use of

liquidity ratios as defined. To see why, suppose that bank assets are composed only of liquid

instruments and loans. In this simplified balance sheet, a bank with higher-than-average liquid

assets in period t-1 will tend to display a higher-than-average loan growth in year t. Thus

interacting monetary conditions with a liquidity indicator will tend to erode the power of the test,

biasing the results in favor of the lending channel hypothesis (i.e., banks with more liquid

balance sheets having a lower sensitivity of loan growth to monetary disturbances). This problem

can be avoided by choosing a different scaling variable. For example, liquid assets could be

scaled by total deposits, which in fact seems to be the relevant measure if deposits are the main

source of shocks to bank's liabilities. For comparative purposes, this paper computes liquidity in

the usual way (scaling liquid assets by total assets), but an additional exercise was implemented

using deposits as the scaling variable with similar qualitative results.


                                             IV. DATA

Macro data come from the International Financial Statistics. The series include MONEY MARKET

RATES   (series 60b), the yearly percent change of the average market exchange rate,

DEPRECIATION (series   rf), the three-month U.S. Treasury bill rate, T-BILL (series 11160c), and




                                                 15
GDP GROWTH (series 99b), expressed in constant (1995) local currency units using consumer

price indexes (series 64).6

Bank-level data (i.e., financial statements) come from the Bankscope database. Series are yearly,

covering a sample of 1,565 banks in 20 countries during 1989-2001. The sample of countries

includes all major Latin American and Southeast Asian countries.7 Comparing the behavior of

domestic and foreign banks in this sample offers a rich experiment, since it covers pre- and post-

entry years, as well as several banking and balance of payment crisis. In total, the sample has

8,574 observations, distributed across time and countries as shown in Table 1. The decrease in

the number of banks in Asia after 1997 reflects the consolidation process following the Asian

crisis.

Using the Bankscope database has two major advantages. First, the coverage is fairly

comprehensive, with sampled banks accounting for about 90 percent of total assets in each

country, according to the source. Second, the accounting information at the bank level is

presented in standardized form, after making adjustments for differences in accounting and

reporting standards across countries. On the other hand, the data has some limitations. First, there

is a sample-selection bias in favor of large banks which weakens somewhat its usefulness, as

small banks may tend to be more financially constrained than large banks. Second, the data do

6
  For countries with incomplete or unavailable information on money market rates, an alternative
indicator was used. Deposit rates (series 60L) were used for Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Panamá,
Paraguay, and Venezuela; the call money rate (series 60) was used for India; the one-month
average interbank offer rate for Hong Kong; and the interbank rate for Taiwan.
7
  For Latin America, the list of countries includes: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela. For East Asia: Hong Kong, India,
Indonesia, South Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Taiwan.




                                                16
not provide a breakdown of loan portfolios by sectors or by borrower types, precluding the use of

controls for bank-specific changes in loan demand. Third, the data do not provide information on

the currency composition of loans and deposits, which could be a potentially useful source of

cross-sectional variation in the open economy context.

While in many cases Bankscope reports both consolidated and unconsolidated financial

statements, this paper uses unconsolidated figures to the extent possible, to reduce variations

arising from changes in subsidiaries' ownership and to work with comparable accounting data.

From the original source, unconsolidated figures were available in all but 73 cases. For the

purposes of the exercises below, balance sheet figures were converted into constant 1995 local

currency using consumer price indexes (series 64 of the IMF: International Financial Statistics).

Series in constant 1995 US$ were also computed using the average market exchange rate for

each country (series rf of the IMF: International Financial Statistics).

Outliers were identified through the application of several filters, including limits on the yearly

change in total assets, on the yearly growth rate of loans and deposits, and on the ratio of net

loans to deposits. Few cases with other data deficiencies and with negative equity were also

removed.8




8
  Specifically, the following filters were used. First, 31 observations where yearly asset growth in
constant US$ exceeded 200 percent in absolute terms were removed. Second, 57 cases where the
yearly loan growth exceeded 300 percent in absolute terms, and 77 cases where the yearly
deposit growth exceeded 300 percent in absolute terms were also removed. Third, 27 cases
where loans represented more than 100 times the value of deposits were removed. Finally, 66
cases with negative deposits and 94 cases with negative equity capital were also removed. In
total, 316 observations were eliminated, as some of the filters affected the same observations.




                                                 17
The identification of foreign banks in each country was achieved through several complementary

steps aimed to minimize misclassifications. A bank was classified as “foreign” in a given year if

it had at least 51 percent of its capital in the hands of residents of industrial OECD countries (i.e.,

excluding Mexico and Korea). The ownership structure at the end of 2001, for each bank in the

sample, was obtained from Bankscope and from central banks. To reconstruct backwards the

chronological evolution of ownership throughout the period, the list of banks was intersected

with a comprehensive list of mergers and acquisitions targeting financial institutions in the

sampled countries (a detailed description is given in Appendix 4). Due to data limitations, no

distinction was made between subsidiaries and branches of foreign banks—an otherwise relevant

separation, to the extent that subsidiaries’ access to capital from their parent institutions may not

be automatic, as in the case of branches.

Descriptive evidence on the structure of balance sheets across regions and bank sizes is presented

in Table 2. No clear patterns arise in the balance sheets of banks operating in Latin America. On

the other hand, banks operating in Asia display some regularities similar to those reported in

Kayshap and Stein (1994). In particular, larger banks tend to have a higher proportion of loans to

assets, and they rely more on non-deposit financing, and less on equity. These patterns have been

interpreted as consistent with the presence of imperfect substitution between deposits and other

sources of financing, especially for smaller banks. If small banks cannot completely offset

shocks to deposits with other financing sources, they will optimally hold a buffer stock of liquid

assets to reduce the costs of early loan liquidation. In equilibrium, they will also tend to rely less

in non-deposit financing and more on internal capital.




                                                  18
This presumption can be further checked by splitting the sample across domestic and foreign

banks. Foreign banks could be more aggressive in lending if they have access to internal

financial resources from their mother institutions. Also, they could have systematic differences in

the liability structure of their balance sheets with respect to domestic banks. Table 3 presents

summary statistics on loan growth, deposit growth, and several indicators of the structure of

balance sheets for domestic and foreign banks, and by regions. On average, foreign banks in

Latin America have higher rates of deposit and loan growth than domestic banks, but the

opposite holds true for Asia. In general, there are not strong differences in the structure of

balance sheets structure across domestic and foreign banks, so the data does not seem to fit into

the hypothesized pattern.


                                      V. BASELINE RESULTS

The results of baseline regressions for the Asian and Latin American sub-samples are presented

in Tables 4 and 5. Given the nature of the data, which combines a cross-section and a time-series

dimension, the equations were estimated with Generalized Least Squares (GLS) to accommodate

possible autocorrelation within panels and heteroscedasticity across panels. The estimation

allowed for panel-specific AR(1) processes. Cross-sectional correlations between panels were

not considered since the number of panels is much larger than the time series dimension.

For each sub-sample, six regressions were computed, using identical specifications except for the

dependent variables. Those presented in the first three columns are quantity-related (LOAN

GROWTH, DEPOSIT GROWTH,      and LOAN TO DEPOSIT ratios), and those in columns four to six are

price-related (LENDING RATES, DEPOSIT RATES, and LENDING MINUS DEPOSIT spreads). To

facilitate reading, the explanatory variables are divided in two panels. The upper panel includes



                                                 19
GDP GROWTH and the bank-level controls, while the lower panel groups the monetary

conditions. To compare the responses across domestic and foreign banks, all the explanatory

variables were interacted with a dummy variable, FOREIGN, which equals one for foreign banks

and zero otherwise. Robust standard errors are reported in square brackets.

In the first two columns, the results show that loan and deposit growth tend to be highly

procyclical (especially the former), with no statistically significant differences across domestic

and foreign banks. A similar result was obtained in Dages, Goldberg and Kinney (2000) for

Mexico and Argentina. In addition, banks with higher asset liquidity or capitalization at the end

of the previous year tend to display stronger loan growth, with some indication that the response

is larger among the subset of foreign banks. Going to the lower panel, loan growth decelerates in

response to tighter monetary conditions, with some support for the view that loan growth of

foreign banks tends to be less sensitive to changes in money market rates. Interestingly, the

results in the third column indicate that loans and deposits move one-for-one at the one year

frequency, independently of the economic cycle, monetary conditions, and bank characteristics,

including ownership.

Going to columns four to six, the upper panel shows that deposit rates tend to be countercyclical,

with some evidence suggesting that this is less intense in the case of foreign banks in the Asian

sub-sample. Banks with higher liquidity tend to pay lower deposit rates and also charge lower

interest spreads, a result that appears to be mainly attributable to changes in lending rates.

However, no significant differences arise between domestic and foreign banks. In the lower

panel, periods of tight monetary conditions are associated with higher lending and deposit rates,

with inconclusive results in terms of spreads (for example, spreads go up for the Latin American




                                                 20
sub-sample, and decrease for the Asian sub-sample). In the Asian sub-sample, foreign banks tend

to display a lower sensitivity of lending and deposit rates to changes in monetary conditions.

Overall, the results tend to provide only weak support to the lending channel hypothesis. In

particular, loan growth of foreign banks is less sensitive to money market rates in both Asia and

Latin America, and some evidence suggests that deposits on foreign banks are also less sensitive

to monetary conditions (in the Latin America sub-sample). On the other hand, the results show

no statistically significant differences in the response of loan growth to changes in reserve

requirements across domestic and foreign banks. All these results were qualitatively robust to the

removal of 58 banks changing ownership during the period.


                            VI. A CLOSER LOOK TO LOAN GROWTH

This section focuses more closely on the response of loan growth to monetary conditions given

its importance in the monetary transmission mechanism. The regressions parallel those presented

before, but adding interacting terms between bank ownership and other bank characteristics. In

particular, besides partitioning the sample across domestic and foreign banks, the sample was

first split by capitalization, separating banks with capitalization above (and below) the 75th

percentile with respect other banks operating in the same country.9 Second, the sample was split

by asset liquidity, separating banks above (and below) the 75th liquidity percentile with respect to

other banks operating in the same country. Subject to the caveats discussed above, banks with

stronger capitalization and more liquid assets could be considered to be less financially-


9
 In other words, the percentiles of capitalization were computed on a country-by-country basis,
and the sample was partitioned between banks above (and below) the 75th percentile.




                                                 21
constrained, and therefore better equipped to isolate loan growth from changes in monetary

conditions. Therefore, the differences between domestic and foreign banks reported before are

expected to be larger in the sub-samples of banks with lower liquidity and/or capitalization.

Summary results of three sets of regressions, using LOAN GROWTH as dependent variable, are

presented in Tables 6 and 7. To facilitate the reading, the only coefficients reported are those

associated with the monetary conditions (i.e., MONEY MARKET RATE and RESERVE

REQUIREMENTS).    The upper panel displays the results of the regressions covering the whole

sample (and are therefore identical to those presented before). The regression in the middle panel

splits the sample by bank ownership and capitalization, and the regression in the lower panel

splits the sample by bank ownership and liquidity. Each panel displays the coefficients of

domestic banks alongside the matching coefficients for foreign banks, and the p-values for the

null(s) of coefficient equality between square brackets.

Going to the upper panel, the coefficients associated with the money market rate are statistically

significant and have the expected (negative) sign for domestic banks, but are not different from

zero in the case of foreign banks. As discussed before, the null of coefficient equality across

domestic and foreign banks can be rejected in both the Latin American and the Asian sub-

samples. The results in the two lower panels indicate that loan growth of banks with lower

capitalization and/or liquidity tend to be more sensitive to changes in money market rates in the

two sub-samples. While this applies to both domestic and foreign banks, the coefficients of the

latter are not significantly different from zero in most cases. A stricter comparison indicates that

the null of coefficient equality across domestic and foreign banks can be rejected only when the

sample is partitioned by liquidity, but not by capitalization, with the evidence providing some




                                                 22
support to the lending channel hypothesis. On the other hand, a look at the coefficients

associated with reserve requirements indicates that, while they have the expected negative sign,

their standard errors are too large and the null of coefficient equality between domestic and

foreign banks cannot be rejected in most cases.

As a complementary exercise, parallel regressions were computed using an alternative set of

indicators of monetary conditions. The new set also included reserve requirements, but replaced

money market rates with the nominal exchange rate depreciation and international interest rates

(proxied by the federal funds rate). The results, presented in Tables 8 and 9 are roughly

comparable to those reported above, providing some evidence in support of the lending channel

hypothesis. In both sub-samples, loan growth decelerates with exchange rate depreciation, with

foreign banks generally displaying a lower sensitivity. Moreover, the differences appear to be

driven by less liquid and/or less capitalized banks.

The coefficients associated with reserve requirements and the federal funds rate are less

conclusive. For the Latin American sub-sample both coefficients have the expected (negative)

sign but the standard errors are too high to be conclusive, and there are no significant differences

across domestic or foreign banks. For the Asian sub-sample, foreign banks display a larger

sensitivity to reserve requirements than domestic, which runs contrary to expectations, while the

coefficients of the federal funds rate are either not significant or have the wrong sign. Similar

results were obtained using the money market rates of Japan and Australia as alternative

measures of international interest rates, possibly reflecting the fact that Asian countries were

mostly non-reliant on foreign capital inflows.




                                                  23
Summing up, the results indicate that loan growth of well capitalized and/or more liquid banks is

less sensitive to changes in monetary conditions. While in most cases the differences between

domestic and foreign banks are not statistically significant, a few exceptions tend to support the

lending channel hypothesis.

The results obtained so far implicitly assume that the behavior of domestic and foreign banks is

regular during tranquil times and during periods of financial distress. Differences in the behavior

of domestic and foreign banks (and their depositors), however, could be magnified during

periods of financial distress. The next section provides a closer look into this.


               VII. ARE FOREIGN BANKS DIFFERENT DURING CRISIS PERIODS?

A related comparison between domestic and foreign banks can be performed by separating

tranquil periods and episodes of financial distress. Arguably, the latter entail larger financial

constraints on banks, as well as changes in depositors’ behavior that may induce relocations of

deposits toward larger or sounder banks. Therefore, potential asymmetries in financial

constraints across domestic and foreign banks would tend to increase during crises periods,

especially if foreign banks are perceived as safer than domestic. The sample of countries

included in this study offers a rich information set to address this issue, since half of them

undergo some type of financial crisis during the nineties.

To implement this exercise, three types of (related) crises are considered: currency, banking, and

debt crises. The definitions of each type of crises, and the series, are borrowed from previous

studies. A first exercise exploits the currency and banking crises defined in Kamisnsky and




                                                 24
Reinhart (1999),10 and the debt crises provided in Detragiache and Spilimbergo (2001).11 As in

the original series, each crisis variable is a dummy that takes the value of one at the crisis year

and zero elsewhere.

A first pass at the evidence is provided with the help of a set of crisis windows spanning three

years and centered around banking, currency, or debt crisis. The close relationship between these

three types of crises—both within and between countries—tends to produce clustering, and

therefore the size of the window exceeds the three-year period in many countries. For example,

the Mexican currency crisis of 1994 was preceded by a banking crisis in 1992, and therefore the

associated crisis window spans over five years (1991-1995). Similarly, the Venezuelan currency

crisis of 1994-1995 was preceded by a banking crisis that started in 1993, and thus the crisis

window also spans over five years (1992-1996). In other cases, such as Malaysia and Philippines

during the 1997 Asian Crisis, the currency and banking crises occurred simultaneously, and the

crisis window covers three years (1996-1998).



10
  In Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), the dating of currency crises is based on an index of
currency market turbulence, computed as a weighted average of exchange rate changes and
reserve changes. A currency crisis occurs when the index reaches (or surpasses) three standard
deviations above the mean. In turn, (the beginning of) a banking crisis is defined by two types of
events: (i) bank runs that lead to the closure, merging, or takeover by the public sector of one or
more financial institutions; or (ii) if there are no runs, the closure, merging, takeover, or large-
scale government assistance of an important financial institution (or group of institutions) that
marks the start of a string of similar outcomes for other financial institutions.
11
  In Detragiache and Spilimbergo (2001), a debt crisis occurs when either (or both) of the
following conditions occur: (i) there are arrears of principal or interest on external obligations
towards commercial creditors (banks or bondholders) of more than 5 percent of total commercial
debt outstanding; (2) there is a rescheduling or debt restructuring agreement with commercial
creditors as listed in the Global Development Finance (World Bank Debt Tables).




                                                 25
Figure 3 presents the behavior of loan growth across domestic and foreign banks for each

country, both during crises and tranquil periods.12 The graphs illustrate two results. First, not

surprisingly, loan growth decreases sharply at the beginning of the crisis window and tend to

recover toward the end. Second, the behavior of loan growth across domestic and foreign banks

is remarkable similar, even during periods of financial distress .

A more systematic test comparing the behavior of domestic and foreign banks across crises and

tranquil periods was performed by running panel regressions with bank-level fixed effects, and

splitting the sample of banks between domestic and foreign with the use of a dummy variable.

The results, presented in Tables 10 and 11 are qualitatively similar for the Asian and Latin

American sub-samples. The first two columns indicate that both loan and deposit growth

decrease during crises periods, with mild or not significant differences between domestic and

foreign banks, with the exception of deposit growth in Asia, which shows a larger contraction for

the subset of foreign banks. The third column, which uses the ratio of loans to deposits as

dependent variable, indicates that the proportion of loans financed though deposits remains

roughly constant during crises periods. In other words, changes in loans are matched one-for-one

by changes in deposits both during crises and tranquil periods, and this tends to apply equally to

domestic and foreign banks.

Interestingly, differences across domestic and foreign banks during crises periods appear to be

related to the behavior of interest rates. The regressions presented in the fifth and sixth columns

indicate that bank-specific deposit and lending rates increase during crises periods, with a
12
   Loan growth was computed as the median taken over all banks operating in the same country
in a given year.




                                                 26
smoother patterns for foreign banks. The behavior of bank spreads during crises periods,

however, is less conclusive, and the results in all cases show no differences between domestic

and foreign banks.

A potential drawback of these results is that they are obtained from a crisis window that may be

too large, as differences in the behavior of domestic and foreign banks may tend to disappear as

the size of the crisis window increases. To take this into account, the same regressions were

computed again using a slightly richer set of crisis variables. Specifically, three yearly dummy

variables were created to isolate potential differences in bank behavior around crisis episodes.

The first variable, CRISIS T-1, equals one for the year preceding the crisis and zero elsewhere, the

second, CRISIS T, equals one in the year of the crisis and zero elsewhere, and the third, CRISIS

T+1, equals one for the year immediately after the crisis and zero elsewhere. The behavior of

domestic and foreign banks around, and during crisis periods, was then compared.

The results displayed in the first two columns of Tables 12 and 13 indicate both loan growth and

deposit growth tend to be slightly above average in the year preceding the onset of the crises, and

sharply collapse immediately after, with mild evidence indicating a less pronounced decline of

credit in the case of foreign banks operating in Latin America, but the opposite in Asia. Looking

at the third column, the ratio of loans to deposits tends to decrease during and after crises

episodes, but the differences with tranquil periods tend to be insignificant. In other words, the

data strongly indicates that loans and deposits of both domestic and foreign banks move one-to-

one during tranquil and crises periods.

Going to the last three columns, lending rates increase above average one year before the crises,

and remain high thereafter (within the crises window considered). Deposit rates, on the other



                                                 27
hand, appear to react more sluggishly, since they do not increase significantly during the year

preceding the crises.

To check the sensitivity of the results, the regressions were computed again using two alternative

definitions of banking crises: Frankel and Rose (1996), and Caprio and Kinglebiel (1996).

Summary results of these regressions, provided in Tables 14 and 15, support the previous

conclusions, in the sense that no systematic differences in loan and deposit growth arise between

domestic and foreign banks, regardless of the operational definition of crises employed. On the

other hand, the behavior of deposit and lending rates across domestic and foreign banks tends to

differ during crises periods, with foreign banks displaying, in general, a somewhat lower

sensitivity to market conditions.


                                    VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

The increase of foreign bank presence in emerging markets has generated debate on its potential

effects on financial stability and the transmission of domestic and external shocks into credit

markets. The results reported in this paper tend to fall on neutral grounds. There is some

evidence that loan growth of foreign banks is less sensitive to changes in monetary conditions in

host countries, a result driven by banks with lower asset liquidity and/or capitalization. Among

the group of banks with stronger balance sheets, however, there is a strong similarity in the

response of loans and deposits to monetary conditions across domestic and foreign banks.

These findings offer some evidence supporting the existence of supply-side effects in credit

markets, provided that differences in bank ownership are a good proxy for financial constraints

on banks, and that no systematic differences arise in loan demand across domestic and foreign




                                                28
banks. While the latter may be unlikely, the fact that the differences are driven by less liquid

and/or less capitalized banks offers an additional support.

At a more general level, the results indicate that foreign bank participation in emerging markets

has not led to increased instability in credit markets. The response of credit to economic activity

and monetary conditions seems to be roughly similar across domestic and foreign banks.

Differences, if any, appear to be more closely related to the behavior of interest rates. In

particular, deposit and lending rates of foreign banks tend to be less sensitive to changes in

monetary conditions, and smoother during periods of financial turmoil in host countries, which

suggest that foreign banks may have an advantage over their domestic peers in attracting

deposits.




                                                 29
                                       IX. REFERENCES

Agung, J. (1998), "Financial Deregulation and the Bank Lending Channel in Developing
Countries: the Case of Indonesia," Asian Economic Journal, Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 273-294.
Ashcraft, A. (2000). “New Evidence on the Lending Channel.” mimeo, Department of
Economics, MIT.
Barajas, A., R. Steiner, and N. Salazar (2000). “Foreign Investment in Colombia’s Financial
Sector.” Journal of Development Economics, Vol 63, pp. 157-196.
Bernanke, B. and A. Blinder (1988), "Credit, Money and Aggregate Demand," The American
Economic Review, Vol. 78, 2, pp. 435-439.
Bernanke B. and M. Gertler (1995), "Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary
Policy Transmission," The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 9, 4, pp. 27-48.
Bank of International Settlements (1998), “The Transmission of Monetary Policy in Emerging
Market Economies”, BIS Policy Papers 3, January.
Bank of International Settlements (2004), “Foreign Direct Investment in the Financial Sector of
Emerging Market Economies”, report submitted by a working group established by the
Committee on the Global Financial System, March,
Caprio, G., and D. Klingebiel, (1996), “Bank Insolvencies, Cross-Country Experiences.” World
Bank Policy Research Paper 1620.
Claessens, S., and T. Glaessner (1999). “Internationalization of Financial services in Asia.”
World Bank WP 1911.
Claessens, S., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and H. Huizinga (2001). “How Does Foreign Presence Affect
Domestic Banking Markets?” Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 25, 5, pp. 891-911.
Crystal, J., G. Dages, and L. Goldberg (2001). “Does Foreign Ownership contribute to Sounder
Banks in Emerging Markets? The Latin American Experience.” Federal Reserve Bank of New
York.
Dages, B., L. Goldberg, and D. Kinney (2000). “Foreign and Domestic Bank Participation in
Emerging Markets: Lessons from Mexico and Argentina.” Economic Policy Review, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, Vol. 6, 3, pp. 17-36.
Detragiache, E., and P. Gupta (2004), “Foreign Banks in Emerging Market Crises: Evidence
from Malaysia.” IMF Staff Working Papers WP/04/129.
Detriagache, E., and A. Spilimbergo, (2001), “Crises and Liquidity: Evidence and
Interpretation.” IMF Staff Working Papers WP/01/2.
Edwards, S. and C. Végh (1997), "Banks and Macroeconomic Disturbances Under
Predetermined Exchange Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 40, pp. 239-278.
Frankel, J., and A. Rose, (1996), “Exchange Rate Crises in Emerging Markets.” Journal of
International Economics, Vol. 41, 3-4, pp. 351-368.




                                                30
Goldberg, L. (2001). “When I U.S. Bank Lending to Emerging Markets Volatile?” National
Bureau of Economic Research WP 8209, April.
Houston, J., C. James, and D. Marcus (1997). “Capital Market Frictions and the Role of Internal
Capital Markets in Banking.” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 46, pp. 135-164, November.
Jayaratne, J. and D. Morgan (2000), "Capital Market Frictions and Deposit Constraints at
Banks," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 32, 1, pp. 74-92.
Kaminsky, G., and C. Reinhart, (1999), “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balance-
of-Payments Problems.” The American Economic Review, Vol. 89, 3, pp. 473-500.
Kashyap A., J. Stein, and D. Wilcox, (1993), "Monetary Policy and Credit Conditions: Evidence
from the Composition of External Finance," American Economic Review, Vol. 83, pp. 78-98.
Kashyap A. and J. Stein (1994), "Monetary Policy and Bank Lending," in: Monetary Policy,
Mankiw, G. (Ed.), NBER Studies in Business Cycles, Vol. 29, University of Chicago Press.
Kashyap A. and J. Stein (1995), "The Impact of Monetary Policy on Bank Balance Sheets,"
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series in Public Policy, Vol. 42, pp. 151-195.
Kashyap, A. and J. Stein (2000).”What Do One Million Observations on Banks have to say
about Monetary Policy?” American Economic Review, Vol. 90, 3, pp. 407-428.
Kishan, R. and T. Opiela (2000). “Bank Size, Bank Capital and the Bank Lending Channel.”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 32, 1, pp. 121-141.
Peek, J. and E. Rosengren (1997). “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks: The
Case of Japan.” American Economic Review, Vol. 87, 4, pp. 495-505.
Reinhart, C. and V. Reinhart (1999). “On the Use of Reserve Requirements in Dealing with
Capital Flow Problems.” International Journal of Finance and Economics, Vol. 4, 1, pp. 27-54.
Vázquez, F. (2001), "Bank Lending and Monetary Conditions in Developing Countries:
International Evidence on the Lending Channel." mimeo, University of Maryland, College Park.




                                              31
Figure 1. Money Market Rates and Reserve Requirements, Asian Countries, 1990-2000

              Money market rates (left scale)                                    Req. reserves (right scale)

            HONG KONG                                INDIA                                         INDONESIA
    12.0                              1.0    12.0                                    2.0   60.0                                1.2
    10.0
                                                                                           40.0
     8.0                                     10.0
     6.0                                                                                   20.0

     4.0                              -1.0    8.0                                    1.7    0.0                                1.1
           1990         1995   2000                 1990          1995        2000                1990           1995   2000
            KOREA REP. OF                            MALAYSIA                                      PHILIPPINES
    20.0                              1.8                                            1.9   16.0                                2.6
                                              8.0
                                                                                           14.0
    15.0                                      6.0
                                                                                           12.0
    10.0                                      4.0                                          10.0
     5.0                              1.3     2.0                                    1.3    8.0                                1.8
           1990         1995   2000                 1992   1994   1996   1998 2000                1990           1995   2000
            SINGAPORE                                TAIWAN                                        THAILAND
     8.0                              1.4     1.0                                    2.8   15.0                                1.5
                                              0.5
     6.0                                                                                   10.0
                                              0.0
     4.0                                                                                    5.0
                                             -0.5
     2.0                              1.3    -1.0                                    2.0    0.0                                1.4
           1990         1995   2000                 1992   1994   1996   1998 2000                1990           1995   2000




Source: Central Bank reports and International Financial Statistics.
For countries with incomplete or not available information on money market rates, an alternative
indicator was used. The call money rate (series 60) was used for India, the 1-month average
interbank offer rate for Hong Kong, and the interbank rate for Taiwan.




                                                                         32
Figure 2. Money Market Rates and Reserve Requirements, Latin America, 1990-2000
                  Money market rates (left scale)                                                                       Req. reserves (right scale)
           ARGENTINA                                        BOLIVIA                                        BRAZIL                                              CHILE
   80.0                                      4.6    25.0                                     2.3   60.0                                         4.5    40.0                             1.6
   60.0                                                                                            50.0
                                                    20.0                                                                                               30.0
   40.0                                                                                            40.0
                                                    15.0                                                                                               20.0
   20.0                                                                                            30.0

    0.0                                      2.1    10.0                                     1.8   20.0                                         3.5    10.0                             1.2
          1990           1995       2000                   1990          1995         2000                1994      1996          1998   2000                 1990        1995   2000
           COLOMBIA                                         MEXICO                                         PANAMA                                              PARAGUAY
   50.0                                      3.3    60.0                                     3.0    7.5                                         1.0    25.0                             3.3

   40.0                                                                                             7.0
                                                                                                                                                       20.0
                                                    40.0                                            6.5
   30.0                                                                                                                                                15.0
                                                                                                    6.0
   20.0                                             20.0
                                             1.9                                             1.2    5.5                                         -1.0   10.0                             2.1
          1990            1995        2000                   1990         1995        2000                1992   1994      1996     1998 2000                 1990        1995   2000
           PERU                                             URUGUAY                                        VENEZUELA
   50.0                                      1.6   200.0                                     2.7   70.0                                         2.4
   40.0
                                                   150.0                                           60.0
   30.0
                                                   100.0                                           50.0
   20.0
   10.0                                      1.4    50.0                                     0.7   40.0                                         1.9
          1992    1994    1996   1998 2000                 1992   1994   1996    1998 2000                1990             1995          2000




Source: Central Bank reports and International Financial Statistics.
For countries with incomplete or not available information on money market rates, an alternative
indicator was used. Deposit rates (series 60L) were used for Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Panamá,
Paraguay, and Venezuela.




                                                                                                      33
Figure 3. Loan Growth of Domestic and Foreign Banks and Financial Crises (Kaminsky-Reinhart)
                Domestic banks                                     Foreign banks
                Crisis periods
       ARGENTINA              BOLIVIA           BRAZIL                   CHILE                   COLOMBIA




      1990           2001    1990       2000   1990         2000        1990             2000   1990           2000
       HONG KONG              INDIA             INDONESIA                KOREA REP. OF           MALAYSIA




      1990           2000    1990       2000   1990         2000        1990             2000   1990           2001
       MEXICO                 PANAMA            PARAGUAY                 PERU                    PHILIPPINES




      1989           2000    1990       2001   1990         2000        1990             2000   1990           2001
       SINGAPORE              TAIWAN            THAILAND                 URUGUAY                 VENEZUELA
                                                                                                                              - 34 -




      1990           2000    1990       2000   1990         2000        1990             2000   1990           2000




This Figure presents the evolution of loan growth in constant local currency units for domestic and foreign banks. For each
country, loan growth is computed as the median across sampled banks. A crisis window, covering a three-year period around
either a currency, banking or debt crisis, (based on banking and currency crises by Kaminsky-Reinhart, and debt crises
Detriagache-Spilimbergo) is also plotted.




                                                                   34
Figure 4. Loan Growth of Domestic and Foreign Banks and Financial Crises (Caprio-Klingebiel and Frankel-Rose)
                 Domest ic banks                                                                   Foreign banks
                 Banking crises (Caprio-Kling.)                                                    Currency crashes (Frankel-Rose)
       ARGENTINA                     BOLIVIA                             BRAZIL                          CHILE                              COLOMBIA




      1990         1995     2000    1990             1995        2000   1990         1995   2000        1990            1995        2000   1990            1995    2000
       HONG KONG                     INDIA                               INDONESIA                       KOREA REP. OF                      M ALAYSIA




      1990         1995     2000    1990             1995        2000   1990         1995   2000        1990            1995        2000   1990           1995    2000
       M EXICO                       PANAMA                              PAR AGUAY                       PERU                               PHILIPPINES




        1990         1995    2000   1990            1995       2000     1990         1995   2000        1992     1994   1996   1998 2000   1990           1995    2000
       SINGAPORE                     TAIWAN                              THAILAND                        URUGUAY                            VENEZUELA
                                                                                                                                                                          - 35 -




      1990          1995     2000   1992     1994    1996   1998 2000   1990         1995   2000        1992     1994   1996   1998 2000   1990            1995    2000




This Figure presents the evolution of loan growth in constant local currency units for domestic and foreign banks. For each
country, loan growth is computed as the median across sampled banks. A crisis window, covering a three-year period around
either a currency, banking or debt crisis, (based on Caprio-Klingebiel and Frankel-Rose) is also plotted.




                                                                                                   35
Table 1. Sample Coverage by Regions and Bank Ownership
                         Asia                                 Latin America                        Total Observations
            Domestic Foreign         Total           Domestic Foreign         Total           Freq.     Percent      Cum.
1989                 .           .          0                 2           1          3               3      0.03        0.03
1990                9           2          11                 9           3         12              23      0.27        0.30
1991               28           5          33                20           3         23              56      0.65        0.96
1992               84         31          115                42          13         55            170       1.98        2.94
1993              280        101          381              159           96       255             636       7.42       10.36
1994              366        132          498              294         157        451             949      11.07       21.43
1995              424        164          588              321         195        516            1104      12.88       34.30
1996              452        182          634              346         212        558            1192      13.90       48.20
1997              411        189          600              329         220        549            1149      13.40       61.60
1998              399        190          589              336         241        577            1166      13.60       75.20
1999              365        172          537              335         235        570            1107      12.91       88.12
2000              281        142          423              319         250        569             992      11.57       99.69
2001                5           1           6                14           7         21              27      0.31      100.00
Total           3104       1311          4415             2526        1633      4159             8574        100
This Table shows the temporal distribution of the bank-level data. The sample comes from the BankScope database, and covers
20 emerging economies in Asia and Latin America.




                                                             36
Table 2. Balance Sheet Structure by Regions and Quintiles of Bank Size
                                                                 Asian                                                        Latin America
Quintiles of bank size                    0-20       20-40       40-60       60-80      80-100             0-20       20-40       40-60     60-80      80-100

Total loans                               50.8        51.5        52.2        57.8       60.4              51.5        54.7        53.2        47.9     50.0
Problem loans                             3.0         3.8         2.0         2.7        3.8               3.1         2.4         2.1         2.4      4.7
Loan loss reserves                        4.9         2.6         1.6         1.7        1.6               4.5         3.1         2.6         2.2      3.0
Net Loans                                 45.9        49.1        50.7        56.4       59.2              48.1        52.9        51.7        47.1     49.8
Deposits with banks                       16.6        13.2        11.9        9.2        11.4              10.4        9.0         8.6         7.0      4.8
Securities                                14.8        12.4        14.5        13.8       10.4              15.9        15.2        18.0        21.6     18.7
Equity investment                         5.0         7.4         6.1         2.6        1.9               2.8         2.4         1.8         2.5      3.4
Total other earning assets                44.2        43.0        41.5        34.8       30.7              33.1        31.4        33.6        36.9     34.6
Total non-earning assets                   7.2         6.2        5.8         6.6         7.9              13.9        12.2        11.5        13.3     12.9
Fixed assets                               2.7         1.7        2.0         2.2         2.2              4.9         3.5         3.2         2.7      2.6
Total assets                              100.0      100.0       100.0       100.0       100.0             100.0      100.0       100.0       100.0    100.0

Total deposits                            53.8        59.1        61.2        72.6       76.8              58.9        66.7        65.8        59.3     56.1
Money Market Funding                      9.6         8.2         8.4         4.7        3.6               8.0         9.3         12.0        14.8     16.4
Other Funding                             3.5         4.9         8.5         4.7        6.1               2.0         2.8         4.0         6.5      9.7
Other liabilities                         5.5         5.4         5.3         6.5        6.8               6.0         5.9         6.5         8.6      9.0
Total liabilities                         72.4        77.6        83.4        88.6       93.2              75.0        84.8        88.2        89.2     91.2
Equity                                     27.6       22.5        16.6        11.4        6.7               25.0       15.2        11.8        10.8     8.8
Total liabilities and equity              100.0      100.0       100.0       100.0       100.0             100.0      100.0       100.0       100.0    100.0

No. Observations                              578         761         888         972        1204               1131        948      821        737     504
Median Assets (million 1995 US$)               58         210         489        1,591       6,351               50         199      486       1,443   6,392
Mean Assets (million 1995 US$)                 58         212         517        1,685      12,615               54         203      512       1,561   11,498
Other earning assets include due from Central Banks, deposits with banks, bonds, securities, and equity investments. Total deposits include demand
deposits, saving deposits, certificates of deposits, and banks deposits. Equity includes equity reserves and share capital.




                                                                                37
Table 3. Summary Statistics by Regions and Bank Ownership
                                              Domestic Banks                        Foreign Banks
                                    Mean     Median     Max.     Min.     Mean     Median    Max.     Min.

                  A) Asia
Loan Growth                           11.2      10.5     240.4   -128.6      5.1       8.3    218.2   -206.9
Deposit Growth                        11.0       9.3     215.7   -183.8      8.3       8.4    216.2   -108.1
Net Loans/Total Deposits              81.8      75.9     484.0     21.1     88.8      80.7    465.0     22.0
Net Loans/Total Assets                56.1      57.4      87.1     11.8     54.5      58.0     87.0     10.0
Other Earning Assets/Total Assets     31.4      28.5      78.4      5.2     32.7      30.0     75.9      6.1
Non Earning Assets/Total Assets        9.9       8.0      74.4      5.0     11.2       8.3     71.2      5.0
Total Deposits/Total Assets           75.2      79.5      94.9      5.2     68.9      74.8     94.9      7.2
Money Market Funding/Total Assets      4.1       0.9      77.2      0.0      4.4       0.0     73.3      0.0
Total Liabilities/Total Assets        90.1      92.3      99.7     40.9     86.1      89.9     99.8     40.3
Net Worth/Total Assets                 9.9       7.7      59.1      0.3     13.9      10.1     59.7      0.2
Efective Bank Spread                   3.8       3.8      19.0    -14.9      5.1       3.7    135.3     -4.4
             B) Latin America
Loan Growth                            3.4       5.0     202.4   -237.0      8.0       7.0    247.9   -209.2
Deposit Growth                         3.6       5.3     229.8   -236.6      5.4       5.8    196.2   -181.8
Net Loans/Total Deposits              89.0      80.4     494.1     20.1     89.1      81.2    478.3     20.6
Net Loans/Total Assets                52.5      54.6      86.3     10.2     50.4      53.0     87.8     10.1
Other Earning Assets/Total Assets     28.4      25.7      79.5      5.0     31.1      26.8     78.8      5.0
Non Earning Assets/Total Assets       14.7      12.4      75.0      5.0     16.0      13.1     77.4      5.0
Total Deposits/Total Assets           65.2      69.7      93.7      5.4     62.7      69.8     94.9      5.5
Money Market Funding/Total Assets      9.0       2.2      64.3      0.0     12.5       3.3     74.1      0.0
Total Liabilities/Total Assets        85.1      87.8      99.9     40.0     86.5      89.4     99.9     40.2
Net Worth/Total Assets                14.9      12.2      60.0      0.1     13.5      10.6     59.8      0.1
Efective Bank Spread                   8.9       7.0      82.2    -19.6      7.8       6.0    101.4    -31.0
             B) Whole Sample
Loan Growth                            6.9       8.0     240.4   -237.0      7.2       7.5    247.9   -209.2
Deposit Growth                         6.9       7.7     229.8   -236.6      6.1       6.3    216.2   -181.8
Net Loans/Total Deposits              85.8      78.7     494.1     20.1     89.0      81.1    478.3     20.6
Net Loans/Total Assets                54.1      55.6      87.1     10.2     51.5      54.4     87.8     10.0
Other Earning Assets/Total Assets     29.7      26.7      79.5      5.0     31.5      27.7     78.8      5.0
Non Earning Assets/Total Assets       12.6       9.7      75.0      5.0     14.8      11.5     77.4      5.0
Total Deposits/Total Assets           69.6      74.6      94.9      5.2     64.3      71.0     94.9      5.5
Money Market Funding/Total Assets      6.7       1.1      77.2      0.0     10.3       1.2     74.1      0.0
Total Liabilities/Total Assets        87.3      89.6      99.9     40.0     86.4      89.5     99.9     40.2
Net Worth/Total Assets                12.7      10.4      60.0      0.1     13.6      10.5     59.8      0.1
Efective Bank Spread                   6.6       4.7      82.2    -19.6      7.1       5.2    135.3    -31.0




                                                       38
Table 4. GLS Estimates of Selected Variables on Monetary Conditions Latin-American sub-
sample
                                               [1]                  [2]                  [3]                   [4]                  [5]                 [6]
                                           Loan Growth         Deposit Growth       Loans/Deposits         Bank Spread          Deposit Rate        Lending Rate

                  Controls

GDP Growth                              2.016                1.695                0.938                0.011                -0.129               -0.107
                                        [0.369]***           [0.391]***           [1.838]              [0.047]              [0.065]**            [0.075]
Foreign*GDP Growth                      -0.329               -0.063               -2.619               -0.039               -0.111               -0.108
                                        [0.582]              [0.614]              [2.906]              [0.072]              [0.100]              [0.115]

Size                                    0.316                0.377                -0.242               -0.005               0.002                -0.008
                                        [0.032]***           [0.032]***           [0.185]              [0.004]              [0.005]              [0.007]
Foreign*Size                            0.008                0.011                0.068                0.000                -0.007               -0.006
                                        [0.040]              [0.040]              [0.239]              [0.006]              [0.007]              [0.009]

Liquidity (t-1)                         0.837                -0.043               -1.052               -0.036               -0.048               -0.068
                                        [0.127]***           [0.129]              [0.686]              [0.016]**            [0.022]**            [0.025]***
Foreign*Liquidity (t-1)                 0.046                -0.210               1.796                0.005                -0.002               -0.010
                                        [0.188]              [0.190]              [1.022]*             [0.025]              [0.032]              [0.039]

Capitalization (t-1)                    1.109                2.178                -1.351               -0.065               0.050                0.026
                                        [0.212]***           [0.215]***           [1.058]              [0.025]**            [0.035]              [0.040]
Foreign*Capitalization (t-1)            0.704                1.337                0.386                0.039                -0.017               -0.015
                                        [0.376]*             [0.378]***           [1.950]              [0.047]              [0.063]              [0.075]

         Monetary Conditions

Reserve Requirements                    -0.088               -0.028               0.048                -0.001               -0.002               -0.004
                                        [0.043]**            [0.047]              [0.204]              [0.005]              [0.007]              [0.008]
Foreign*Reserve Requirements            0.007                -0.046               0.227                -0.017               0.029                0.014
                                        [0.082]              [0.088]              [0.394]              [0.010]*             [0.014]**            [0.015]

Money Market Rate                       -0.042               -0.055               0.000                0.106                0.233                0.388
                                        [0.006]***           [0.007]***           [0.029]              [0.028]***           [0.039]***           [0.045]***
Foreign*Money Market Rate               0.056                0.399                -0.013               0.070                0.026                0.107
                                        [0.034]*             [0.102]***           [0.065]              [0.039]*             [0.050]              [0.061]*


Observations                            2317                 2350                 2324                 2194                 2235                 2197
Groups                                  591                  599                  593                  582                  595                  584
R. Sq.                                  0.17                 0.22                 0.00                 0.04                 0.07                 0.13
Rho AR(1)                               0.18                 0.06                 0.55                 0.42                 0.09                 0.31

This Table presents the results of GLS panel regressions with bank-level fixed effects, and allowing for panel-specific AR(1) errors. The sample comes from the
Bankscope database and covers banks operating in selected Latin American countries from 1989-2001. Robust standard errors are reported between square
brackets. Statistical significance at one, five, and ten percent level, are indicated by ***, **, *, respectively. Six models are considered, each one presented in a
separate column. Each model uses a different dependent variable, specified in the first row of the Table. All models share the same set of explanatory variables,
including country-level controls (GDP growth), bank-level controls (bank size, bank liquidity, and bank capitalization), and two indicators of monetary conditions
(an index that tracks the evolution of reserve requirements, and the money market rate). The sample is split across domestic and foreign banks with the use of a
dummy ("Foreign") which equals one for foreign banks and zero otherwise.




                                                                                  39
Table 5. GLS Estimates of Selected Variables on Monetary Conditions Asian sub-sample
                                               [1]                  [2]                  [3]                   [4]                  [5]                 [6]
                                           Loan Growth         Deposit Growth       Loans/Deposits         Bank Spread          Deposit Rate        Lending Rate

                  Controls

GDP Growth                              1.906                1.364                -0.101               0.073                -0.099               -0.027
                                        [0.238]***           [0.268]***           [1.260]              [0.026]***           [0.018]***           [0.031]
Foreign*GDP Growth                      0.389                1.202                -0.944               0.004                0.071                0.063
                                        [0.351]              [0.393]***           [1.887]              [0.040]              [0.028]**            [0.048]

Size                                    0.281                0.315                0.126                0.001                -0.002               0.000
                                        [0.032]***           [0.035]***           [0.193]              [0.004]              [0.002]              [0.005]
Foreign*Size                            0.127                0.209                0.303                0.009                -0.001               0.005
                                        [0.044]***           [0.047]***           [0.264]              [0.005]              [0.003]              [0.006]

Liquidity (t-1)                         0.856                -0.224               -1.537               -0.025               -0.036               -0.066
                                        [0.107]***           [0.119]*             [0.646]**            [0.013]*             [0.008]***           [0.015]***
Foreign*Liquidity (t-1)                 0.309                0.595                0.602                -0.010               0.011                0.016
                                        [0.171]*             [0.189]***           [1.005]              [0.021]              [0.013]              [0.025]

Capitalization (t-1)                    0.870                0.924                0.365                0.047                -0.013               0.033
                                        [0.138]***           [0.156]***           [0.806]              [0.015]***           [0.010]              [0.018]*
Foreign*Capitalization (t-1)            0.045                0.544                -0.221               -0.032               0.046                -0.002
                                        [0.216]              [0.238]**            [1.257]              [0.024]              [0.015]***           [0.029]

         Monetary Conditions

Reserve Requirements                    -0.033               0.111                -0.091               0.001                0.023                0.011
                                        [0.089]              [0.099]              [0.473]              [0.009]              [0.006]***           [0.011]
Foreign*Reserve Requirements            -0.352               -0.329               -0.064               -0.011               -0.026               -0.025
                                        [0.196]*             [0.219]              [1.039]              [0.021]              [0.014]*             [0.025]

Money Market Rate                       -0.793               -0.005               -1.245               -0.063               0.254                0.200
                                        [0.177]***           [0.195]              [0.998]              [0.019]***           [0.013]***           [0.023]***
Foreign*Money Market Rate               0.569                -0.169               0.052                0.094                -0.158               -0.052
                                        [0.260]**            [0.288]              [1.435]              [0.029]***           [0.019]***           [0.034]


Observations                            2631                 2623                 2582                 2308                 2380                 2314
Groups                                  627                  628                  613                  571                  593                  573
R. Sq.                                  0.26                 0.17                 0.01                 0.04                 0.40                 0.15
Rho AR(1)                               0.15                 0.02                 0.45                 0.40                 -0.01                0.42

This Table presents the results of GLS panel regressions with bank-level fixed effects, and allowing for panel-specific AR(1) errors. The sample comes from the
Bankscope database and covers banks operating in selected Latin American countries from 1989-2001. Robust standard errors are reported between square
brackets. Statistical significance at one, five, and ten percent level, are indicated by ***, **, *, respectively. Six models are considered, each one presented in a
separate column. Each model uses a different dependent variable, specified in the first row of the Table. All models share the same set of explanatory variables,
including country-level controls (GDP growth), bank-level controls (bank size, bank liquidity, and bank capitalization), and two indicators of monetary conditions
(an index that tracks the evolution of reserve requirements, and the money market rate). The sample is split across domestic and foreign banks with the use of a
dummy ("Foreign") which equals one for foreign banks and zero otherwise.




                                                                                  40
Table 6. GLS Regressions of Loan Growth on Monetary Conditions (I), Latin America

                                                                                          H0:
                                              Domestic              Foreign             Domestic=
                                               Banks                 Banks               Foreign
                              Whole Sample

Money Market Rate                                 -0.042 ***             0.013            [0.10]       Obs.                   2317
                                                (0.0064)              (0.0332)                         Groups                  591
Reserve Requirements                              -0.088 **             -0.081            [0.93]       R-Squared             0.167
                                                (0.0431)              (0.0697)                         Rho AR(1)             0.175

         Capitalization Below 75 percentile

Money Market Rate                                 -0.042 ***            -0.019            [0.46]       Obs.                   1759
                                                (0.0060)              (0.0304)                         Groups                  483
Reserve Requirements                              -0.094 *              -0.057            [0.68]       R-Squared             0.179
                                                (0.0482)              (0.0748)                         Rho AR(1)             0.207

         Capitalization Above 75 percentile

Money Market Rate                                  0.028                 1.232            [0.29]       Obs.                    401
                                                (0.0336)              (1.1285)                         Groups                  165
Reserve Requirements                               0.014                 0.188            [0.38]       R-Squared             0.269
                                                (0.0895)              (0.1743)                         Rho AR(1)             0.359

              Liquidity Below 75 percentile


Money Market Rate                                 -0.042 ***            -0.003            [0.04]       Obs.                   1718
                                                (0.0053)              (0.0184)                         Groups                  501
Reserve Requirements                              -0.028                -0.040            [0.88]       R-Squared             0.272
                                                (0.0392)              (0.0663)                         Rho AR(1)             0.259

              Liquidity Above 75 percentile

Money Market Rate                                  0.984                 0.778            [0.91]       Obs.                    377
                                                (1.2471)              (1.2656)                         Groups                  171
Reserve Requirements                              -0.603 **             -0.206            [0.34]       R-Squared             0.102
                                                (0.3016)              (0.2861)                         Rho AR(1)             0.195

This table presents selected coefficients from six sets of fixed-effects panel regressions. In all cases, the dependent variable is
loan growth in constant local currency units. The reported coefficients are those associated with monetary conditions, measured
by money market rates and an indicator of reserve requirements (which goes from 1 to 5 where a higher number indicates higher
reserves). Controls, not reported here, include GDP growth and a set of bank characteristics (size, asset liquidity and
capitalization). The table is divided in three panels. The upper displays the results of the regression based on the whole sample.
The middle panel reports the results of two regressions, splitting the sample between banks with capitalization above (and below)
the 75 percentile relative to other banks operating in the same country. The lower panel follows a similar structure, but the
sample is split by liquidity levels. The estimation is based on GLS, allowing for panel-specific AR(1) processes.

Standard errors between parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 10%; *** significant at 1%. The p-values
coresponding to the null of coefficient equality across domestic and foreign banks between [square] brackets.




                                                                 41
Table 7. GLS Regressions of Loan Growth on Monetary Conditions (I), Asia

                                                                                          H0:
                                              Domestic              Foreign             Domestic=
                                               Banks                 Banks               Foreign
                              Whole Sample

Money Market Rate                                 -0.793 ***            -0.224            [0.03]       Obs.                  2631
                                                (0.1770)              (0.2034)                         Groups                 627
Reserve Requirements                              -0.033                -0.384 **         [0.07]       R-Squared           0.2614
                                                (0.0893)              (0.1760)                         Rho AR(1)         0.151788

         Capitalization Below 75 percentile

Money Market Rate                                 -0.647 ***            -0.382            [0.42]       Obs.                  2032
                                                (0.2000)              (0.2724)                         Groups                 511
Reserve Requirements                              -0.022                -0.254            [0.22]       R-Squared           0.2515
                                                (0.0882)              (0.1670)                         Rho AR(1)         0.162126

         Capitalization Above 75 percentile

Money Market Rate                                 -0.825                -0.059            [0.29]       Obs.                   442
                                                (0.5376)              (0.5424)                         Groups                 181
Reserve Requirements                               0.031                -0.541            [0.58]       R-Squared           0.3708
                                                (0.3771)              (0.9635)                         Rho AR(1)         0.206858

              Liquidity Below 75 percentile


Money Market Rate                                 -1.030 ***            -0.518 ***        [0.02]       Obs.                   2105
                                                (0.1560)              (0.1778)                         Groups                  527
Reserve Requirements                              -0.040                -0.447 ***        [0.01]       R-Squared             0.343
                                                (0.0730)              (0.1435)                         Rho AR(1)             0.295

              Liquidity Above 75 percentile

Money Market Rate                                 -0.623                 0.767            [0.45]       Obs.                    358
                                                (1.4300)              (1.1636)                         Groups                  161
Reserve Requirements                              -0.225                -1.232            [0.47]       R-Squared             0.274
                                                (0.5974)              (1.2425)                         Rho AR(1)             0.242

This table presents selected coefficients from six sets of fixed-effects panel regressions. In all cases, the dependent variable is
loan growth in constant local currency units. The reported coefficients are those associated with monetary conditions, measured
by money market rates and an indicator of reserve requirements (which goes from 1 to 5 where a higher number indicates higher
reserves). Controls, not reported here, include GDP growth and a set of bank characteristics (size, asset liquidity and
capitalization). The table is divided in three panels. The upper displays the results of the regression based on the whole sample.
The middle panel reports the results of two regressions, splitting the sample between banks with capitalization above (and below)
the 75 percentile relative to other banks operating in the same country. The lower panel follows a similar structure, but the
sample is split by liquidity levels. The estimation is based on GLS, allowing for panel-specific AR(1) processes.

Standard errors between parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 10%; *** significant at 1%. The p-values
coresponding to the null of coefficient equality across domestic and foreign banks between [square] brackets.




                                                                 42
Table 8. GLS Regressions of Loan Growth on Monetary Conditions (II), Latin America

                                                                                            H0:
                                               Domestic              Foreign             Domestic=
                                                Banks                 Banks               Foreign
                              Whole Sample

Exchange Rate Depreciation                       -0.4138 ***            0.0482              [0.00]      Obs.                   2299
                                                (0.0751)              (0.1345)                          Groups                  589
Reserve Requirements                              -0.080 *              -0.081              [0.98]      R-Squared               0.16
                                                (0.0438)              (0.0707)                          Rho AR(1)              0.19
US Federal Funds Rate                             -0.035                -0.049 *            [0.45]
                                                (0.0248)              (0.0263)

          Capitalization Below 75 percentile

Exchange Rate Depreciation                       -0.4398 ***            0.0914              [0.00]      Obs.                   1744
                                                (0.0750)              (0.1314)                          Groups                  483
Reserve Requirements                              -0.094 *              -0.056              [0.68]      R-Squared               0.17
                                                (0.0488)              (0.0762)                          Rho AR(1)              0.22
US Federal Funds Rate                             -0.048 *              -0.057 **           [0.68]
                                                (0.0263)              (0.0272)

         Capitalization Above 75 percentile

Exchange Rate Depreciation                       -0.0729                0.0362              [0.78]      Obs.                     398
                                                (0.2306)              (0.1450)                          Groups                  162
Reserve Requirements                               0.022                -0.039              [0.32]      R-Squared               0.27
                                                (0.0922)              (0.0676)                          Rho AR(1)               0.39
US Federal Funds Rate                             -0.011                -0.004              [0.28]
                                                (0.0663)              (0.0250)

              Liquidity Below 75 percentile


Exchange Rate Depreciation                       -0.4186 ***            0.0966              [0.00]      Obs.                   1707
                                                (0.0727)              (0.5544)                          Groups                  497
Reserve Requirements                              -0.029                 0.217              [0.90]      R-Squared               0.26
                                                (0.0404)              (0.1743)                          Rho AR(1)              0.25
US Federal Funds Rate                              0.005                 0.060              [0.60]
                                                (0.0221)              (0.0671)

              Liquidity Above 75 percentile

Exchange Rate Depreciation                       -0.1468                0.0966              [0.90]      Obs.                     373
                                                (0.3556)              (0.5544)                          Groups                  169
Reserve Requirements                              -0.425                 0.217              [0.78]      R-Squared               0.13
                                                (0.2939)              (0.1743)                          Rho AR(1)               0.20
US Federal Funds Rate                             -0.012                 0.060              [0.08]
                                                (0.1363)              (0.0671)

This table presents selected coefficients from six sets of fixed-effects panel regressions. In all cases, the dependent variable is
loan growth in constant local currency units. The reported coefficients are those associated with monetary conditions, measured
by the Federal Funds rate, the yearly variation of the exchange rate (increase=depreciation) and an indicator of reserve
requirements (which goes from 1 to 5 where a higher number indicates higher reserves). Controls, not reported here, include
GDP growth and a set of bank characteristics (size, asset liquidity and capitalization). The table is divided in three panels. The
upper displays the results of the regression based on the whole sample. The middle panel reports the results of two regressions,
splitting the sample between banks with capitalization above (and below) the 75 percentile relative to other banks operating in
the same country. The lower panel follows a similar structure, but the sample is split by liquidity levels. The estimation is based
on GLS, allowing for panel-specific AR(1) processes.

Standard errors between parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 10%; *** significant at 1%. The p-values
coresponding to the null of coefficient equality across domestic and foreign banks between [square] brackets.




                                                                                 43
Table 9. GLS Regressions of Loan Growth on Monetary Conditions (II), Asia

                                                                                           H0:
                                               Domestic              Foreign             Domestic=
                                                Banks                 Banks               Foreign
                              Whole Sample

Exchange Rate Depreciation                       -0.1188 *              0.2317 ***          [0.00]      Obs.                   2631
                                                (0.0691)              (0.0722)                          Groups                  627
Reserve Requirements                              -0.075                -0.461 ***          [0.05]      R-Squared              0.26
                                                (0.0922)              (0.1759)                          Rho AR(1)              0.14
US Federal Funds Rate                              0.039 **             -0.013              [0.00]
                                                (0.0165)              (0.0197)

          Capitalization Below 75 percentile

Exchange Rate Depreciation                       -0.2040 **             0.2345 ***          [0.00]      Obs.                   2032
                                                (0.0802)              (0.0905)                          Groups                  511
Reserve Requirements                              -0.032                -0.328 **           [0.12]      R-Squared              0.26
                                                (0.0915)              (0.1658)                          Rho AR(1)              0.15
US Federal Funds Rate                              0.054 ***            -0.018              [0.00]
                                                (0.0171)              (0.0202)

         Capitalization Above 75 percentile

Exchange Rate Depreciation                        0.3491 *              0.0683              [0.62]      Obs.                     442
                                                (0.1861)              (0.0623)                          Groups                   181
Reserve Requirements                              -0.253                -0.515 ***          [0.81]      R-Squared               0.38
                                                (0.3863)              (0.1440)                          Rho AR(1)               0.21
US Federal Funds Rate                             -0.052                -0.028 *            [0.59]
                                                (0.0555)              (0.0162)

              Liquidity Below 75 percentile


Exchange Rate Depreciation                       -0.3327 ***            0.2154              [0.00]      Obs.                   2105
                                                (0.0647)              (0.1917)                          Groups                  527
Reserve Requirements                              -0.025                -0.496              [0.00]      R-Squared              0.34
                                                (0.0770)              (0.9463)                          Rho AR(1)              0.28
US Federal Funds Rate                              0.040 ***            -0.019              [0.00]
                                                (0.0134)              (0.0627)

              Liquidity Above 75 percentile

Exchange Rate Depreciation                       -0.0347                0.2154              [0.36]      Obs.                     358
                                                (0.3986)              (0.1917)                          Groups                   161
Reserve Requirements                              -0.238                -0.496              [0.51]      R-Squared               0.29
                                                (0.6127)              (0.9463)                          Rho AR(1)               0.25
US Federal Funds Rate                             -0.061                -0.019              [0.18]
                                                (0.0899)              (0.0627)

This table presents selected coefficients from six sets of fixed-effects panel regressions. In all cases, the dependent variable is
loan growth in constant local currency units. The reported coefficients are those associated with monetary conditions, measured
by the Federal Funds rate, the yearly variation of the exchange rate (increase=depreciation) and an indicator of reserve
requirements (which goes from 1 to 5 where a higher number indicates higher reserves). Controls, not reported here, include
GDP growth and a set of bank characteristics (size, asset liquidity and capitalization). The table is divided in three panels. The
upper displays the results of the regression based on the whole sample. The middle panel reports the results of two regressions,
splitting the sample between banks with capitalization above (and below) the 75 percentile relative to other banks operating in
the same country. The lower panel follows a similar structure, but the sample is split by liquidity levels. The estimation is based
on GLS, allowing for panel-specific AR(1) processes.

Standard errors between parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 10%; *** significant at 1%. The p-values
coresponding to the null of coefficient equality across domestic and foreign banks between [square] brackets.




                                                                                 44
Table 10. Latin America, Regressions Using a Crises Window
                                     [1]          [2]              [3]           [4]          [5]            [6]
                                                Deposit          Loans to
                                 Loan Growth    Growth           Deposits    Bank Spread Deposit Rate Lending Rate

           Bank-level controls

Size                                0.2270       0.2710          -0.3110       -0.0130       0.0120         0.0010
                                  [0.039]***   [0.038]***        [0.190]     [0.004]***    [0.005]**       [0.007]
Foreign*Size                        0.0220       0.0570           0.1010       0.0000       -0.0100        -0.0130
                                    [0.053]      [0.052]         [0.154]       [0.006]      [0.006]*       [0.009]

Liquidity (t-1)                     0.6740      -0.0860           -1.6310      -0.0550      -0.0770        -0.0830
                                  [0.155]***    [0.139]          [0.778]**   [0.019]***    [0.036]**     [0.029]***
Foreign*Liquidity (t-1)             0.4110       0.1140            1.5120      0.1090        0.0400         0.1050
                                   [0.223]*     [0.217]           [0.836]*   [0.036]***     [0.042]       [0.050]**

Capitalization (t-1)                1.2380       2.2150          -1.9040       -0.0030      0.0800         0.1170
                                  [0.325]***   [0.320]***        [1.677]       [0.035]     [0.048]*       [0.060]*
Foreign*Capitalization (t-1)        0.8360       0.7930          2.3640        0.0550      -0.0410        -0.0240
                                    [0.527]      [0.520]         [1.791]       [0.065]      [0.056]        [0.089]

             Target variables

Dummy Crises                        -0.0980      -0.1380         -0.2770        0.0300       0.0370         0.0580
                                  [0.038]***   [0.038]***        [0.209]     [0.005]***   [0.011]***     [0.008]***
Foreign*Dummy Crises                 0.1340       0.0710          0.0700       -0.0040      -0.0290        -0.0270
                                   [0.070]*      [0.081]         [0.259]       [0.011]     [0.014]**      [0.015]*

Constant                           0.0220       0.0260         1.1860          0.0710       0.1210         0.1930
                                   [0.014]     [0.012]**     [0.055]***      [0.002]***   [0.003]***     [0.002]***

Observations                        3019         3055              3020         2898         2955           2906
R-squared                           0.41         0.37              0.55         0.86         0.60           0.71

This Table compares the response of selected bank-level variables to GDP growth and crises/non-crises period across
domestic and foreign banks. The regressions were computed with bank-level fixed effects and robust standard errors.
The sample covers the Latin American countries.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                            45
Table 11. Asia, Regressions Using a Crises Window
                                     [1]          [2]              [3]           [4]          [5]            [6]
                                                Deposit          Loans to
                                 Loan Growth    Growth           Deposits    Bank Spread Deposit Rate Lending Rate

           Bank-level controls

Size                                0.1270       0.2060           0.0780       -0.0080       0.0030        -0.0050
                                  [0.035]***   [0.035]***         [0.118]    [0.003]***     [0.002]        [0.003]
Foreign*Size                        0.1120       0.2010           0.4140       0.0080       -0.0020         0.0050
                                   [0.051]**   [0.052]***         [0.303]      [0.005]      [0.003]        [0.007]

Liquidity (t-1)                     0.7570      -0.0910        -1.7290         -0.0220      -0.0510        -0.0790
                                  [0.145]***    [0.092]      [0.609]***       [0.011]*    [0.010]***     [0.013]***
Foreign*Liquidity (t-1)             0.2920       0.4940        -0.6090         0.0100        0.0230         0.0360
                                    [0.233]    [0.208]**       [1.856]         [0.059]      [0.019]        [0.073]

Capitalization (t-1)                0.8860       1.2560           0.3880       0.0270       0.0140         0.0430
                                  [0.206]***   [0.211]***         [0.643]      [0.031]      [0.011]        [0.030]
Foreign*Capitalization (t-1)        0.1720       0.2740           0.2290       0.0210       0.0220         0.0420
                                    [0.402]      [0.449]          [0.831]      [0.039]      [0.021]        [0.043]

             Target variables

Dummy Crises                        -0.0920      -0.0440           0.0090      -0.0040       0.0230         0.0190
                                  [0.019]***    [0.019]**         [0.049]     [0.001]**   [0.002]***     [0.002]***
Foreign*Dummy Crises                -0.0300      -0.1100          -0.3190      0.0020       -0.0050        -0.0030
                                    [0.040]    [0.039]***        [0.154]**     [0.005]     [0.003]*        [0.006]

Constant                            0.1250       0.1260        1.2440          0.0490       0.0680         0.1150
                                  [0.008]***   [0.010]***    [0.040]***      [0.001]***   [0.001]***     [0.001]***

Observations                        3343         3327              3271         2956         3050           2965
R-squared                           0.43         0.37              0.71         0.92         0.94           0.90

This Table compares the response of selected bank-level variables to GDP growth and crises/non-crises period across
domestic and foreign banks. The regressions were computed with bank-level fixed effects and robust standard errors.
The sample covers the Asian countries.
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                            46
Table 12. Latin America, Regressions Specifying Pre- and Post- Crises Years
                                                 [1]            [2]           [3]             [4]           [5]            [6]
                                                              Deposit       Loans to
                                             Loan Growth      Growth        Deposits     Bank Spread Deposit Rate Lending Rate

                       Bank-level controls

Size                                           0.2330         0.2790         -0.3100        -0.0130        0.0100         0.0000
                                             [0.040]***     [0.039]***       [0.187]*     [0.004]***     [0.005]**       [0.007]
Foreign*Size                                   0.0190         0.0560          0.1010        0.0000        -0.0090        -0.0130
                                               [0.054]        [0.053]         [0.152]       [0.006]       [0.006]        [0.009]

Liquidity (t-1)                                0.6790         -0.0790        -1.6320        -0.0550       -0.0780        -0.0840
                                             [0.154]***       [0.138]       [0.781]**     [0.019]***     [0.036]**     [0.029]***
Foreign*Liquidity (t-1)                        0.4030          0.0910         1.5070         0.1110        0.0410         0.1080
                                              [0.223]*        [0.217]        [0.839]*     [0.036]***      [0.042]       [0.050]**

Capitalization (t-1)                           1.2350         2.2250         -1.9140       -0.0010         0.0750         0.1150
                                             [0.326]***     [0.322]***       [1.670]       [0.035]        [0.047]        [0.059]*
Foreign*Capitalization (t-1)                   0.8360         0.7750          2.3690       0.0530         -0.0350        -0.0220
                                               [0.529]        [0.523]        [1.784]       [0.066]        [0.055]         [0.089]

                          Target variables

Crises (T-1)                                   0.0690         0.0620         -0.1570        0.0240        -0.0060         0.0180
                                               [0.066]        [0.070]        [0.110]      [0.007]***      [0.006]        [0.010]*
Foreign*Crises (T-1)                           0.0850         0.1840          0.1480        -0.0080       -0.0100        -0.0180
                                               [0.105]       [0.108]*        [0.133]        [0.014]       [0.011]         [0.018]

Crises (T)                                     -0.0730        -0.0730        -0.2820        0.0310         0.0150         0.0450
                                               [0.069]        [0.076]       [0.138]**     [0.007]***     [0.007]**     [0.010]***
Foreign*Crises (T)                              0.1120         0.0780         0.0990        -0.0220       -0.0050        -0.0270
                                               [0.134]        [0.150]        [0.141]        [0.015]       [0.014]        [0.019]

Crises (T+1)                                   -0.1370        -0.2030        -0.3030        0.0290         0.0560         0.0720
                                             [0.040]***     [0.039]***       [0.281]      [0.007]***    [0.016]***     [0.011]***
Foreign*Crises (T+1)                            0.1690         0.0680         0.0570        0.0070        -0.0480        -0.0320
                                              [0.070]**       [0.085]        [0.371]        [0.014]      [0.019]**       [0.021]

Constant                                       0.0190         0.0220         1.1850         0.0710        0.1220         0.1940
                                               [0.014]       [0.012]*      [0.054]***     [0.002]***    [0.003]***     [0.002]***

Observations                                    3019           3055           3020           2898          2955           2906
R-squared                                       0.41           0.38           0.55           0.86          0.60           0.71

Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
This Table compares the response of selected bank-level variables to GDP growth and crises/non-crises period across domestic and
foreign banks. The regressions were computed with bank-level fixed effects and robust standard errors. The sample covers the Latin
American countries.




                                                                  47
Table 13. Asia, Regressions Specifying Pre- and Post- Crises Years
                                         [1]           [2]            [3]            [4]           [5]            [6]
                                                     Deposit        Loans to
                                     Loan Growth     Growth         Deposits     Bank Spread Deposit Rate Lending Rate

               Bank-level controls

Size                                   0.1240        0.2030          0.0830        -0.0090        0.0030        -0.0050
                                     [0.035]***    [0.035]***        [0.118]     [0.003]***      [0.002]        [0.003]
Foreign*Size                           0.1030        0.1940          0.4040        0.0080        -0.0040         0.0040
                                      [0.050]**    [0.052]***        [0.305]       [0.005]       [0.003]        [0.007]

Liquidity (t-1)                        0.8030        -0.0650          -1.7330      -0.0200       -0.0500        -0.0770
                                     [0.146]***      [0.092]        [0.612]***    [0.011]*     [0.011]***     [0.013]***
Foreign*Liquidity (t-1)                0.3410         0.5500          -0.5260      0.0090         0.0210         0.0330
                                       [0.231]     [0.207]***         [1.838]      [0.059]       [0.019]        [0.072]

Capitalization (t-1)                   0.8020        1.2090          0.3610        0.0260        0.0080         0.0390
                                     [0.204]***    [0.214]***        [0.648]       [0.031]       [0.012]        [0.031]
Foreign*Capitalization (t-1)           0.1330        0.2240          0.2730        0.0190        0.0230         0.0380
                                       [0.391]       [0.446]         [0.837]       [0.039]       [0.020]        [0.044]

                  Target variables

Crises (T-1)                           0.0380         0.0160          0.0470       0.0020        0.0010         0.0040
                                     [0.011]***      [0.014]          [0.034]     [0.001]**      [0.002]      [0.001]***
Foreign*Crises (T-1)                   0.0170        -0.0160         -0.1570       0.0000        0.0060         0.0040
                                       [0.024]       [0.029]         [0.086]*      [0.003]      [0.002]**       [0.004]

Crises (T)                             -0.0330       -0.0100         -0.0170       -0.0010        0.0180        0.0150
                                      [0.013]**      [0.015]          [0.034]      [0.001]     [0.002]***     [0.001]***
Foreign*Crises (T)                      0.0450       -0.0170         -0.1730       0.0010        -0.0030        0.0000
                                       [0.032]       [0.032]         [0.103]*      [0.004]       [0.003]        [0.005]

Crises (T+1)                           -0.1360       -0.0640         -0.0310       -0.0020        0.0110         0.0090
                                     [0.016]***    [0.019]***        [0.032]       [0.001]     [0.002]***     [0.002]***
Foreign*Crises (T+1)                   -0.0540       -0.1270         -0.1100       -0.0020       -0.0030        -0.0060
                                      [0.030]*     [0.031]***        [0.074]       [0.003]       [0.002]        [0.004]

Constant                               0.1140        0.1180           1.2390       0.0480        0.0700         0.1160
                                     [0.008]***    [0.009]***       [0.040]***   [0.001]***    [0.001]***     [0.001]***

Observations                            3343          3327            3271          2956          3050           2965
R-squared                               0.45          0.38            0.71          0.92          0.94           0.90

Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
This Table compares the response of selected bank-level variables to GDP growth and crises/non-crises period across
domestic and foreign banks. The regressions were computed with bank-level fixed effects and robust standard errors. The
sample covers the Asian countries.




                                                               48
Table 14. Latin America, Alternative Crises Definitions
                                                  [1]            [2]            [3]             [4]            [5]            [6]
                                                               Deposit        Loans to
                                             Loan Growth       Growth         Deposits     Bank Spread Deposit Rate Lending Rate

                         Caprio-Kinglebiel

Crises C-K (T-1)                                  0.006          -0.075         -0.267         0.025           0.000         0.026
                                                [0.047]        [0.045]*       [0.127]**     [0.006]***       [0.006]      [0.009]***
Foreign*Crises C-K (T-1)                         -0.142           0.005          0.032         -0.024         -0.008        -0.033
                                               [0.082]*         [0.079]        [0.135]       [0.010]**       [0.010]      [0.012]***

Crises C-K (T)                                   -0.101          -0.171         -0.350         0.045          0.045          0.081
                                               [0.046]**      [0.047]***       [0.282]      [0.007]***     [0.012]***     [0.011]***
Foreign*Crises C-K (T)                            0.136           0.123          0.019         0.000         -0.057         -0.051
                                                [0.075]*        [0.087]        [0.326]        [0.011]      [0.015]***     [0.017]***

Crises C-K (T+1)                                 0.066          -0.005         -0.316         0.009          -0.008          0.013
                                               [0.039]*         [0.041]        [0.275]       [0.005]*        [0.014]        [0.009]
Foreign*Crises C-K (T+1)                         0.123           0.042          -0.108        0.023           -0.014         -0.003
                                                [0.077]         [0.087]        [0.410]       [0.012]*        [0.016]        [0.017]

                             Frankel-Rose

Crises F-R (T-1)                                -0.029           0.157          0.141          0.002          -0.012         -0.006
                                                [0.042]       [0.051]***       [0.195]        [0.006]        [0.009]        [0.011]
Foreign*Crises F-R (T-1)                         0.034           0.006          0.254          -0.006         -0.005         -0.012
                                                [0.101]         [0.107]        [0.465]        [0.010]        [0.013]        [0.015]

Crises F-R (T)                                  -0.226           -0.026         -0.205         0.011          0.036          0.046
                                              [0.055]***        [0.060]        [0.140]       [0.006]*      [0.009]***     [0.011]***
Foreign*Crises F-R (T)                           0.184            0.073          0.738         0.009          -0.007         0.003
                                               [0.100]*         [0.111]        [0.561]        [0.012]        [0.015]        [0.020]

Crises F-R (T+1)                                -0.150           -0.110         0.126          0.009          0.043          0.056
                                              [0.043]***      [0.042]***       [0.292]        [0.007]      [0.011]***     [0.013]***
Foreign*Crises F-R (T+1)                         0.123            0.091         -0.028         0.005          0.035          0.038
                                                [0.079]         [0.083]        [0.436]        [0.015]       [0.020]*       [0.022]*

                      Kaminsky-Reinhart

Crises K-R (T-1)                                  0.016          0.010          -0.149         0.024           0.004         0.027
                                                [0.057]         [0.061]        [0.103]      [0.006]***       [0.005]      [0.008]***
Foreign*Crises K-R (T-1)                         -0.033          0.091           0.046         -0.017         -0.009        -0.025
                                                [0.089]         [0.084]        [0.121]        [0.012]        [0.007]       [0.013]*

Crises K-R (T)                                  -0.069           -0.069         -0.287         0.034          0.025          0.059
                                                [0.069]         [0.076]       [0.141]**     [0.007]***     [0.006]***     [0.010]***
Foreign*Crises K-R (T)                           0.116            0.088          0.101         -0.023         -0.008        -0.031
                                                [0.133]         [0.149]        [0.142]        [0.016]        [0.013]       [0.017]*

Crises K-R (T+1)                                     -0.147         -0.213         -0.302         0.029         0.059          0.074
                                                  [0.040]***     [0.039]***       [0.282]      [0.007]*** [0.016]***        [0.011]***
Foreign*Crises K-R (T+1)                              0.162          0.059          0.049         0.007         -0.049         -0.032
                                                   [0.071]**       [0.086]        [0.376]        [0.015]      [0.020]**       [0.021]
This table reports selected coefficients from a set of 18 panel regressions that compare the behavior of bank loans, deposits, and
interest rates, across domestic and foreign banks, around periods of financial crises. The sample covers 11 Latin American countries
during 1989-2001. Each column covers 3 separate regressions that share the same dependent variable, described in the first row, and
the same set of (unreported) bank-level controls: size, liquidity, and capitalization. Bank-level controls were lagged one period to
reduce potential endogeneity problems. The reported coefficients correspond to a set of dummy variables, generically labeled as "T-
1", "T", and "T+1". Those labeled with "T" equal one during banking crises and zero elsewhere. Correspondingly, "T-1" equal one a
year before financial crises and zero elsewhere, and "T+1" equal one a year after banking crises, and zero elsewhere. To provide
sensitivity analysis, three alternative definitions of banking crises were used: Caprio-Kinglebiel, Frankel-Rose, and Kaminsky-
Reinhart. These are reported in the upper-, middle-, and lower-panel, respectively.

In order to compare the behavior of domestic and foreign banks, each explanatory variable was interacted with a "foreign bank"
dummy. All regressions were computed with bank-level fixed effects and robust standard errors, reportes between square brackets. *,
**, ***, indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                           49
Table 15. Asia, Alternative Crises Definitions
                                                  [1]            [2]            [3]             [4]            [5]            [6]
                                                               Deposit        Loans to
                                             Loan Growth       Growth         Deposits     Bank Spread Deposit Rate Lending Rate

                         Caprio-Kinglebiel

Crises C-K (T-1)                                  0.008         -0.021          0.005          0.004         0.003           0.008
                                                [0.017]         [0.021]        [0.062]       [0.002]**      [0.002]*      [0.002]***
Foreign*Crises C-K (T-1)                         -0.017         -0.065         -0.208          -0.004        0.011           0.006
                                                [0.037]         [0.050]        [0.187]        [0.006]      [0.004]**        [0.008]

Crises C-K (T)                                   -0.095         -0.086         -0.083          0.004          0.018           0.021
                                              [0.018]***      [0.016]***       [0.061]        [0.002]      [0.002]***     [0.002]***
Foreign*Crises C-K (T)                           -0.015         -0.071         -0.217          -0.007         0.005          -0.001
                                                [0.048]         [0.044]        [0.177]        [0.006]        [0.004]        [0.008]

Crises C-K (T+1)                                 -0.15          -0.055           0.017         -0.008          0.005         -0.003
                                              [0.024]***      [0.020]***       [0.101]       [0.004]**     [0.001]***       [0.004]
Foreign*Crises C-K (T+1)                        -0.159          -0.102          -0.391         -0.004         -0.005         -0.009
                                              [0.057]***       [0.059]*       [0.169]**       [0.005]        [0.003]        [0.006]

                             Frankel-Rose

Crises F-R (T-1)                                0.0230         -0.0260          0.0630        -0.0020        0.0050         0.0050
                                                [0.023]        [0.026]         [0.096]        [0.002]      [0.002]***      [0.002]**
Foreign*Crises F-R (T-1)                        0.0040         -0.0270         -0.7470        -0.0050        0.0030         -0.0040
                                                [0.043]        [0.065]       [0.210]***       [0.006]        [0.003]        [0.008]

Crises F-R (T)                                  -0.1950         -0.1580        -0.0080        -0.0160         0.0310        0.0140
                                              [0.025]***      [0.028]***       [0.081]      [0.002]***     [0.003]***     [0.003]***
Foreign*Crises F-R (T)                          -0.0460         -0.1180        -0.8810        0.0070         -0.0150        -0.0070
                                                [0.048]        [0.048]**     [0.231]***       [0.005]      [0.003]***       [0.006]

Crises F-R (T+1)                                -0.1840         -0.0990        -0.0950        -0.0130         0.0050        -0.0080
                                              [0.038]***      [0.033]***       [0.060]      [0.002]***     [0.002]***     [0.003]***
Foreign*Crises F-R (T+1)                         0.0820         -0.0120        -0.7050        0.0180         -0.0030         0.0150
                                                [0.054]         [0.063]        [0.454]        [0.015]        [0.004]        [0.018]

                      Kaminsky-Reinhart

Crises K-R (T-1)                                 0.038           0.005           0.06          0.002          0.009          0.012
                                               [0.020]*         [0.024]        [0.075]        [0.001]      [0.002]***     [0.002]***
Foreign*Crises K-R (T-1)                         0.007          -0.033         -0.279          0.001          0.006          0.006
                                                [0.041]         [0.052]        [0.189]        [0.005]        [0.004]        [0.007]

Crises K-R (T)                                   -0.122         -0.048          -0.049         -0.004          0.039          0.032
                                              [0.027]***      [0.024]**         [0.054]      [0.002]*      [0.004]***     [0.002]***
Foreign*Crises K-R (T)                            0.066         -0.057          -0.315         0.004          -0.012         -0.005
                                                [0.055]        [0.050]         [0.190]*       [0.007]       [0.005]**       [0.008]

Crises K-R (T+1)                                    -0.225         -0.106           0.028         -0.011         0.02           0.01
                                                 [0.035]***     [0.032]***        [0.058]      [0.003]*** [0.003]***        [0.003]***
Foreign*Crises K-R (T+1)                            -0.115         -0.209          -0.339         0.003         -0.01          -0.008
                                                  [0.056]**     [0.058]***       [0.155]**       [0.005]     [0.004]***       [0.006]
This table reports selected coefficients from a set of 18 panel regressions that compare the behavior of bank loans, deposits, and
interest rates, across domestic and foreign banks, around periods of financial crises. The sample covers 9 Asian countries during 1989-
2001. Each column covers 3 separate regressions that share the same dependent variable, described in the first row, and the same set
of (unreported) bank-level controls: size, liquidity, and capitalization. Bank-level controls were lagged one period to reduce potential
endogeneity problems. The reported coefficients correspond to a set of dummy variables, generically labeled as "T-1", "T", and
"T+1". Those labeled with "T" equal one during banking crises and zero elsewhere. Correspondingly, "T-1" equal one a year before
financial crises and zero elsewhere, and "T+1" equal one a year after banking crises, and zero elsewhere. To provide sensitivity
analysis, three alternative definitions of banking crises were used: Caprio-Kinglebiel, Frankel-Rose, and Kaminsky-Reinhart. These
are reported in the upper-, middle-, and lower-panel, respectively.

In order to compare the behavior of domestic and foreign banks, each explanatory variable was interacted with a "foreign bank"
dummy. All regressions were computed with bank-level fixed effects and robust standard errors, reportes between square brackets. *,
**, ***, indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                            50
                       APPENDIX 1. SCALES FOR RESERVE REQUIREMENTS BY COUNTRY

     I.    SCALE

           IF RESERVE REQUIREMENT IS:

           BETWEEN 1% AND 15% :                      1-2
           BETWEEN 16% AND 30% :                     2-3
           BETWEEN 31% AND 70% :                     3-4
           BETWEEN 71% AND 100% :                    4-5

           SUB- CATEGORIES:

           BETWEEN 1% AND 15%                                             BETWEEN 16% AND 30%                BETWEEN 31% AND 70%                    BETWEEN 71% AND 100%
                                         1.00%          1.00                 16.00%    2.00                      31%      3.00                          71%      4.00
                                         3.00%          1.20                 19.50%    2.25                      40%      3.25                          80%      4.30
                                         4.50%          1.30                 23.00%    2.50                      50%      3.50                          85%      4.50
                                         6.00%          1.40                 25.00%    2.60                      60%      3.75                          90%      4.60
                                         7.50%          1.50                 26.50%    2.75                      70%      3.99                         100%      4.99
                                         9.00%          1.60                 29.00%    2.95
                                        10.50%          1.70                 30.00%    2.99
                                        12.00%          1.80
                                        13.50%          1.90
                                        15.00%          1.99

           EXAMPLES THAT CAN BE EXTENDED FOR OTHER CASES:

                                         9.00%          1.60                   10.50%          1.70
                                         9.25%          1.62                   10.75%          1.72
                                         9.50%          1.64                   11.00%          1.74
                                         9.75%          1.65                   11.25%          1.75
                                        10.00%          1.67                   11.50%          1.77
                                        10.25%          1.69                   11.75%          1.79
                                        10.50%          1.70                   12.00%          1.80

     II.   HOW DO WE ASSIGN THE FINAL SCALE?

1)         For each country, we specify the policy instrument used to construct the reserve requirement index. Most cases use the reserve requirement on
           demand deposits (first criterium).

2)         During years with one or more changes in reserve requirements, the index reflects the weighted average of its intra-year values, using the relative
           time of the policy regimes as weights.

3)         In cases where reserve requirements on demand deposits in domestic currency were not applicable, or did not show variation, a parallel policy
           instrument (such as liquidity requirements, reserve requirements on foreign currency deposits, etc.) was also used (second criterium). The list of
           policy instruments used for each country is presented in Appendix 2.




                                                                                         51
APPENDIX 2. CRITERIA FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE RESERVE REQUIREMENTS INDEX
                                                        ARGENTINA

          First Criterium:
          Reserve requirements (minimum cash requirement) until 1994
          Minimum liquidity requirements since 1995

          Second Criterium:
          Reserve requirements for deposits in foreign currency.

                                                           BOLIVIA

          First Criterium:
          Reserve requirement on demand deposits (domestic currency).

                                                           BRAZIL

          First Criterium:
          Reserve requirement on demand deposits (domestic currency).

          Second Criterium:
          Reserve requirements for saving and time deposits in domestic currency, and
          daily balance to be held in banking reserves.

                                                            CHILE

          First Criterium:
          Reserve requirements on demand deposits (foreign currency).

          Second Criterium:
          Reserve requirement on external credits.

                                                         COLOMBIA

          First Criterium:
          Reserve requirement on demand deposits (domestic currency).

          Second Criterium:
          Reserve requirements for saving and time deposits in domestic currency.

                                                            INDIA

          First Criterium:
          Cash reserve requirement on demand deposits (domestic currency).

          Second Criterium:
          Statutory liquidity ratio on demand and time liabilities.

                                                         INDONESIA

          First Criterium:
          Statutory reserve requirement on demand deposits (domestic currency).

          Second Criterium:
          Statutory reserve requirement on foreign currency deposits.

                                                            KOREA

          First Criterium:
          Reserve requirement on demand deposits (domestic currency).

          Second Criterium:
          Marginal reserve requirement in domestic and foreign currency.




                                                              52
                                              MALAYSIA

First Criterium:
Statutory reserve requirement on demand deposits (domestic currency).

Second Criterium:
Liquidity requirement.

                                               MEXICO

First Criterium:
Reserve requirement on demand deposits (domestic currency) until 1988.
Liquidity coeffcient from 1989 to 1990.
Liquidity coeffcient for deposits in foreign currency 1991 (August) to 1994.


                                             PARAGUAY

First Criterium:
Reserve requirement on demand deposits (domestic currency).

                                                 PERU

First Criterium:
Reserve requirement (domestic currency).

Second Criterium:
Reserve requirements for deposits in foreign currency.

                                            PHILIPPINES

First Criterium:
Reserve requirement on demand deposits (domestic currency). The reserve requirement
against peso demand is the sum of the statutory and the liquidity reserve ratios.

                                             SINGAPORE

First Criterium:
Minimum cash balance on demand deposits (domestic currency).

                                               TAIWAN

First Criterium:
Reserve requirement ratio on demand deposits (domestic currency).

Second Criterium:
The required reserve ratio for passbook saving deposits, time saving deposits and time deposits.

                                              THAILAND

First Criterium:
Liquidity requirement ratio on demand deposits (domestic currency).

Second Criterium:
Minimum reserve requirement on non-resident bath deposits.

                                              URUGUAY

First Criterium:
The remunerated reserve requirement on sight deposits in local currency.

                                             VENEZUELA

First Criterium:
Reserve requirement on demand deposits (domestic currency).



                                                  53
                                               APPENDIX 3. RESERVE REQUIREMENTS INDEX
ARGENTINA
  Year    Code                Reserve Requirements

       1986       4.580       Reserve requirements were kept at 89,5% on demand deposits.
       1989       4.500       The average reserve requirement of the system was 71% in June. There was a reduction of reserve requirements for
                              deposits in foreign currency.
       1990       4.575       As from July, reserve requirements were reduced 3% in cases of technical reserves for demand deposits and
                              by 1.5% additional for fixed time deposits. By September, the contractionary monetary policy was further deepened, so
                              the backing figures returned to their previous high levels.
       1991       4.555       In December, the Central Bank reduced minimum cash requirements to 79% on demand deposits.
       1992       4.120       There were not substancial variations in minimum cash requirements. Requirements on deposits
                              whose holders belonged to the non-financial public sector were reduced by 6%. As of October 1
                              the Central Bank reduced by 2% the minimun cash requirement on peso deposits in current accounts
                              and other sight and fixed term operations, at 71% .
       1993       3.354       The Central Bank homogenized the reserve requirements for current accounts and sight operations in both
                              currencies, implying a substantial reduction in reserve requirements for current accounts in pesos from 71% to 40% .
                              In August, the Central Bank set a 3% increase, to 43%, in cash requirements on current account and saving deposits.
       1994       3.300       The Central Bank reduced temporarily required minimums covering dollars deposits from 43% for sight deposits dated
                              12-15-95, to 35% until 1-15-95. For fixed-term deposits the minimum cash requirement dropped from 3% to 1% as of
                              12-16-94 to be reestablished at 3% as of 2-1-95.
       1995       3.082       As of November 1995, reserve requirements have been replaced by minimum liquidity requirements (Requisitos Minimos
                              de Liquidez), which may include earning assets. All deposits were subject to a uniform 15% liquidity requirement.
       1996       2.100       The Central Bank increased the minimum liquidity requirement by 2%.
       1997       2.200       The Central Bank increased the minimum liquidity requirement by 2% .
       1998       2.300       The Central Bank increased the minimum liquidity requirement by 1% .
       2001       2.188       In April, the Central Bank reduced the minimum liquidity requirement by 2%.
                              In June, the Central Bank established a new liquidity regime based on a minimum cash requirement over sight
                              operations, whereas the rules realted to minimum liquidity requirements only involved fixed term deposits.

Source: Annual Report of the Argentine Economy- Economic Trends. Consejo Tecnico de Inversiones.



BOLIVIA
  Year            Code        Reserve Requirements

       1985       3.500       Central Bank reduced reserve requirements on demand deposits, saving deposits and time deposits,
                              all in domestic currency. From 60% to 50% in the case of demand deposits.
       1986       3.250       Central Bank reduced reserve requirements on demand deposits, saving deposits and time deposits,
                              all in domestic currency. From 50% to 40% in the case of demand deposits.
       1987       2.765       In July. Central Bank homogenized the reserve requirements to 20% for different types of deposits and currencies
       1994       1.975       In July, the Central Bank eliminated the marginal reserve requirement for deposits in domestic currency.
                              The marginal reserve requirement was 10% for demand and saving deposits, and 6% for time deposits
                              (less than 365 days).
       1998       1.757       In May, Central Bank homogenized the reserve requirements to 12% for different types of deposits and currencies.

Source: Annual Reports of the Central Bank of Bolivia.


 BRAZIL
  Year            Code        Reserve Requirements

       1984       3.300       The Central Bank increased reserve requirements from 10% to 22% for time deposits. The average reserve requirement on dem
                              deposits was 43%.
       1985       3.170       The rate of reserve requirements on demand deposits in the commercial banks dropped from an average of 43% to 36%.
       1988       3.180       Reserve requirements are rationalized, requirements differing according to bank size. As of December, the average implicit
                              reserve requirement represented 37% of deposits.
       1993       3.458       The percentage of the reserve requirement moved from 40% to 50% but had little impact on the banking system's capacity to
                              grant credit, since demand deposits represented less than 1% of GDP.
       1994       4.337       Under the Real Plan, the Central Bank raised the reserve requirement on demand deposits to 100% in June, which was reduced
                              to 90% in December. The reserve requeriment on time deposits was raised from 20% to 30% in August and then reduced to
                              27% in December. For saving deposits, the reserve requirement was raised from 20% to 30% in August.
       1995       4.500       The reserve requirement on demand deposits was reduced from 90% to 83% in July, for time deposits the rate was reduced
                              to 20% in August, and for saving deposits the rate was reduced to 15%.
       1996       4.200       The criteria for reserve requirements and obligatory reserves on demand deposits were altered and a schedule was defined
                              according to which the rate would gradually decline from 83% to 78% as of December.
       1997       4.150       In January, the reserve requirement on demand deposits was reduced from 78% to 75% .
       1999       4.075       In October, the reserve requirement on demand deposits was reduced from 75% to 65% .
       2000       3.538       The reserve requirement on demand deposits was reduced twice during the year to 55% in March and to 45% in June.

Source: Annual Reports of the Central Bank of Brazil (Banco Central do Brasil).




                                                                                         54
  CHILE
   Year           Code       Reserve Requirements

       1991          2.300 In June, the Central Bank stablished a 20% reserve requirement on external credits for less than 1 year.
       1992          2.588 In January, the Central Bank stablished a 20% reserve requirement on demand and term deposits in
                           foreign currency.
                           In March, the reserve requirement was increased to 30% for financial entities not in the Chapter XIV of
                           CNCI (Compendium of Regulations Governing Foreign Exchange).
                           In August, the reserve requirement for external credits was increased to 30%.
       1996          2.990 In December, credit and financial investment operations between US$ 10,000 and US$ 200,000 done under
                           the Chapter XIV of CNCI were released of the 30% reserve requirement.
       1998          2.300 In April, the Central Bank reduced the reserve requirements on external credits from 30% to 10%.
                           In September, the reserve requirement on external credits was eliminated (unremunerated reserve requirement
                           for short-term capital inflows).
                           In December, there was a reduction of reserve requirements to deposits in foreign currency.
                           From 30% to 19% for demand deposits, and from 30 to 13.6% for term deposits.
                           10% of the reserve requirement in foreign currency was remunerated.

Source: Annual Reports of the Central Bank of Chile.


COLOMBIA
  Year   Code                Reserve Requirements

       1984       3.300      The monetary authority reduced the reserve requirement (RR) from 45% to 43% on demand
                             deposits. Also, it was reduced the RR of term deposits of and above six months from 10% to 6%.
       1987       3.350      The RR of demand deposits was raised to 44%.
       1988       3.250      The RR of demand deposits was reduced from 44% to 40%, and also it was reduced the RR
                             of demand deposits with entities of the public sector from 65% to 61%.
       1989       3.230      The RR of demand deposits was reduced from 40% to 39%, and also it was reduced the RR
                             of demand deposits with entities of the public sector from 61% to 53%.
       1990       3.100      The RR of demand deposits was reduced from 39% to 33.5%, and also it was reduced the RR
                             of demand deposits with entities of the public sector from 56% to 52.5%.
       1991       3.280      In January, marginal reserve requirements of 100% were imposed on all new deposits. These
                             reserves were held as interest-bearing central bank bonds. In September, the marginal reserve
                             requirement was replaced by an increase in reserve requirement on most deposits.
                             RR of demand deposits was raised from 33.5% to 41% , and from 53.5% to 70% (public sector).
       1992       3.260      The RR for saving deposits was reduced from 31% to 10%, and from 23% to 10% in the case
                             of term deposits.
       1995       3.250      RR of demand deposits was reduced from 41% to 40% , and from 70% to 60% (public sector).
                             A marginal reserve requirement (MRR) of 21% was stablished for demand deposits, and 10%
                             for saving deposits and term deposits.
       1996       2.350      The RR on deposits was homogenized to 21%. The RR on term deposits was reduced to 5%
                             and the MRR was reduced to 7%.
       1998       2.292      In November, the monetary authority determined the following changes:
                             The RR on demand deposits was reduced to 16% and the MRR was reduced to 16%
      1999        1.870      The RR on demand deposits was reduced to 13% and the MRR was reduced to 13%
 2000-2001        1.870      No changes.

Source: Annual Reports of the Central Bank of Colombia (Banco de la Republica).


MEXICO
  Year            Code       Reserve Requirements

       1987       3.550      The Bank of Mexico (BOM) reduced the marginal reserve requirement (MRR) from 77.2% to 51%.
                             The distribution was: 10% in cash, 35% in credits to the Federal Government, and 6% to development
                             banks.
       1988       3.500      The BOM determined liquidity coefficients. 30% of liabilities (aceptaciones bancarias) had to be invested
                             in remunerated demand deposits in the BOM and other securities (CETES, BONDES).
                             The distribution of MRR required investment was: 10% in cash, 31% in credits to the Federal Government,
                             and 10% to developmengt banks.
       1989       2.990      Liquidity coefficient applied also to liabilities coming from traditional bank instruments.
                             Promisory notes denominated in US dollars required a liquidity coefficient of 30%.
       1991       2.903      In August, the BOM eliminated the existing liquidity coefficient on bank liabilities in domestic currency.
                             In June, the BOM established a 50% compulsory liquidity coefficient on foreign currency liabilities to be
                             constitued with liquid foreign assets.
                             In August, the BOM determined an ascendent scale of the liquidity coefficient from 0% to 50% depending
                             on the maturity of deposits.
       1992       2.143      In April, the liquidity coefficient, which went from 0% up to 50% according to the maturity of the deposits,
                             was replaced by a 15% requirement.
      1995        1.415      In March, the BOM adopted a zero average legal reserve requirement.
 1996-2000        1.300      No changes.

Source: Annual Reports of the Central Bank of Mexico (Banco de Mexico).




                                                                                   55
PARAGUAY
  Year   Code                Reserve Requirements

       1991       3.330      Reserve Requirement (RR) on demand deposits in local currency was at 42%.
       1992       2.990      The Central Bank reduced the RR for domestic currency deposits to 30%.
                             In June, the Central Bank started to remunerate legal RR on local currency deposits.
       1993       2.600      The CB reduced the RR on local currency deposits from 30% to 25%.
                             RR on foreign currency deposits was 30%.
       1994       2.500      In September, the CB reduced the RR on local currency deposits from 25% to 18%.
                             In October, the CB started to remunerate legal RR on local currency deposits in excess of 10%.
 1995-2000        2.100      No changes.

Source: Annual Reports of the Central Bank of Paraguay.


   PERU
   Year           Code       Reserve Requirements

       1985       3.850      As of December, the reserve requirement was 65%.
                             In August, The marginal reserve requirement (MRR) was raised from 50% to 75% for liabilities in
                             domestic currency.
       1986       3.760      As of December, the reserve requirement was 61%.
                             The Central Bank reduced the MRR twice. As of May the MRR was 70% for liabilities in
                             domestic currency, and as October, the MRR was 64%.
       1987       3.580      As of December, the reserve requirement was 53.1%.
                             In March, the Central bank reduced the MRR from 64% to 50% for liabilities in domestic currency.
                             The reduction only applied to bank branches located outside the Lima to support credit decentralization.
       1990       3.350      As of December, the reserve requirement was 45%
                             In June, the Central Bank homogenized and raised the MRR to 80%, but in August it came back
                             to the initial scheme of 64% and 50%. In September, the Central Bank homogenized and reduced
                             the MRR to 40% and then it was reduced to 30% at the end of the year.
       1991       2.600      The reserve requirement was reduced from 45% to 25.4% at the end of the year.
                              In October, the MRR was reduced to 15% and then reduced to 5% at the end of the year.
                             The Central Bank raised the MRR from 30% to 50% for liabilities in foreign currency.
       1992       1.625      As of December, the reserve requirement was at the level of 9.3%. There was a unification
                             of the legal and exigible reserve requirement. In March, the MRR was reduced to 0% for domestic
                             currency deposits.
       1993       1.620      The Central Bank established a reserve requirement of 9% for domestic currency, and
                             reduced the MRR from 50% to 45% for foreign currency.
       1997       1.470      The Central Bank reduced the reserve requirement to 7%
       1998       1.470      The Central Bank reduced the average reserve requirement by 4.5% between October and
                             December for liabilities in foreign currency.
                             In December, the MRR in foreign currency was reduced from 35% to 20%.
       2000       1.400      In September, the reserve requirement was reduced from 7% to 6%, an a 1% minimum
                             reserve requirement in the form of demand deposits kept at the Central Bank was introduced.

Source: Annual Reports of the Central Reserve Bank of Peru.


URUGUAY
  Year            Code       Reserve Requirements

  1991            1.870      The remunerated reserve requirement (RR) on sight deposits in local currency was 13%.
  1992            1.670      The RR on sight deposits in local currency was reduced to 10%.
1993-2000         1.670      No changes.

Source: IMF Staff Country Reports.


VENEZUELA
  Year    Code               Reserve Requirements

       1990       1.927      In January, the central bank (CB) unified the RR on demand, time and saving deposits to 12%.
                             In May, the CB raised the RR to 15%.
       1991       2.244      In May, the CB established a special RR of 80% on public sector deposits in commercial banks.
                             In August, the CB raised the RR on demand, savings and time deposits to 25% gradually.
       1992       2.397      In September, the CB established that the RR on liabilities held until August 30 was 25%, and for liabilities
                             after this date the RR was 15%.
                             Also, the CB reduced the RR on public sector deposits in commercial banks from 80% to 25% gradually.
                             In December, it was adjusted to 15%.
       1993       1.990      In November, the CB unified the RR scheme. For commercial banks the RR was 15%.
       1998       2.100      The RR was raised to 17%.

Source: Annual Reports of the Central Bank of Venezuela.




                                                                                 56
INDIA
  Year            Code       Reserve Requirements

       1987       1.644      In February, the cash reserve requirement (CRR) was raised from 9% to 9.5%.
                             In May, the CRR on foreign currency non-resident (FCNR) deposit liabilities was raised from 3% to 9.5%.
                             In October, the CRR was raised from 9.5% to 10% of net demand and time liabilities.
       1988       1.705      In July, the CRR was raised from 10% to 11% of net demand and time liabilities.
                             In July, the CRR on FCNR was raised from 9.5% to 10% .
       1989       1.866      In July, the CRR was homogenized at 15% for all net demand and time liabilities.
       1990       1.992      In September, statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) was raised from 38% to 38.5% of net demand and time liabilities.
       1992       1.980      In April, SLR was reduced from 38.5% to 37.75% of net demand and time liabilities.
                             In April, banks were exempted from the mantainance of the 10% incremental CRR on net
                             demand and time liabilities.
       1993       1.973      In September, CRR was reduced from 15% to 14%.
       1994       1.990      CRR was raised from 14% to 15% in three phases.
                             In October, a CRR of 7.5% on FCNR deposit liabilities was stablished.
       1995       1.982      In January, CRR of deposit liabilities under Foreign Currency (NR) was raised to 15%.
                             In November and December, the CRR was reduced from 15% to 14%.
       1996       1.848      In May, the CRR was reduced from 14% to 13%.
                             In July, the CRR was reduced from 13% to 12%.
                             In November, the CRR was reduced from 12% to 11%.
       1997       1.665      In January, the CRR was reduced from 11% to 10%.
                             In October, the CRR was reduced from 10% to 9.75%.
       1998       1.683      In March, the CRR was raised from 9.75% to 10.25%.
       1999       1.675      In November, the CRR was reduced from 10.25% to 9%.

Source: Annual Reports of the Central Bank of India.


INDONESIA
  Year    Code               Reserve Requirements

       1988       1.100      Reserve requirements were reduced from 15% to 2%.
       1995       1.100      In December, the Bank of Indonesia (BOI) amended the regulation on the reserve requirement to statutory
                             reserve requirement. With this new regulation, the reserve components changed from demand deposits
                             with BOI and cash originally, to only demand deposit with BOI.
       1996       1.192      In February, the new regulation required commercial banks to maintain 3% of their funds in the form of
                             demand deposit with the BOI.
       1997       1.192      The statutory reserve requirement for foreign currencies deposits was reduced from 5% to 3%.

Source: Annual Reports of the Bank of Indonesia.


KOREA
  Year            Code       Reserve Requirements

       1985       1.300      the reserve requirement (RR) for demand, time and saving deposits was 4,5% in domestic currency and 1% in foreign
                             currency ( In July, the marginal reserve ratio for resident account in foreign currency was introduced at 20%).
       1987       1.328      In November, RR for demand, time and saving deposits was raised to 7.0% in domestic currency.
                             In February, the marginal reserve ratio for resident account in foreign currency was reduced to 4.5% .
       1988       1.486      In December, RR for demand, time and saving deposits was raised to 10.0% in domestic currency.
       1989       1.680      In May, a 30% marginal reserve requirement (MRR) was introduced for deposits in domestic currency.
       1990       1.762      In February, RR for demand, time and saving deposits was raised to 11.5% in domestic currency.
                             In March, the marginal reserve ratio for resident account in foreign currency was raised to 11.5% .
       1996       1.621      In April, RR for demand, time and saving deposits was reduced to 9% in domestic currency
                             In April, the marginal reserve ratio for resident account in foreign currency was reduced to 9% .
                             In November, RR for demand, time and saving deposits was reduced to 7% in domestic currency.
                             In November, the marginal reserve ratio for resident accounts in foreign currency was reduced to 7% .
       1997       1.351      In February, RR for demand deposits was reduced to 5% in domestic currency. The RR for time and saving
                             deposits in domestic currency was reduced to 2 %.
                             The Bank of Korea imposed a 2% RR on negotiable certificates of deposits.
       2000       1.340      In April, the MRR for resident account in foreign currency (demand deposits) was reduced to 5%. The MRR
                             for resident account in foreign currency (time and saving deposits) was reduced to 2% .

Source: Annual Reports of the Bank of Korea.




                                                                            57
MALAYSIA
  Year   Code                 Reserve Requirements

        1985      1.288       In April, the statutory reserve requeriment (SRR) of commercial banks (CB) was reduced from
                              5% to 4% of total eligible liabilities. For merchant banks (MB), the ratio was raised from 1.5%
                              to 2.5%. The SRR for finance companies (FC) remained unchanged at 2.5%.
        1986      1.263       In February, the SRR of FC and MB as increased from 2.5% to 3%.
                              In October, the SRR for CB was reduced from 4% to 3.5%.
                              In February, the liquidity requeriment (LR) of CB was reduced from 20% to 18.5 %. The LR for
                              MB and FC remained unchanged at 10%.
                              In October, the LR for CB was reduced from 18.5% to 17%.
        1987      1.238       The Central Bank reduced the liquidity ratio of CB from 10% to 8%, with the LR remaining
                              unchanged at 17% for MB and FC.
        1988      1.233       The Central Bank reduced the liquidity ratio of CB from 8% to 5%, and abolished the liquidity
                              ratio for FC.
        1989      1.298       In May, the Central Bank raised the SRR of CB, MB and FC to a uniform 4.5%.
                              In October, the Central Bank raised the SRR of CB, MB and FC to 5.5%.
        1990      1.440       In January, the Central Bank raised the SRR of CB, MB and FC to 6.5%.
        1991      1.465       In August, the Central Bank raised the SRR of CB, MB and FC to 7.5%.
        1992      1.547       In May, the Central Bank raised the SRR of CB, MB and FC to 8.5%.
        1994      1.715       In January, the Central Bank raised the SRR of CB, MB and FC to 9.5%.
                              In May, the Central Bank raised the SRR of CB, MB and FC to 10.5%.
                              In July, the Central Bank raised the SRR of CB, MB and FC to 11.5%.
        1996      1.873       In February, the Central Bank raised the SRR of CB, MB and FC to 12.5%.
                              In June, the Central Bank raised the SRR of CB, MB and FC to 13.5%.
        1998      1.521       In February, the Central Bank reduced the SRR of CB, MB and FC from 13.5% to 10%.
                              In July, the Central Bank reduced the SRR of CB, MB and FC from 10% to 8%.
                              In September, the Central Bank reduced the SRR of CB, MB and FC from 8% to 4%.
 1999-2000        1.250       No changes.

Source: Annual Reports of the Central Bank of Malaysia.


PHILIPPINES
  Year     Code               Reserve Requirements

        1985      2.540       In September, the reserve requirement (RR) against short-term deposit liabilities of
                              commerical banks (CB) and thrift banks (TB) was reduced from 24% to 23%.
        1986      2.438       The RR on long-term deposit instruments of banks was reduced by a total of 2
                              percentage points from 23% to 21% in May and August.
        1987      2.350       No changes.
        1988      2.350       No changes.
        1989      2.333       In September, the RR on deposits and deposit substitutes was homogenized to 20%.
        1990      2.600       A series of upward adjustments in the RR on bank deposits were made during the
                              year with a cummulative increase of 5 percentage points from 20% in 1989 to 25% at the
                              end of 1990 as a contractionary measure.
        1991      2.600       No changes.
        1992      2.600       No changes.
        1993      2.300       A series of downward adjustments in the RR on bank deposits were made during the
                              year with a cummulative reduction of 5 percentage points from 25% in 1992 to 22% at the
                              end of 1993.
        1994      2.100       The RR was reduced to 19%.
        1995      2.027       In May, the RR was reduced to 17%.
        1997      2.100       At the end of the year, the RR was 17%. During the year there were seven changes in the
                              liquidity reserve component of the RR.
        1998      2.054       In May, the RR was reduced to 15%. In October, the RR was increased to 17%.
        1999      1.950       The RR was reduced during the year by a total of 5 percentage points from 17% in January to reach 12% by July.
        2000      1.850       In October, the RR was increased to 16%.

Source: Annual Reports of the Central Bank of Philippines.




                                                                             58
SINGAPORE
   Year   Code               Reserve Requirements

       1987       1.400      In May, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) reduced the minimum liquid asset ratio from
                             20% to 18%.
       1998       1.300      In July, the MAS reduced the minimum cash balance (MCB) from 6% to 3%. The MCB had been
                             mantained at 6% since 1975.
                             The minimum liquid assets (MLA) requirement of finance companies was raised from 10% to 13%.
 1999-2000        1.200      No changes.

Source: Annual Reports of the Monetary Authority of Singapore.


TAIWAN
  Year            Code       Reserve Requirements

       1978       2.990      The required reserve ratio (RRR) for checking accounts (CA) was 30%
       1979       2.730      In May, the RRR for CA was reduced to 25%.
       1982       2.542      In June, the RRR for CA was reduced to 23%.
       1988       2.508      In December, the RRR for CA was raised to 25%.
       1989       2.863      In April, the RRR for CA was raised to 29%.
       1990       2.929      In August, the RRR for CA was reduced to 28.5%.
       1991       2.867      In September, the RRR for CA was reduced to 27.75%.
       1993       2.773      In September, the RRR for CA was reduced to 26.25%.
       1995       2.692      In November, the RRR for CA was reduced to 23.75%.
       1996       2.508      In August, the RRR for CA was reduced to 22%.
       1997       2.408      In October, the RRR for CA was reduced to 19.75%.
       1998       2.247      In September, the RRR for CA was reduced to 18.75%.
       1999       2.006      In February, the RRR for CA was reduced to 15%.
       2000       1.975      In October, the RRR for CA was reduced to 13.5%.
       2001       1.855      In October, the RRR for CA was reduced to 10.75%.

Source: Annual Reports of the Central Bank of the Republic of China.


THAILAND
  Year   Code                Reserve Requirements

       1990       1.470      To stabilize the money markets and reduce fluctuations of short-term interest rates, the BOT
                             modified the computacional procedure of commercial bank's reserve requirements.
       1995       1.480      In August, non-resident bath deposits with maturity of less than one year are subject to a 7%
                             minimum reserve requirement in the form of deposits (with no interest) with the BOT.
                             While reserve requirements on domestic deposits were also 7%, they could be held in the form
                             of interest-bearing public bonds.
       1997       1.447      In September, the BOT reduced the liquidity requirement ratio on total deposits from 7 % to 6%.
                             For finance companies the liquidity requirement on total domestic and foreign borrowing was
                              reduced from 7% to 6%. This was also applied to non-resident deposits, or foreign borrowing
                             with maturity of less than one year.
       1999       1.440      The BOT announced new rules on liquidity reserve requirement composition and procedure,
                             but not changes in rates.
       2000       1.440      No changes.

Source: Annual Reports of the Bank of Thailand.




                                                                            59
        APPENDIX 4. ALGORITHM TO TRACK THE EVOLUTION OF BANK OWNERSHIP

This Appendix describes the algorithm used to reconstruct the evolution of bank ownership.

Ideally, the objective is to identify foreign institutions involved in retail banking and with

access to upstream financing from their mother banks.13 This is the case of branches of

foreign banks, which can obtain resources from their mother institutions as needed. This may

also be the case of subsidiaries of foreign banks, although the availability of upstream

resources in this case is not guaranteed. In this paper a bank is considered "foreign" if it is a

branch of a bank incorporated in a foreign country, or if it has shareholders settled in a

foreign country, holding together at least 51 percent of the bank capital.

The above operational definition was applied in four steps. First, the Bankscope search

engine was used to identify subsidiaries of banks from OECD countries. Those with more

than 51 percent of ownership in the hands of foreign banks were selected. This search

identified 304 banks at least partially owned by banks from OECD countries. Of those, 189

had more than 51 percent in the hands of banks headquartered in OECD countries. Second, to

verify the above list, the search engine of Bankscope was used to identify the shareholders of

the sampled banks. Specifically, banks with shareholders settled in OECD countries, holding

together at least 51 percent of the bank capital were filtered. In cases with no available

information on percentage ownership, banks with one or more shareholders from OECD

countries, and with local shareholders holding together less than 50 percent of the bank's



13
  In practice, both the nature of the services provided by foreign banks, and their access to
upstream resources, depend on the institutional modality of entry. The most commonly used
are representative offices, branches, subsidiaries, and joint ventures.




                                                60
capital, were also selected. These filtering criteria produced 313 cases. Of those, 171 were

common to the 189 mentioned above, and taken as foreign banks without further check. The

remaining 18 were checked individually by looking at their web pages. All of them were

included in the final list of foreign banks.

Third, as the information on ownership is not available for all the banks included in the

Bankscope database, a list of banks with unknown dependence was produced. The search

matched 801 banks. This information was crossed out with a list of transnational banks

headquartered in OECD countries or the Cayman Islands, gathered from the web site

www.transnationale.org. In addition, the list of banks in the sample was intersected with the

lists of foreign banks available from the Central Banks' web pages of Hong Kong, Brazil,

Singapore, and Thailand. On a case-by-case basis, 168 additional branches of foreign banks

were also identified.

The list produced by the above criteria provides information on ownership as of end-2000 (in

some cases end-2001). In the fourth step, to obtain chronological information on changes in

ownership throughout the period, the sample of banks was intersected with a comprehensive

list of mergers and acquisitions targeting financial institutions in the sampled countries taken

from the SDC Platinum database. Specifically, the list includes all transactions announced

between January 1, 1985 and December 31, 2000, targeting institutions classified under

industrial (SIC) codes 6000, 6081, 6029, 6021, and 6712 (to be on the safe side, these codes

include a broad category of target financial institutions). The search produced 1,227

transactions involving 804 target institutions. Of those, 404 were matched with the sample of

banks. In order to track acquisitions by financial institutions exclusively, the list ignored



                                                61
operations were the acquirers and their nationalities were unknown. Using the description of

each operation, nine categories were created, indicating the nationality of the buyer (foreign

OECD, foreign non-OECD, government, domestic resident), and the resulting ownership

position after the transaction (public, domestic, foreign OECD, and foreign non-OECD).14

With the help of this code, it was possible to replicate the evolution of bank ownership

throughout the period. In total, the algorithm identified 58 institutions changing ownership.




14
  In cases where the acquirer is a public company (there are several cases involving
government-owned companies based in China), we classify the acquirer as government.




                                              62
