                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ON THE GENERAL RELATIVITY OF FISCAL LANGUAGE

                                              Jerry Green
                                          Laurence J. Kotlikoff

                                          Working Paper 12344
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12344


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Jerry Green and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
On the General Relativity of Fiscal Language
Jerry Green and Laurence J. Kotlikoff
NBER Working Paper No. 12344
June 2006
JEL No. H3, H6

                                           ABSTRACT

         A century ago, everyone thought time and distance were well defined physical concepts. But
neither proved absolute. Instead, measures/reports of time and distance were found to depend on
one’s reference point, specifically one’s direction and speed of travel, making our apparent physical
reality, in Einstein’s words, “merely an illusion.”
         Like time and distance, standard fiscal measures, including deficits, taxes, and transfer
payments, depend on one’s reference point/reporting procedure/language/labels. As such, they too
represent numbers in search of concepts that provide the illusion of meaning where none exists.
         This paper, dedicated to our dear friend, David Bradford, provides a general proof that
standard and routinely used fiscal measures, including the deficit, taxes, and transfer payments, are
economically ill-defined. Instead these measures reflect the arbitrary labeling of underlying fiscal
conditions. Analyses based on these and derivative measures, such as disposable income, private
assets, and personal saving, represent exercises in linguistics, not economics.


Jerry Green
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 266
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jgreen@hbs.edu

Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
kotlikof@bu.edu
For David
We are deeply honored to contribute to this volume in recognition of David Bradford.
David was our very dear friend and mentor. He was also our steadfast enthusiast, filling
us full of encouragement and lauding us with overly generous praise. David was a seeker
of core truth, and his marvelous research contributions are replete with fundamental
insights that separate economic science from popular perception.

David’s research interests overlapped with ours on a wide range of topics, none less than
the issue considered here, namely how to discuss and measure fiscal policy in
economically meaningful ways. David was particularly supportive of generational
accounting, whose goal is to compare the fiscal treatment of current and future
generations. Indeed, David was a driving force behind the development of the first set of
generational accounts.

David’s laugh, spirit, spark, insight, and support continue to sustain us. He has moved
from the physical to the metaphysical, but his presence is no less real in our hearts, souls,
and minds and will always be treasured.


I. Introduction
This paper provides a general proof that standard fiscal measures, including the deficit,
taxes, and transfer payments, are economically ill-defined. Instead these measures reflect
the arbitrary labeling of underlying fiscal conditions. Analyses based on these and
derivative measures, such as disposable income, private assets, and personal saving,
constitute the perusal of nomenclature, not the application of economics.

The argument that any underlying fiscal policy can be reported as entailing any time path
of deficit, taxes, and transfer payments and that these measures are, economically
speaking, content-free was originally advanced by Kotlikoff (1986). Auerbach and
Kotlikoff (1987) and Kotlikoff (2002) provide formal treatments of the point, but neither
provide a general proof of the proposition. This paper fills this gap. It posits a
competitive, contingent claims economy that can accommodate uncertainty, information
asymmetries, distortions, externalities, public goods, time inconsistent policy, imperfect
credit markets, and incomplete/segmented markets.

II. The Model
In what follows, there are K agents, N states, M goods, V firms, and H endowments.
Goods include leisure. Endowments include time, various types of physical capital, and
natural resources. As in Arrow (1964), a state of the world is defined by a particular date,
a particular resolution of uncertainty, and a specification of all economically relevant
variables. The terms ps and qs reference pre-policy producer and endowment price
vectors in state s.




                                             1
Profit Maximization
There are V firms, which may be operated by private agents, the government, or both.
Firm j’s profit is

(1)        π j ≡ max(Σ p s y js − Σ q sϕ js + m j ),
                     y js   s              s


where yjs is firm j’s 1 x M vector of net goods supply in state s, ϕ js is firm j’s 1 x H vector
of endowment demands, and mj is a function determining the government’s net payment
to firm j. Producers are atomistic and take producer prices, endowment prices, and their
net payment functions as given.

Firm j’s constant returns production function is given by

(2)

 f j ( y j1 ,..., y jN , ϕ j1 ,..., ϕ jN ; Y − j1 ,..., Y − jN ,ϕ − j1 ,..., ϕ − jN , X 1 ,..., X N , Z 1 ,..., Z N , ω 1 ,..., ω N ) = 0

where Y-js is a 1 x M x (V-1) vector of net supplies of firms other than j in state s, ϕ − js is a
1 x H x (V-1) vector of state-s endowment demands of firms other than j, Xs references the
1 x M x K vector of goods demanded by agents 1 through K in state s, Zs references the 1
x M vector of goods demanded by the government in state s, and ω s references the 1 x H
vector of economy-wide endowments in state s. For future reference we denote by Ys the
1 x M x V vector of net supplies of firms 1 through V in state s and by ϕ s the 1 x H x V
vector of endowment demands of firms 1 through V.

Including the Y-js’s, ϕ − js ’s, Xs’s, Zs’s, φ s ’s, and s’s in (2) entertains the possibility of
production externalities, consumption externalities, externalities from the use of
economy-wide endowments, as well as externalities arising from the levels of economy-
wide endowments.

Firm j’s net payment function, mj, may depend on its own state-specific net supplies of
goods and demands for endowments. But it may also depend on the state-specific net
supplies and demands of other firms, the constellation of agents’ state-specific demands,
the constellation of government state-specific demands for goods and endowments, and
the economy’s overall endowments. In other words, the firm’s net payment function may
depend on any real variable in the economy. This potential dependency, which may be
highly non-linear, is expressed in

(3)

m j = m j ( y j1 ,..., y jN , ϕ j1 ,..., ϕ jN ; Y− j1 ,..., Y− jN , ϕ − j1 ,..., ϕ − jN , X 1 ,..., X N , Z 1 ,..., Z N , ω1 ,..., ω N )




                                                                    2
Preferences
Let xis reference the 1 x M vector of goods demanded by agent i in state s, X-is reference
the 1 x M x (K-1) vector of goods consumed by agents other than i in state s, and Zs
reference the 1 x M vector of goods consumed by the government in state s. The utility
of agent i is given by

(4)    U i = U ( xi1 ,..., xiN ; X −i1 ,..., X −iN , Z 1 ,..., Z N , Y1 ,..., YN , ϕ j1 ,..., ϕ jN , ω1 ,..., ω N )

The arguments of these preferences accommodate consumer and producer externalities as
well as externalities/public goods generated by producers’ and government demands.
These arguments can also determine commodity characteristics, like average quality, that
can be important determinants of demand and welfare in economies characterized by
asymmetric information.

Private Budgets
The budget constraint of agent i is given by

(5)    Σ p s xis = ei ,
        s


where ei is the net resource function of agent i. The net resource function references the
amount of resources the government arranges for agent i to be able to spend on state-
specific claims. As indicated in (6), this function may depend not only on the agent’s
own demand for claims in states of nature, but also on the claims of other agents, the
production of each firm, the government’s state-specific goods demands, and the
economy’s state-specific overall endowments. This dependency may also be highly non-
linear.

(6)    ei = ei ( xi1 , xi 2 ,..., xiN ; X −i1 , X −i 2 ,..., X −iN , Z 1 , Z 2 ,..., Z N , Y1 , Y2, ,..., YN , ω1 , ω 2 ,..., ω N ) ,

In addition to (5), agent i’s demands are constrained by

(7)     xis ∈ Ψ ( X 1 , X 2 ,..., X N , Z 1 , Z 2 ,..., Z N , Y1 , Y2, ,..., YN , ω1 , ω 2 ,..., ω N ) .

Equation (7) can accommodate a variety of important restrictions on trade, including
those arising because of incomplete/segmented markets and borrowing constraints.




                                                               3
Market Clearing
In equilibrium firms’ supplies of goods in each state s must cover agents’ and
government demands and the economy-wide supplies of endowments must cover firms’
endowment demands.

(8)     Σ y js = Σ xis + Z s .
        j           i



(9)     ω s = Σ ϕ js .
                j



The Government’s Budget
Equations (1), (5), (8), and (9) imply

(10)    Σ ps Z s = Σ qsω s + Σ π j − Σ ei − Σ m j .
        s               s           j         i         j



The economy’s overall resources consist of the value of its overall endowments plus the
value of pure profits. These overall resources less the amount of net resources that the
government provides to agents and firms must finance the government’s demand for
goods.


Government Policy
Government policy consists of a set of ei( ) and mj( ) functions as well as state-specific
government product demand functions given by

(11)    Z s = Z s ( X 1 , X 2 ,..., X N , Z 1 , Z 2 ,..., Z N , Y1 , Y2, ,..., YN , ω1 , ω 2 ,..., ω N ) .

As (10) indicates, these four sets of policy functions are not mutually independent.

Equilibrium
In equilibrium households maximize (4) subject to (5) and (7), firms maximize (1)
subject to (2), the government jointly chooses its mj( ), ei( ), and Zs( ) functions consistent
with (10), and the market clearing conditions (8) and (9) are satisfied.

Reporting Policy
Agent i’s net resources, ei, can be reported as reflecting the market value of a 1 x H
vector of state-specific private endowments, ais, proportionate holdings of firm j of ij,
less a 1 x K vector of state- and good-specific net tax functions, is, i.e.,




                                                              4
(12)        ei = Σ q s ais + Σ θ ij π j − Σ p sτ is .
                   s                i          s


Since the elements ais and agent i’s reported share of firm profits will be described as
constants, the is functions must contain the same arguments as the ei function, i..e,

(13) τ is = τ is ( xi1 , xi 2 ,..., xiN ; X −i1 , X −i 2 ,..., X −iN , Z 1 , Z 2 ,..., Z N , Y1 , Y2, ,..., YN , ω1 , ω 2 ,..., ω N ) .

Note that in equilibrium endowment and producer price vectors depend on the same
arguments as is, namely X1,…,XN, Z1, …, ZN, Y1,…,YN, 1,…, 1, so there is no need to
list them in (13) as separate arguments.

Let s reference a 1 x H vector of reported government endowments in state s. Since
endowments are held either by agents or the government, reporting, for agent i,
endowments of ais in state s also requires, for consistency, announcing a government net
endowment vector s satisfying

(14)        Ω s = ω s − Σ ais .
                               i


Combining (10), (12), and (14) yields the more conventional expression for the
government’s budget, namely

(15)        Σ p s Z s + Σ Σ m js = Σ q s Ω s + Σ θ gj π j + Σ Σ p sτ is ,
            s                 s j         s             j               s i



where

(16)       θ gj = 1 − Σ θ ij
                          i


references the government’s reported ownership share of firm j. Equation (15) can be
described as the government financing its goods and its net subsidies payments to firms
from its net worth (the sum of the first two terms on the right-hand side of (15)) plus its
net taxation of agents.

Given an equilibrium, any party, be it a private agent or government official, is free to
report any constellation of private endowments and corresponding government
endowments she wants. Assume, for example, that there is a single endowment, namely
capital and that agent k reports private asset values of âis for i = 1,…, K and s = 1, …, N
and private firm ownership shares θˆ . Her corresponding announcement of government
                                                        ij

net tax payments by agent i in state s – denoted by τˆis , and government assets in state s,
Ω̂ s , must satisfy (17) and (18).




                                                                    5
(17)    ei = Σ q s aˆ is + Σ θˆij π j − Σ p sτˆis .
               s           i            s



(18)    ˆ = ω − Σ â .
        Ω s  s      is
                       i


If agent k is a fiscal conservative (liberal) and is reassured by contemplating a large
government surplus (debt) and low (high) taxes, she can simply declare very low (high)
values of private assets, âis , which will lead, according to (17) and (18) to high reported
values of Ω̂ s and low reported values of Σ p sτˆis . Thus the reported levels of these fiscal
                                                      s
variables are completely undetermined as individual magnitudes, but they are linked to
each other by (17) and (18). In this sense these variables are mutually determined, but
not individually determined. As we discuss below, however, many economic analyses in
macroeconomics and public finance have used the levels of taxes or deficits as
measurable, identifiable variables, as if these levels had an unambiguous, independent
meaning.

Deficits
Time is one of many characteristics of our model’s states of nature. If we consider two
states, s and s that differ with respect to their measure of time, the difference in
government net debt (the negative of government assets) between the two states
constitutes their intervening deficit. Since one can report any size debt or surplus for
states s and s , one is free to report any size deficit (reduction in debt) across those two
states and, indeed, across any two states that one wants. Hence, each agent is free to
concoct whatever deficit and associated net tax payment times series, past or present, that
she wants.

Tax and Transfer Payments
Net taxes are defined as gross taxes minus transfer payments. Given one’s reported level
of net taxes, one can report any level of gross taxes minus a corresponding level of
transfer payment. Hence, gross taxes and transfer payments are just as ill defined as net
taxes. The same holds for any measures that rely on gross taxes and gross transfer
payments such as average tax rates or the unfunded liabilities of transfer programs.

Intuition
There’s an old joke in which a husband claims to be in charge of his household. As he
puts it to his friends, “I make the important decisions – I determine our household’s
foreign policy and let my wife handle everything else.” Knowing who’s really in charge
in a marriage is tough business, and determining who owns what can be even harder.
Indeed, if the household resides in a community property state, it’s impossible to allocate
ownership. The husband and wife may have “separate” bank and other accounts, but



                                                          6
neither can withhold the corpus of “their” accounts from the other. Indeed, a variant of
the quoted joke is “I own the money and my wife spends it.”

The private sector and the government are no different from a couple living under
community property law. They jointly own everything and jointly determine how to
spend it. Whether the government says a) “It’s all mine, but I’ll let you (the private
sector) have some.” b) “It’s all yours, but I’ll take whatever I’d like.” or c) “It’s partly
mine and partly yours, but I’ll determine how much of mine to give you and how much of
yours to keep.” does not make an iota of economic difference.

V. Illustrating the Model
The canonical model of government “debt” is Diamond’s (1965) two period life-cycle
formulation. We now show how the above general formulation accommodates this
model. Agents are assumed to consume a single good and leisure when young and old.
Labor supplied by young and old is homogeneous. Output of the good, call it corn, is
produced understand constant returns with capital and labor. There is neither population
nor productivity growth. We normalize each cohort’s population to unity. The
endowment of time that can be used for work or leisure is 1 per generation per period.
For simplicity, we assume the government makes no net payments to firms, but does have
a demand for consumption of the economy’s single good.

Let cyt, lyt, cot+1, and lot+1 stand, respectively, for consumption and leisure when young
and old of the generation born at time t.

The lifetime utility of the generation born at time t is given by

(19)    u t = u t (c y ,t , l yt , cot +1 , l ot +1 )

Consider the economy as of time t=0. The budget constraint facing the old at time 0 is
given by

(20)    co 0 + w0 l o 0 = eo 0 .

For generations born at time t 0, the budget constraint is given by

                  cot +1              w l
(21)    c yt +             + wt l yt + t +1 ot +1 = et .
                 1 + rt +1            1 + rt +1

In (20) and (21) eo,0 stands for the remaining lifetime net resource function of the old at
time 0, and et is the lifetime net resource function of the generation born at time t. Each
generation’s net resource function can depend freely and in a highly non-linear way on its
consumption and leisure decisions. And since each generation will consider how its




                                                           7
consumption and leisure decisions affect its net resources both infra-marginally and at the
margin, this formulation fully accommodates distortionary policy.

The production function is

(22)     Yt = F ( K t , Lt )

The government’s demand for corn at time t is gt. The economy’s endowment of capital
evolves according to

(23)     K t +1 − K t = Yt − c yt − cot − g t .

Labor supply is determined by

(24)     Lt = 2 − l yt − l ot .

Using (22) and (24), rewrite (22) as

(24)     K t +1 − K t = F ( K t ,2 − l yt − l ot ) − c yt − cot − g t .

In hiring capital and labor, firms equate marginal factor products to pre-policy factor
prices; i.e.,

(25)     FK ( K t ,2 − l yt − l ot ) = rt

         FL ( K t ,2 − l yt − l ot ) = wt


Policy

In equilibrium the government announces a time-path of net resource functions – the
terms eo0 and et -- and a time path of corn demand, gt, that satisfy (24) in each period
given utility maximization subject to (19) and (20), and given the determination via (25)
of pre-policy factor prices.

Labeling
Suppose the economy is in dynamic equilibrium given government policy as determined
by its net resource and spending functions. Denote by an upper bar this equilibrium’s
variables. Now consider announcing/reporting any time-path of official debt¸ D̂t starting
at time 0. If one reports D̂0 as the amount of government debt prevailing at time 0, the
corresponding report of private assets at time 0, â0 , is determined by (26) for t=0. The
consistent report of net taxes facing the elderly at time 0, τˆo 0 , is determined by (27). The


                                                          8
reported debt for time t>0 determines ât from (26). This determines τˆ yt from (28), and,
given τˆ yt , the reported value of τˆot +1 is determined by (29).

(26)    aˆ t = Dˆ t + K t .

(27)    eo 0 = aˆ 0 (1 + r0 ) + w0 − τˆo 0 .

(28)    aˆ t +1 = wt (1 − l yt ) − c yt − τˆ yt .

                        wt +1             τˆ
(29)    et = wt +               − τˆ yt − ot +1 .
                      1 + rt +1          1 + rt +1

Relationship to the General Formulation
In the above example, (20) and (21) are specific cases of (5), (24) is a specific case of (8),
and the equation of economy-wide capital and time endowments with firm demands for
these endowments in (25) is a specific case of (9).

Although we’ve presented this example assuming that all cohort members are identical,
the example can readily be modified to include cohort-specific heterogeneity. One need
simply apply an individual-specific subscript to each of the cohort-specific variables.
Doing so does not rule out anonymous net resource functions. Subscripting net resources
by an agent’s identity does not imply that the function determining those resources (as
opposed to the arguments of the function) is agent-specific. Hence, Mirrlees’ (1971)
optimal income “tax” can be relabeled as freely as any other “tax,” with no alteration in
his underlying optimal net resource function.


A Second Illustration with Adverse Selection, and Credit Constraints

Our second example, informed by Jaffee and Russel (1976) and Hayashi (1987), shows
that the relativity of fiscal language is compromised neither by incomplete information,
adverse selection, or credit constraints.

Agents again live for two periods. But each cohort now features two types of agents – A
and B. An agent’s type is private information. Type B agents are honest. They always
repay what they owe, whether they owe payments to private parties or the government.
In contrast, type A agents are dishonest.

          *
Define c Ay by

(30)    V A = u (c *yA ,0) ,



                                                     9
where for i = A, B,

(31)    Vi ≡ max ui (ciy , cio ) s.t. ciy + cio = ei .
             c ,c
                iy   io                           1+ r

Note that for standard concave utility functions, c Ay >e A .
                                                             *



                                                                 *
If type-A agents are permitted to consume more than c Ay when young, the present value
of their consumption will exceed their lifetime net resources.

Denote by ^ the utility maximizing value of ciy and cio .            Consider a separating
equilibrium in which

(32)    cˆ By > c *Ay

and “financial” and “fiscal” institutions permit agents to set their consumption when
young as high as c *yA , but no higher. Since type A agents are indifferent between
consuming c *yA and consuming less than this amount, we assume they consume less. In
contrast, given (32), the consumption of type B agents is given by

(33)    c Byt = c *Ayt and c Bo = (e B − c *Ay )(1 + r ) .

The consumption of type A agents is given by ĉ Ay and ĉ Ao .

Note that we have described this economy with no reference to “borrowing,” “taxes,” or
“transfer payments.” The budget constraint in (31) is a specific case of (5), and the
constraint on agent B’s consumption when young and old in (33) is a specific case of (7).

If we want, we can describe type-B agents as “facing high taxes when young, but being
able to borrow large amounts” or as “facing low taxes, but being able to borrow small
amounts.” A “policy” of “raising current taxes” and “cutting future taxes” that leaves
lifetime net resources unchanged can be described as engendering an increase in “private
lending” that leaves type-B agents with the same first and second period consumption
values.

V. Research and Policy Implications
The fact that one can construct an infinite number of equally meaningless time series of
government debt, deficits, taxes, transfer payments, private assets, private saving, and
disposable income vitiates a vast number of economic analyses predicated on these


                                                       10
measures. Recent examples include Gale and Orsag’s (2004) and Engen and Hubbard’s
(2005) studies of the effects of budget deficits on interest rates, Bell and Bosworth’s
(2005) study of the decline in personal saving, Banks, Blundell, Smith’s (2001) study of
financial wealth inequality, Slemrod’s (1994) study of tax progressivity and income
inequality, the OECD’s (1997) analysis of inequality in disposable income, the IMF’s
study of fiscal policy and financial development (Hauner 2006), and the World Bank’s
study of fiscal sustainability (Burnside, 2005). .

The failure to distinguish economics from linguistics also undermines theoretical
research. Consider, for example, Barsky, Mankiw, and Zeldes’ (1986) paper on
Keynesian tax cuts. Their policy entails a short-run across-the-board “tax cut” coupled
with a long-run progressive “tax hike,” which is present value neutral in terms of the
government’s net receipts. The policy provides earnings insurance, which leads to more
current consumption. The authors suggest that this provides a neoclassical basis for the
Keynesian view that tax cuts expand aggregate demand.

In fact, it does no such thing since the policy could equally well be run/described/labeled
as entailing a tax hike. No doubt someone will someday write a paper arguing, from the
perspective of this model, that a tax hike policy and a tax cut policy are equivalent. This
projected paper will add to the long list of papers purporting to identify “equivalent
policies” – policies that can be run/implemented differently, but that generate the same
economic outcomes. Such papers miss a central point. There are no equivalent policies
in neoclassical economics. Policies are unique. What’s different is simply the words we
use to describe the same underlying policy.

Fischer’s (1980) famous paper on the time inconsistency provides yet another example of
the confusion of economics and language. In Fischer’s two-period model agents fail to
save out of fear of ex-post efficient, but ex-ante inefficient capital levies. But from the
perspective of the second period, Fischer’s capital levy is no different, apart from
labeling, from a second-period infra-marginal labor income tax. Were Fischer’s agents to
adopt such a non-distortionary labor tax in their second period and also in their first,
they’d achieve a first-best equilibrium.

So why does Fischer conclude that his economy ends up in a third best equilibrium in
which no one saves for fear of a capital levy? The answer is his assumption that only
proportional labor income taxes may be levied/announced. But this assumption is not
based on any economic feature of his model. Instead it boils down to a non-economic
restriction on language since, from the perspective of the second period, a “capital levy”
could just as well be called “an infra-marginal labor income tax.” Fischer’s rational
agents will surely realize this and also realize that if they can infra-marginally tax labor in
the second period, they can do so in the first. Having figured this out, they’ll end up in
the first best.1



1
    Kotlikoff (2002) discusses both Barsky, Mankiw, and Zeldes (1986) and Fischer (1980).


                                                     11
A third example of theoretical confusion over real policy and labels is the ubiquitous
invocation of transversality conditions requiring that government debt grow, in the long
run, no faster than the economy’s return on capital2 and the presumption that economies
that violate such conditions are dynamically inefficient. As indicated here, there is no
limit to the growth in reported debt time nor is there any economic association between
the growth rate of reported debt and what matters for dynamic efficiency, namely the
deviation between the growth rate of the economy and its return to capital.

To see this in a less abstract framework, consider a dynamically efficient two period life-
cycle model with a zero intrinsic growth rate. Assume the economy is sitting in a
stationary state with a positive return to capital of r. Also assume the economy’s
government consumes nothing and takes, on net, nothing from any generation either
when it’s young or when it’s old. Now, starting at time 1, let’s label this policy as the
government’s “borrowing mth from each agent born at time t, making infra-marginal
transfer payments of mth to each agent born at time t, repaying principal plus interest of
mth(1+r) at time t+1 to each agent born at time t, and infra-marginally taxing at time t+1
each agent born at time t in the amount mth(1+r).” This economy’s reported debt at the
beginning of time t+1 is mth. If m>1, the economy’s debt and deficit will head to infinity
with no affect whatsoever on the economy or any agent in the economy.3

Turning to actual policy, one need only consider the Maastricht Treaty limiting members
of the EURO to 3 percent deficits, the Stability and Growth Pact that sanctions EU
members with deficits above 3 percent, the IMF’s enduring use of the deficit to assess
fiscal prudence, the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act to limit U.S. deficits, or the ongoing
movement for a U.S. balanced budget amendment to realize that official reports of
deficits are a) dramatically influencing policy decisions and b) diverting attention from
fundamental and meaningful measures of fiscal policy.

VI. Conclusion
A century ago, everyone thought that time and distance were well defined physical
concepts. But neither proved to be absolute. Instead, measures/reports of time and
distance were found to depend on one’s direction and speed of travel making our
apparent physical reality, in the words of Einstein, “merely an illusion.”

Like time and distance, standard fiscal measures, including deficits, taxes, and transfer
payments, depend on one’s reference point/reporting procedure/language/labels. As
such, they too represent numbers in search of concepts that provide the illusion of
meaning where none exists. Economists must accept this fact and acknowledge that
much of what they have been writing and saying about fiscal policy has been an exercise
in linguistics, not economics.


2
 See, for example, Blanchard (1985).
3
 If m<-1, the government’s surplus heads to infinity. If -1<m<1, the government’s reports a declining debt
or surplus through time.


                                                   12
13
                                      References


Arrow, Kenneth J., “The Role of Securities in the Optimal Allocation of Risk-Bearing,”
Review of Economic Studies, 31, 1964, 91-6.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press, 1987.

Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and James P. Smith, Financial Wealth Inequality in the
United States and Britian, The Rand Institute, 2001.

Barsky, Robert B, Gregory Mankiw, and Steven P, Zeldes, “Rchardian Consumers with
Keynesian Propensities,” The American Econonomic Review, 76 (4), 1986, 676-91.

Bell, Linda and Barry Bosworth, “The Decline in Household Saving: What Can We
Learn from Survey Data,” mimeo, The Brookings Institution, August 2005.

Blanchard, Olivier, “Debts, Deficits, and Finite Horizons,” Journal of Political Economy,
93 (2), April 1985, 223-47.

Burnside, Craig, ed., Fiscal Sustainability in Theory and Practice, Washington, D.C.:
The World Bank, 2005.

Engen, Eric M. and R. Glenn Hubbard, “Federal Government Debt and Interest Rates,” in
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, Mark Gertler and Ken Rogoff, eds., 2005, 83-138.

Fischer, Stanley, “Dynamic Inconsistency, Cooperation, and the Benevolent Dissembling
Government,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2, 1980, 93-107.

Gale, William and Peter R. Orsag, “Budget Deficits, National Saving, and Interest
Rates,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 2004, 101-210.

Hauner, David, “Fiscal Policy and Financial Development,” IMF Working Paper,
WP/06/26, January 2006.

Hayashi, Fumio, "Tests for Liquidity Constraints: A Critical Survey", invited paper, 5th
World Congress of the Econometric Society, Cambridge, Mass., in T. Bewley ed.,
Advances in Econometrics II: Fifth World Congress, Cambridge University Press, 1987,
91-120.

Hubbard, Glenn, and Eric Engen, "Government Debt and Interest Rates,” in M. Gertler
and K. Rogoff, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005.

Jaffee, D. M. and T. Russel, “Imperfect Information, Uncertainty, and Credit Rationing,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 651-66.


                                           14
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., “Deficit Delusion,” The Public Interest, Summer 1986.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Generational Policy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002.

Mirrlees, James A., “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation,” Review
of Economic Studies, 38, 175-208.

OECD, “Income Distribution and Poverty in Selected OECD Countries, OECD
Economic Outlook, December 1997.

Slemrod, Joel, ed., Tax Progressivity and Income Inequality, Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Tabellini, Guido, “The Politics of Intergenerational Redistribution,” Journal of Political
Economy, 99 (2), 1991, 335-57.




                                           15
