NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MACROECONOMIST AS SCIENTIST AND ENGINEER
N. Gregory Mankiw
Working Paper 12349
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12349
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006

N. Gregory Mankiw is the Robert M. Beren Professor of Economics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
I am grateful to Steven Braun, James Hines, Donald Marron, David Romer, Andrei Shleifer, Timothy Taylor,
Michael Waldman, and Noam Yuchtman for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by N. Gregory Mankiw. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Macroeconomist as Scientist and Engineer
N. Gregory Mankiw
NBER Working Paper No. 12349
June 2006
JEL No.
ABSTRACT
This essay offers a brief history of macroeconomics, together with an evaluation of what has been
learned over the past several decades. It is based on the premise that the field has evolved through
the efforts of two types of macroeconomist— those who understand the field as a type of engineering
and those who would like it to be more of a science. While the early macroeconomists were
engineers trying to solve practical problems, macroeconomists have more recently focused on
developing analytic tools and establishing theoretical principles. These tools and principles,
however, have been slow to find their way into applications. As the field of macroeconomics has
evolved, one recurrent theme is the interaction—sometimes productive and sometimes not—
between the scientists and the engineers.
N. Gregory Mankiw
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ngmankiw@harvard.edu

Economists like to strike the pose of a scientist. I know, because I often do it
myself. When I teach undergraduates, I very consciously describe the field of economics
as a science, so no student would start the course thinking he was embarking on some
squishy academic endeavor. Our colleagues in the physics department across campus
may find it amusing that we view them as close cousins, but we are quick to remind
anyone who will listen that economists formulate theories with mathematical precision,
collect huge data sets on individual and aggregate behavior, and exploit the most
sophisticated statistical techniques to reach empirical judgments that are free of bias and
ideology (or so we like to think).
Having recently spent two years in Washington as an economic adviser at a time
when the U.S. economy was struggling to pull out of a recession, I am reminded that the
subfield of macroeconomics was born not as a science but more as a type of engineering.
God put macroeconomists on earth not to propose and test elegant theories but to solve
practical problems. The problems He gave us, moreover, were not modest in dimension.
The problem that gave birth to our field—the Great Depression of the 1930s— was an
economic downturn of unprecedented scale, including incomes so depressed and
unemployment so widespread that it is no exaggeration to say that the viability of the
capitalist system was called in question.
This essay offers a brief history of macroeconomics, together with an evaluation of
what we have learned. My premise is that the field has evolved through the efforts of two
types of macroeconomist—those who understand the field as a type of engineering and
those who would like it to be more of a science. Engineers are, first and foremost, problemsolvers. By contrast, the goal of scientists is to understand how the world works. The
research emphasis of macroeconomists has varied over time between these two motives.
While the early macroeconomists were engineers trying to solve practical problems, the
macroeconomists of the past several decades have been more interested in developing
analytic tools and establishing theoretical principles. These tools and principles, however,
have been slow to find their way into applications. As the field of macroeconomics has
evolved, one recurrent theme is the interaction—sometimes productive and sometimes

1

not— between the scientists and the engineers. The substantial disconnect between the
science and engineering of macroeconomics should be a humbling fact for all of us working
in the field.
To avoid any confusion, I should say at the outset that the story I tell is not one of
good guys and bad guys. Neither scientists nor engineers have a claim to greater virtue.
The story is also not one of deep thinkers and simple-minded plumbers. Science professors
are typically no better at solving engineering problems than engineering professors are at
solving scientific problems. In both fields, cutting-edge problems are hard problems, as well
as intellectually challenging ones.
Just as the world needs both scientists and engineers, it needs macroeconomists of
both mindsets. But I believe that the discipline would advance more smoothly and fruitfully
if macroeconomists always kept in mind that their field has a dual role.

The Keynesian Revolution
The word “macroeconomics” first appears in the scholarly literature in the 1940s.
To be sure, the topics of macroeconomics—inflation, unemployment, economic growth, the
business cycle, and monetary and fiscal policy—have long intrigued economists. In the
eighteenth century, for example, David Hume (1752) wrote about the short-run and long-run
effects of monetary injections; at many points, his analysis looks remarkably similar to what
one might see from a modern monetary economist or central banker. In 1927, Arthur Pigou
published a book titled Industrial Fluctuations that attempted to explain the business cycle.
Nonetheless, the field of macroeconomics as a distinct and active area of inquiry arose in the
shadow of the Great Depression. There is nothing like a crisis to focus the mind.
The Great Depression had a profound impact on those who lived through it. In
1933, the U.S. unemployment rate reached 25 percent, and real GDP was 31 percent below
its 1929 level. All subsequent fluctuations in the U.S. economy have been ripples on a calm
sea compared to this tsunami. Autobiographical essays by prominent economists of this era,
such as Lawrence Klein, Franco Modigliani, Paul Samuelson, Robert Solow, and James
Tobin, confirm that the Depression was a key motivating event in their careers. (Breit and
Hirsch, 2004)

2

The General Theory of John Maynard Keynes was the focal point in professional
discussions about how to understand these developments. All five of these Nobel
laureates confirm this from first-hand experience. Tobin reports the following reaction
from Harvard, where he was a student in the late 1930s and early 1940s: “The senior
faculty was mostly hostile…The younger faculty and the graduate student teaching
fellows were enthusiastic about Keynes’s book.” As is often the case, the young had
greater foresight than the old about the impact the new ideas. Keynes tied with Marshall
as the most frequently cited economist in economic journals in the 1930s and was the
second most cited in the 1940s, after Hicks. (Quandt, 1976) This influence persisted for
many years. Keynes ranked number 14 in citations for the period from 1966 to 1986,
even though he died two decades before the time period began. (Garfield, 1990)
The Keynesian revolution influenced not only economic research but also pedagogy.
Samuelson’s classic textbook Economics was first published in 1948, and its organization
reflected his perception of what the profession had to offer to the lay reader. Supply and
demand, which today are at the heart of how we teach economics to freshmen, were not
introduced until page 447 of the 608-page book. Macroeconomics came first, including
such concepts as the fiscal-policy multiplier and the paradox of thrift. Samuelson wrote (on
page 253), “Although much of this analysis is due to an English economist, John Maynard
Keynes,…today its broad fundamentals are increasingly accepted by economists of all
schools of thought.”
When a modern economist reads The General Theory, the experience is both
exhilarating and frustrating. On the one hand, the book is the work of a great mind being
applied to a social problem whose currency and enormity cannot be questioned. On the
other hand, although the book is extensive in its analysis, it somehow seems incomplete as a
matter of logic. Too many threads are left hanging. The reader keeps asking, what,
precisely, is the economic model that ties together all the pieces?
Soon after Keynes published The General Theory, a generation of
macroeconomists worked to answer this question by turning his grand vision into a
simpler, more concrete model. One of the first and most influential attempt was the ISLM model proposed by the 33-year-old John Hicks (1937). The 26-year-old Franco
Modigliani (1944) then extended and explained the model more fully. To this day, the

3

IS-LM model remains the interpretation of Keynes offered in the most widely used
intermediate-level macroeconomics textbooks. Some Keynesian critics of the IS-LM
model complain that it oversimplifies the economic vision offered by Keynes in The
General Theory. To some extent, this may well be true. The whole point of the model
was to simplify a line of argument that was otherwise hard to follow. The line between
simplifying and oversimplifying is often far from clear.
While theorists such as Hicks and Modigliani were developing Keynesian models
suitable for the classroom blackboard, econometricians such as Klein were working on more
applied models that could be brought to the data and used for policy analysis. Over time, in
the hope of becoming more realistic, the models became larger and eventually included
hundreds of variables and equations. By the 1960s, there were many competing models,
each based on the input of prominent Keynesians of the day, such as the Wharton Model
associated with Klein, the DRI (Data Resource, Inc.) model associated with Otto Eckstein,
and the MPS (MIT-Penn-Social Science Research Council) model associated with Albert
Ando and Modigliani. These models were widely used for forecasting and policy analysis.
The MPS model was maintained by the Federal Reserve for many years and would become
the precursor to the FRB/US model, which is still maintained and used by Fed staff.
Although these models differed in detail, their similarities were more striking than
their differences. They all had an essentially Keynesian structure. In the back of each
model builder’s mind was the same simple model taught to undergraduates today: an IS
curve relating financial conditions and fiscal policy to the components of GDP, an LM curve
that determined interest rates as the price that equilibrates the supply and demand for
money, and some kind of Phillips curve that describes how the price level responds over
time to changes in the economy.
As a matter of science, The General Theory was a remarkable success. The
revolution that it inspired attracted many of the best young minds of its day. Their
prodigious output offered a new way to understand short-run economic fluctuations.
Reflecting on these events, Samuelson (1988) offered a succinct summary: "The
Keynesian revolution was the most significant event in 20th-century economic science."
This sentiment is shared by many economists of his generation.

4

Yet the Keynesian revolution cannot be understood merely as a scientific advance.
To a large extent, Keynes and the Keynesian model builders had the perspective of
engineers. They were motivated by problems in the real world, and once they developed
their theories, they were eager to put them into practice. Until his death in 1946, Keynes
himself was heavily involved in offering policy advice. So, too, were the early American
Keynesians. Tobin, Solow, and Eckstein all took time away from their academic pursuits
during the 1960s to work at the Council of Economic Advisers. The Kennedy tax cut,
eventually passed in 1964, was in many ways the direct result of the emerging Keynesian
consensus and the models that embodied it.

The New Classicals
By the late 1960s, cracks in the Keynesian consensus were starting to appear. Those
cracks would grow into fissures, which would eventually crumble the macroeconomic
consensus and undermine confidence in the mainstream econometric models. In its place, a
more classical view of the economy would reemerge.
The first wave of new classical economics was monetarism, and its most notable
proponent was Milton Friedman. Friedman’s (1957) early work on the permanent income
hypothesis was not directly about money or the business cycle, but it certainly had
implications for business cycle theory. It was in part an attack on the Keynesian
consumption function, which provided the foundation for the fiscal policy multipliers that
were central to Keynesian theory and policy prescriptions. If the marginal propensity to
consume out of transitory income is small, as Friedman’s theory suggested, then fiscal
policy would have a much smaller impact on equilibrium income than many Keynesians
believed.
Friedman and Schwartz’s (1963) Monetary History of the United States was more
directly concerned with the business cycle and it, too, undermined the Keynesian consensus.
Most Keynesians viewed the economy as inherently volatile, constantly buffeted by the
shifting “animal spirits” of investors. Friedman and Schwartz suggested that economic
instability should be traced not to private actors but rather to inept monetary policy. The
implication was that policymakers should be satisfied if they do no harm by following
simple policy rules. Although Friedman’s proposed rule of steady growth in monetary

5

aggregates has few adherents today, it was an early precursor to the inflation-targeting
regimes now in effect in many of the world’s central banks.
Friedman’s Presidential Address to the American Economic Association in 1968,
along with Phelps (1968), took aim at the weakest link in the Keynesian model: the Phillips
curve tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. At least since Samuelson and Solow
(1960), some sort of Phillips curve had been part of the Keynesian consensus, even if not a
view endorsed by Keynes himself. Samuelson and Solow understood the theoretical
tenuousness of this tradeoff, and their paper was filled with caveats about why the short-run
and long-run tradeoff could differ. But the subsequent literature forgot those caveats all too
easily. The Phillips curve provided a convenient way to complete the Keynesian model,
which always had trouble explaining why prices failed to equilibrate markets and how the
price level adjusted over time.
Friedman argued that the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment would not
hold in the long run when classical principles should apply and money should be neutral.
The tradeoff appeared in the data because, in the short run, inflation is often unanticipated
and unanticipated inflation can lower unemployment. The particular mechanism that
Friedman suggested was money illusion on the part of workers. More important for the
development of macroeconomics was that Friedman put expectations on center stage.
This prepared the way for the second wave of new classical economics—the rational
expectations revolution. In a series of highly influential papers, Robert Lucas extended
Friedman’s argument. In his “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” Lucas (1976)
argued that the mainstream Keynesian models were useless for policy analysis because they
failed to take expectations seriously; as a result, the estimated empirical relationships that
made up these models would break down if an alternative policy were implemented. Lucas
(1973) also proposed a business cycle theory based on the assumptions of imperfect
information, rational expectations, and market clearing. In this theory, monetary policy
matters only to the extent to which it surprises people and confuses them about relative
prices. Barro (1977) offered evidence that this model was consistent with U.S. time-series
data. Sargent and Wallace (1975) pointed out a key policy implication: Because it is
impossible to surprise rational people systematically, systematic monetary policy aimed at
stabilizing the economy is doomed to failure.

6

The third wave of new classical economics was the real business cycle theories of
Kydland and Prescott (1982) and Long and Plosser (1983). Like the theories of Friedman
and Lucas, these were built on the assumption that prices adjust instantly to clear markets—
a radical difference from Keynesian theorizing. But unlike the new classical predecessors,
the real business cycle theories omitted any role of monetary policy, unanticipated or
otherwise, in explaining economic fluctuations. The emphasis switched to the role of
random shocks to technology and the intertemporal substitution in consumption and leisure
that these shocks induced.
As a result of the three waves of new classical economics, the field of
macroeconomics became increasingly rigorous and increasingly tied to the tools of
microeconomics. The real business cycle models were specific, dynamic examples of
Arrow-Debreu general equilibrium theory. Indeed, this was one of their main selling points.
Over time, proponents of this work have backed away from the assumption that the business
cycle is driven by real as opposed to monetary forces, and they have begun to stress the
methodological contributions of this work. Today, many macroeconomists coming from the
new classical tradition are happy to concede to the Keynesian assumption of sticky prices as
long as this assumption is imbedded in a suitably rigorous model in which economic actors
are rational and forward-looking. Because of this change in emphasis, the terminology has
evolved, and this class of work now often goes by the label “dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium” theory. But I am getting ahead of the story.
At the time the three new classical waves were first hitting shore in the 1970s and
1980s, one of their goals was to undermine the old Keynesian macroeconometric models
both as a matter of science and as a matter of engineering. In their article “After Keynesian
Macroeconomics,” Sargent and Lucas (1979) wrote, “For policy, the central fact is that
Keynesian policy recommendations have no sounder basis, in a scientific sense, than
recommendations of non-Keynesian economists or, for that matter, noneconomists.”
Although Sargent and Lucas thought Keynesian engineering was based on flawed science,
they knew that the new classical school (circa 1979) did not yet have a model that was ready
to bring to Washington: “We consider the best currently existing equilibrium models as
prototypes of better, future models which will, we hope, prove of practical use in the
formulation of policy.” They also ventured that such models would be available “in ten

7

years if we get lucky.” I will return later to the question of whether this prospect panned out
as they had hoped.
As these quotations suggest, those engaged in the new classical movement were not
shy about their intentions or modest about their accomplishments. Lucas offered an even
more blunt assessment in a 1980 article entitled “The Death of Keynesian Economics:”
“One cannot find good, under-forty economists who identify themselves or their work as
‘Keynesian’. Indeed, people even take offense if referred to as ‘Keynesians’. At research
seminars, people don’t take Keynesian theorizing seriously anymore; the audience starts
to whisper and giggle to one another.” Yet, just as Lucas was happily writing the eulogy
for Keynesian economics, the profession was about to welcome a generation of “new
Keynesians.”

The New Keynesians
Economists attracted to the Keynesian approach to the business cycle have long
been discomfited by the issue of microfoundations. Indeed, a 1946 article by Klein, one of
the first to use the term “macroeconomics,” begins as follows: “Many of the newly
constructed mathematical models of economic systems, especially business-cycle
theories, are very loosely related to the behavior of individual households or firms which
must form the basis of all theories of economic behavior.” All modern economists are, to
some degree, classical. We all teach our students about optimization, equilibrium, and
market efficiency. How to reconcile these two visions of the economy—one founded on
Adam Smith’s invisible hand and Alfred Marshall’s supply and demand curves, the other
founded on Keynes’s analysis of an economy suffering from insufficient aggregate
demand—has been a profound, nagging question since macroeconomics began as a separate
field of study.
Early Keynesians, such as Samuelson, Modigliani, and Tobin, thought they had
reconciled these visions in what is sometimes called the “neoclassical-Keynesian synthesis.”
These economists believed that the classical theory of Smith and Marshall was right in the
long run, but the invisible hand could become paralyzed in the short run described by
Keynes. The time horizon mattered because some prices—most notably the price of
labor—adjusted sluggishly over time. Early Keynesians believed that classical models

8

described the equilibrium toward which the economy gradually evolved, but that Keynesian
models offered the better description of the economy at any moment in time when prices
were reasonably taken as predetermined.
The neoclassical-Keynesian synthesis is coherent, but it is also vague and
incomplete. While the new classical economists responded to these defects by rejecting the
synthesis and starting afresh, the new Keynesian economists thought there was much to
preserve. Their goal was to use the tools of microeconomics to give greater precision to the
uneasy compromise reached by early Keynesians. The neoclassical-Keynesian synthesis
was like a house built in the 1940s: The new classicals looked at its outdated systems and
concluded it was a tear down, while the new Keynesians admired the old-world
craftsmanship and embraced it as an opportunity for a major rehab.
The first wave of research that can rightly be called “new Keynesian” is the work on
general disequilibrium (Barro and Grossman, 1971; Malinvaud, 1977). These theories
aimed to use the tools of general equilibrium analysis to understand the allocation of
resources that results when markets do not clear. Wages and prices were taken as given.
The focus was on how the failure of one market to clear influences supply and demand in
related markets. According to these theories, the economy can find itself in one of several
regimes, depending on which markets are experiencing excess supply and which are
experiencing excess demand. The most interesting regime—in the sense of corresponding
best to what we observe during economic downturns—is the so-called "Keynesian"
regime in which both the goods market and the labor market are exhibiting excess supply.
In the Keynesian regime, unemployment arises because labor demand is too low to
ensure full employment at prevailing wages; the demand for labor is low because firms
cannot sell all they want at prevailing prices; and the demand for firms’ output is
inadequate because many customers are unemployed. Recessions and depressions result
from a vicious circle of insufficient demand, and a stimulus to demand can have
multiplier effects.
The second wave of new Keynesian research aimed to explore how the concept of
rational expectations could be used in models without the assumption of market clearing.
To some extent, this work was responding to Sargent and Wallace’s conclusion of
monetary policy irrelevance by showing how systematic monetary policy could

9

potentially stabilize the economy, despite rational expectations (Fischer, 1977). To some
extent, it was motivated by a desire find an empirically realistic model of inflation
dynamics (Taylor, 1980). The Achilles heel of this work was that it assumed a form of
labor contracts that, while perhaps justifiable on empirical grounds, was hard to square
with microeconomic principles.
Because so much of the Keynesian tradition was based on the premise that wages
and prices fail to clear markets, the third wave of new Keynesian research aimed to
explain why this was the case. Various hypotheses were explored: that firms face “menu
costs” when they choose to change their prices; that firms pay their workers “efficiency
wages” above the market-clearing level to increase worker productivity; and that wage
and price setters deviate from perfect rationality. Mankiw (1985) and Akerlof and
Yellen (1985) pointed out that when firms have market power, there are large differences
between the private and social cost-benefit calculations regarding price adjustment, so a
sticky-price equilibrium could be privately rational (or near rational) while socially very
costly. Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987) showed that part of this divergence between
private and social incentives results from an aggregate-demand externality: When one
firm cuts its prices, it increases real money balances and thus the demand for the products
of all firms. Ball and Romer (1990) established that there is strong complementary
between real and nominal rigidities, so any motive for avoiding relative-price changes
would exacerbate the sluggishness of nominal prices.
In retrospect, these various new Keynesian contributions were more related and
complementary than they seemed at the time, even to people working on them. For
example, it is tempting to see the early work on general disequilibrium as a dead end—a
research program that sowed the seeds of its own demise by its assumption of
predetermined prices. And, indeed, this work rarely finds its way on to reading lists
today. Yet one can also see a progression of related ideas about how the economy works
when prices do not move instantly to balance supply and demand.
There is, for instance, an interesting but rarely noticed relationship between the
first and third waves of new Keynesian economics. In particular, one can view the third
wave as establishing the centrality of the Keynesian regime highlighted in the first wave.
When firms have market power, they charge prices above marginal cost, so they always

10

want to sell more at prevailing prices. In a sense, if all firms have some degree of market
power, then goods markets are typically in a state of excess supply. This theory of the
goods market is often married to a theory of the labor market with above-equilibrium
wages, such as the efficiency-wage model. In this case, the "Keynesian" regime of
generalized excess supply is not just one possible outcome for the economy, but the
typical one.
In my judgment, these three waves of new Keynesian research added up to a
coherent microeconomic theory for the failure of the invisible hand to work for short-run
macroeconomic phenomena. We understand how markets interact when there are price
rigidities, the role that expectations can play, and the incentives that price setters face as
they choose whether or not to change prices. As a matter of science, there was much
success in this research (although, as a participant, I cannot claim to be entirely
objective). The work was not revolutionary, but it was not trying to be. Instead, it was
counterrevolutionary: Its aim was to defend the essence of the neoclassical-Keynesian
synthesis from the new classical assault.
Was this work also successful as a matter of engineering? Did it help
policymakers devise better policies to cope with the business cycle? The judgment here
must be less positive—a topic to which I will return shortly.
But it is remarkable that the new Keynesians were, by temperament, more
inclined to become macroeconomic engineers than were economists working within the
new classical tradition. Among the leaders of the new classical school, none (as far as I
know) has ever left academia to take a significant job in public policy. By contrast, the
new Keynesian movement, like the earlier generation of Keynesians, was filled with
people who would trade a few years in the ivory tower for a stay in the nation’s capital.
Examples include Stanley Fischer, Larry Summers, Joseph Stiglitz, Janet Yellen, John
Taylor, Richard Clarida, Ben Bernanke, and myself. The first four of these economists
came to Washington during the Clinton years; the last four during the Bush years. The
division of economists between new classicals and new Keynesians is not,
fundamentally, between the political right and the political left. To a greater extent, it is a
split between pure scientists and economic engineers.

11

Digression and Vitriol
The theory and empirics of long-run economic growth are beyond the scope of the
essay, but it is worth pointing out that these topics occupied much of the attention of
macroeconomists during the decade of the 1990s. This work drew attention away from
short-run fluctuations, which had dominated the field of macroeconomics since its birth half
a century earlier.
There are several reasons for the emergence of growth as a major area for research.
First, a series of influential papers by Paul Romer (1986) and others offered a new set of
ideas and tools for analyzing what is surely one of the most compelling topics in
economics—the large gap between rich and poor nations. Second, new cross-country data
became available that allowed systematic examination of the validity of alternative theories
(Summers and Heston 1991). Third, the U.S. economy in the 1990s was experiencing its
longest expansion in history. Just as the early Keynesians were attracted to the field because
of its immediate relevance to the nation’s health, the economy of the 1990s suggested to that
generation of students that the business cycle was no longer of great practical importance.
There is also a fourth, more troublesome reason why budding macroeconomists of
the 1990s were drawn to study long-run growth rather than short-run fluctuations: the
tension between new classical and new Keynesian worldviews. While Lucas, the leading
new classical economist, was proclaiming that “people don’t take Keynesian theorizing
seriously anymore,” leading Keynesians were equally patronizing to their new classical
colleagues. In his AEA Presidential Address, Solow (1980) called it “foolishly
restrictive” for the new classical economists to rule out by assumption the existence of
wage and price rigidities and the possibility that markets do not clear. He said, “I
remember reading once that it is still not understood how the giraffe manages to pump an
adequate blood supply all the way up to its head; but it is hard to imagine that anyone
would therefore conclude that giraffes do not have long necks.”
In an interview with Arjo Klamer (1984) a few years later, Lucas remarked, “I
don't think that Solow, in particular, has ever tried to come to grips with any of these
issues except by making jokes.” In his own interview in the same volume, Solow
explained his unwillingness to engage with the new classical economists: “Suppose
someone sits down where you are sitting right now and announces to me that he is

12

Napoleon Bonaparte. The last thing I want to do with him is to get involved in a technical
discussion of cavalry tactics at the Battle of Austerlitz. If I do that, I'm getting tacitly
drawn into the game that he is Napoleon Bonaparte.”
To some extent, this dispute reflects the differing perspectives of the protagonists
about the goal of the field. Lucas seems to be complaining that Solow does not
appreciate the greater analytic rigor that new classical macroeconomics can offer. Solow
seems to be complaining the Lucas does not appreciate the patent lack of reality of his
market-clearing assumptions. They each have a point. From the standpoint of science,
the greater rigor that the new classicals offered has much appeal. But from the standpoint
of engineering, the cost of this added rigor seems too much to bear.
I dwell on the nature of this debate not only because it reflects the underlying
tension between scientists and engineers but also because it helps explain the choices
made by the next generation of economists. Such vitriol among intellectual giants
attracts attention (much in the way that the patrons in a bar gather around a fist fight,
egging on the participants). But it was not healthy for the field of macroeconomics. Not
surprisingly, many young economists chose to avoid taking sides in this dispute by
turning their attention away from economic fluctuations and toward other topics.

A New Synthesis, or a Truce?
An old adage holds that science progresses funeral by funeral. Today, with the
benefits of longer life expectancy, it would be more accurate (if less vivid) to say that
science progresses retirement by retirement. In macroeconomics, as the older generation of
protagonists has retired or neared retirement, it has been replaced by a younger generation of
macroeconomists who have adopted a culture of greater civility. At the same time, a new
consensus has emerged about the best way to understand economic fluctuations. Marvin
Goodfriend and Robert King (1997) have dubbed this consensus view “the new neoclassical
synthesis.” This synthesis model has been widely applied in research on monetary policy
(Clarida, Gali, and Gertler, 1999, and McCallum and Nelson, 1999). The most extensive
treatment of this new synthesis is Michael Woodford’s (2003) monumental (in both
senses of the word) treatise.

13

Like the neoclassical-Keynesian synthesis of an earlier generation, the new synthesis
attempts to merge the strengths of the competing approaches that preceded it. From the new
classical models, it takes the tools of dynamic stochastic general equilibrium theory.
Preferences, constraints, and optimization are the starting point, and the analysis builds up
from these microeconomic foundations. From the new Keynesian models, it takes nominal
rigidities and uses them to explain why monetary policy has real effects in the short run. The
most common approach is to assume monopolistically competitive firms that change prices
only intermittently, resulting in price dynamics sometimes called the new Keynesian
Phillips curve. The heart of the synthesis is the view that the economy is a dynamic general
equilibrium system that deviates from a Pareto optimum because of sticky prices (and
perhaps a variety of other market imperfections).
It is tempting to describe the emergence of this consensus as great progress. In some
ways, it is. But there is also a less sanguine way to view the current the current state of play.
Perhaps what has occurred is not so much a synthesis as a truce between intellectual
combatants, followed by a face-saving retreat on both sides. Both new classicals and new
Keynesians can look to this new synthesis and claim a degree of victory, while ignoring the
more profound defeat that lies beneath the surface.
The heart of this new synthesis—a dynamic general equilibrium system with
nominal rigidities— is precisely what one finds in the early Keynesian models. Hicks
proposed the IS-LM model, for example, in an attempt at putting the ideas of Keynes into a
general equilibrium setting. (Recall that Hicks won the 1972 Nobel Prize jointly with
Kenneth Arrow for contributions to general equilibrium theory.) Klein, Modigliani, and the
other model-builders were attempting to bring that general equilibrium system to the data to
devise better policy. To a large extent, the new synthesis picks up the research agenda that
the profession abandoned, at the behest of the new classicals, in the 1970s.
With the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that the new classical economists promised
more than they could deliver. Their stated aim was to discard Keynesian theorizing and
replace it with market-clearing models that could be convincingly brought to the data and
then used for policy analysis. By that standard, the movement failed. Instead, they helped
to develop analytic tools that are now being used to develop another generation of models

14

that assume sticky prices and that, in many ways, resemble the models that the new
classicals were campaigning against.
The new Keynesians can claim a degree of vindication here. The new synthesis
discards the market-clearing assumption that Solow called “foolishly restrictive” and that
the new Keynesian research on sticky prices aimed to undermine. Yet the new Keynesians
can be criticized for having taken the new classicals’ bait and, as a result, pursuing a
research program that turned out to be too abstract and insufficiently practical. Paul
Krugman (2000) offers this evaluation of the new Keynesian research program: “One can
now explain how price stickiness could happen. But useful predictions about when it
happens and when it does not, or models that build from menu costs to a realistic Phillips
curve, just don’t seem to be forthcoming.” Even as a proponent of this line of work, I have
to admit that there is some truth to that assessment.

The View from Central Banking
If God put macroeconomists on earth to solve practical problems, then Saint Peter
will ultimately judge us by our contributions to economic.engineering. So let’s ask: Have
the developments in business cycle theory over the past several decades improved the
making of economic policy? Or, to set a more modest goal, have the advances in
macroeconomic science altered how economic policy is analyzed and discussed among
professional economists who are involved in the policy process?
One place to find evidence to answer these questions is Laurence Meyer’s charming
memoir A Term at the Fed. In 1996, Meyer left his job as an economics professor at
Washington University and as a prominent economic consultant to serve for six years as a
governor of the Federal Reserve. His book provides a window into how economists at the
highest reaches of monetary policymaking view their jobs and the approaches they take to
analyzing the economy.
The book leaves the reader with one clear impression: Recent developments in
business cycle theory, promulgated by both new classicals and new Keynesians, have had
close to zero impact on practical policymaking. Meyer’s analysis of economic fluctuations
and monetary policy is intelligent and nuanced, but it shows no traces of modern
macroeconomic theory. It would seem almost completely familiar to someone who was

15

schooled in the neoclassical-Keynesian synthesis that prevailed around 1970 and has
ignored the scholarly literature ever since. Meyer’s worldview would be easy to dismiss as
outdated if it were idiosyncratic, but it’s not. It is typical of economists who have held top
positions in the world’s central banks.
It is fashionable among academics to believe that central banking has been strongly
influenced by the rules-vs-discretion literature, particularly the work on time inconsistency
that started with Kydland and Prescott (1977). Two institutional changes are often linked
with these academic contributions: the increased independence of central banks in countries
such as New Zealand and the adoption of inflation targeting as a policy regime in many
central banks around the world. These institutional changes, in turn, are then linked to
improvements in monetary policy. According to this line of argument, we should thank
Kydland and Prescott for the low, stable inflation that many countries have enjoyed over the
past two decades.
This self-congratulatory view runs into two problems. The first is that the
institutional changes we have observed are at best loosely connected to the issues raised in
the theoretical literature. An independent central bank is not the same as a rule-bound central
bank. The U.S. Federal Reserve has long had a high degree of independence without ever
committing itself to a policy rule. And even inflation targeting is closer to a statement of
intentions and a way of communicating with the public than it is a commitment to a policy
rule. Ben Bernanke (2003) has called it “constrained discretion.”
The second, more significant problem is that these institutional changes are not
necessarily linked to the improvements we have witnessed in monetary policy. Laurence
Ball and Niamh Sheridan (2005) look at a large sample of countries and show that adoption
of inflation targeting does not help explain the recent move toward low, stable inflation.
Monetary policy has improved both in those counties that have adopted inflation targets and
in those that have not. This world-wide improvement in inflation outcomes could be
because the world economy has not had to deal with supply shocks as adverse as those
experienced in the 1970s or because central bankers have learned from the experience of the
1970s that high inflation should be assiduously avoided. But the evidence shows that
inflation targeting is not a prerequisite for good monetary policy.

16

The Greenspan Fed is a case in point. According to Alan Blinder and Ricardo
Reis (2005), Alan Greenspan has a rightful claim to be “the greatest central banker who
ever lived.” Indeed, by most accounts, monetary policy worked remarkably well under
his leadership. Yet throughout his time at the helm of the Fed, Greenspan avoided any
announcement of a policy rule, valuing flexibility over commitment. Here is how
Greenspan (2003) defended his choice: “Some critics have argued that such an approach
to policy is too undisciplined--judgmental, seemingly discretionary, and difficult to
explain. The Federal Reserve should, some conclude, attempt to be more formal in its
operations by tying its actions solely to the prescriptions of a formal policy rule. That any
approach along these lines would lead to an improvement in economic performance,
however, is highly doubtful….Rules by their nature are simple, and when significant and
shifting uncertainties exist in the economic environment, they cannot substitute for riskmanagement paradigms, which are far better suited to policymaking.” Yet, despite
Greenspan’s aversion to policy rules, inflation was low and stable during his tenure as
Fed chairman. Greenspan proves, contradicting Kydland and Prescott, that central banks
can produce desirable outcomes while wielding substantial discretionary powers.

The View from Fiscal Policy
Another place to look for the practical impact of macroeconomic theory is the
analysis of fiscal policy. The Bush tax cuts of 2001 and 2003 offer a good case study, in
part because they are a recent attempt at major fiscal stimulus to combat a recession and in
part because, as chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers for two years, I am familiar
with much of the economic analysis that laid the foundation for this policy. To be sure,
there were many motives for the design of the Bush tax policy. The expansion of the child
credit, for example, was rooted as much in politics and social philosophy as it was in
economics. But economists at the CEA and Treasury had substantial input into the
development of the policy, so it is illuminating to consider the tools they brought to the job.
The economic analysis of the Bush tax plan was done with one eye on long-run
growth and one eye on the short-run business cycle. The long-run perspective would be
familiar to students of public finance. Most significantly, in 2003 Bush proposed
eliminating the double taxation of income from corporate capital. The final bill passed by

17

Congress did not fully achieve this goal, but the substantial cut in tax rates on dividends
moved in the direction of greater tax neutrality, reducing the bias for retained earnings over
dividends, the bias for debt over equity finance, and the bias for noncorporate over corporate
capital. It also moved the tax code further in the direction of taxing consumption rather than
income. This latter goal is consistent with a well-established literature in public finance (for
example, Diamond and Mirrlees 1971, Atkinson and Stiglitz 1976, Feldstein 1978, Chamley
1986) and is not particularly new as a matter of economic theory. Three decades ago,
Atkinson and Stiglitz noted, even then, there was a “conventional presumption in favor of
consumption rather than income taxation.”
More relevant to this essay, however, is the short-run analysis of tax policy. As
President George W. Bush took office in 2001, the economy was heading into a recession
after the bursting of the stock market bubble of the late 1990s. One goal of the tax cuts was
to stimulate economic recovery and employment. When President Bush signed the Jobs and
Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003, he explained the policy as follows: “When
people have more money, they can spend it on goods and services. And in our society,
when they demand an additional good or a service, somebody will produce the good or a
service. And when somebody produces that good or a service, it means somebody is more
likely to be able to find a job.” This logic is quintessentially Keynesian.
The Council of Economic Advisers was asked to quantify how tax relief would
affect employment. We answered this question using a mainstream macroeconometric
model. The specific model we used while I was there was the one maintained by
Macroeconomic Advisers, the consulting firm created and run by Laurence Meyer before he
was a Fed governor. This model was being used the CEA staff long before I arrived as
chairman and, in fact, had been used for almost two decades under both Republican and
Democratic administrations. The choice of this particular model is not crucial, however, for
the Macroeconomic Advisers model is similar to other large macroeconometric models,
such as the FRB/US model maintained by the Federal Reserve. From the standpoint of
intellectual history, these models are the direct descendents of the early modeling efforts of
Klein, Modigliani, and Eckstein. Research by new classicals and new Keynesians has had
minimal influence on the construction of these models.

18

The real world of macroeconomic policymaking can be disheartening for those of us
who have spent most of our careers in academia. The sad truth is that the macroeconomic
research of the past three decades has had only minor impact on the practical analysis of
monetary or fiscal policy. The explanation is not that economists in the policy arena are
ignorant of recent developments. Quite the contrary: The staff of the Federal Reserve
includes some of the best young Ph.D.’s, and the Council of Economic Advisers under both
Democratic and Republican administrations draws talent from the nation’s top research
universities. The fact that modern macroeconomic research is not widely used in practical
policymaking is prima facie evidence that it is of little use for this purpose. The research
may have been successful as a matter of science, but it has not contributed significantly to
macroeconomic engineering.

Inside the Classroom
Beyond the corridors of power in the world’s capitals, there is another place where
the economics profession tries to sell its wares to a broader audience—the undergraduate
classroom. Those of us who regularly teach undergraduates see our job as producing
citizens who are well informed about the principles of good policy. Our choice of material
is guided by what we see as important for the next generation of voters to understand.
Like policymakers, undergraduates typically have little interest in theory for theory’s
sake. Instead, they are interested in understanding how the real world works and how public
policy can improve economic performance. Except for the rare student who is considering
graduate school and a career as an academic economist, the undergraduate has the
perspective of an engineer more than that of a scientist. It is, therefore, useful to take note of
what we choose to teach undergraduates. And there is no better place to see what we teach
than in the contents of the most widely used undergraduate textbooks.
Consider, for example, the books used to teach intermediate-level macroeconomics.
A generation ago, the three leading texts for this course were those by Robert Gordon,
Robert Hall and John Taylor, and Rudiger Dornbusch and Stanley Fischer. Today, the top
three sellers are those written by Olivier Blanchard, Andrew Abel and Ben Bernanke, and
myself. The common thread is that each of these six books was written by at least one
economist with graduate training from MIT, a prominent engineering school where the

19

dominant macroeconomic tradition was that of Samuelson and Solow. In all these books,
the basic theory taught to undergraduates is some version of aggregate demand and
aggregate supply, and the basic theory of aggregate demand is the IS-LM model. The same
lesson can be gleaned by perusing the most widely used textbooks for freshman-level
economics: Short-run economic fluctuations are best understood using some version of the
neoclassical-Keynesian synthesis.
I do not mean to suggest that pedagogy has been stagnant as the field has evolved.
Today’s textbooks place greater emphasis on classical monetary theory, models of long-run
growth, and the role of expectations than did those of thirty years ago. There is less
confidence about what policy can accomplish and more emphasis on policy rules over
discretionary monetary and fiscal actions (despite the lack of evidence on the practical
importance of policy rules). But the basic framework that modern students learn to make
sense of the business cycle is one that would be familiar to an early generation of
Keynesians.
The exception that proves the rule is the intermediate text written by Robert Barro,
first published in 1984. Barro’s book provided a clear and accessible introduction to the
new classical approach to macroeconomics aimed at undergraduates. Keynesian models
were included, but they were covered late in the book, briefly, and with little emphasis.
When the book came out, it received substantial attention and acclaim. However, while
many macroeconomists read the Barro book and were impressed by it, many fewer chose
it for their students. The new classical revolution in pedagogy that Barro hoped to inspire
never took off, and the Barro text did not offer significant competition to the dominant
textbooks of the time.
This lack of revolution in macroeconomic pedagogy stands in stark contrast to
what occurred half a century ago. When the Samuelson text was first published in 1948
with the aim of introducing undergraduates to the Keynesian revolution, the world’s
teachers rapidly and heartily embraced the new approach. By contrast, the ideas of new
classicals and new Keynesians have not fundamentally changed how undergraduate
macroeconomics is taught.

20

Not a Dentist in Sight
John Maynard Keynes (1931) famously opined that, “If economists could manage
to get themselves thought of as humble, competent people on a level with dentists, that
would be splendid.” He was expressing a hope that the science of macroeconomics
would evolve into a useful and routine type of engineering. In this future utopia,
avoiding a recession would be as straightforward as filling a cavity.
The leading developments in academic macroeconomics of the past several decades
bear little resemblance to dentistry. New classical and new Keynesian research has had little
impact on practical macroeconomists who are charged with the messy task of conducting
actual monetary and fiscal policy. It has also had little impact on what teachers tell future
voters about macroeconomic policy when they enter the undergraduate classroom. From the
standpoint of macroeconomic engineering, the work of the past several decades looks like
an unfortunate wrong turn.
Yet from the more abstract perspective of macroeconomic science, this work can be
viewed more positively. New classical economists were successful at showing the
limitations of the large Keynesian macroeconometric models and the policy prescriptions
based on these models. They drew attention to the importance of expectations and the case
for policy rules. New Keynesian economists have supplied better models to explain why
wages and prices fail to clear markets and, more generally, what types of market
imperfections are needed to make sense of short-run economic fluctuations. The tension
between these two visions, while not always civil, may have been productive, for
competition is as important to intellectual advance as it is to market outcomes.
The resulting insights are being incorporated into the new synthesis that is now
developing and which will, eventually, become the foundation for the next generation of
macroeconometric models. For those of us interested in macroeconomics as both science
and engineering, we can take the recent emergence of a new synthesis as a hopeful sign that
more progress can be made on both fronts. As we look ahead, humble and competent
remain ideals toward which macroeconomists can aspire.

21

References

Akerlof, George A. and Janet L. Yellen. 1985. "A Near-Rational Model of the Business
Cycle with Wage and Price Inertia.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. Suppl., 100, pp.
823-838.

Atkinson, A.B., and J.E. Stigltiz. 1976. “The Design of Tax Structure: Direct versus
Indirect Taxation,” Journal of Public Economics 6, pp. 55-75.

Ball, Laurence, and David Romer. 1990. “Real Rigidities and the Non-Neutrality of
Money.” Review of Economic Studies. 57:2, pp. 183-203.

Ball, Laurence, and Niamh Sheridan. 2005. “Does Inflation Targeting Matter?” in Ben S.
Bernanke, and Michael Woodford, editors, The Inflation-Targeting Debate, University of
Chicago Press.

Barro, Robert. 1977. "Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in the United
States." American Economic Review. March, 67:2, pp.101-115.

Barro, Robert J. and Herschel Grossman. 1971. "A General Disequilibrium Model of
Income and Employment." American Economic Review. March, 61:1, pp. 82-93.

Bernanke, Ben S. “Constrained Discretion and Monetary Policy,” Remarks before the
Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, New York, February 3, 2003.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 1987. "Monopolistic Competition and
the Effects of Aggregate Demand." American Economic Review. September, 77:4, pp.
647-666.
Breit, William, and Barry T. Hirsch. 2004. Lives of the Laureates, 4th edition, Cambridge,
MA: MIT press.

22

Chamley, Christophe.1986. “Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium
with Infinite Lives.” Econometrica. May, 54:3, pp.607-622.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler. 1999. “The Science of Monetary Policy: A
New Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature. December, 37:4, pp.
1661-1707.

Diamond, Peter A. and James A. Mirrlees. 1971. "Optimal Taxation and Public
Production II: Tax Rules. American Economic Review, June, 61:3, pp. 261-278.

Feldstein, Martin. 1978. “The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation,” Journal of
Political Economy, April, 86:2, Part 2, pp. S29-S51.

Fischer, Stanley. 1977. "Long-term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
Money Supply Rule.” Journal of Political Economy. February, 85:1, pp. 191-205.

Friedman, Milton. 1957. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Friedman, Milton. 1968. “The Role of Monetary Policy.” American Economic Review.
March, 58:1, pp. 1-17.

Freidman, Milton and Anna Jacobson Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United
States, 1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Garfield, Eugene. 1990. “Who Will Win the Nobel Prize in Economics? Here a Forecast
Based on Citation Indicators.” Current Contents 11, Institute for Scientific Information.

Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert King. 1997. “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the
Role of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, pp. 231-283.

23

Greenspan, Alan. 2003. “Monetary Policy under Uncertainty,” Remarks at a symposium
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August
29, 2003.

Hicks, John R. 1937. "Mr. Keynes and the 'Classics.'” Econometrica. April, 5:2, pp. 147-59.

Hume, David. 1752. "Of Money," in Essays. London: George Routledge and Sons.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1931. Essays in Persuasion. New York: Norton.

Klamer, Arjo. 1984. Conversations with Economists. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Allanheld.

Klein, Lawrence R. 1946. “Macroeconomics and the Theory of Rational Behavior.”
Econometrica. April, 14:2, pp. 93-108.

Krugman, Paul. 2000. “How Complicated Does the Model Have to Be?” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy 16, No. 4, pp. 33-42.

Kydland, Finn, and Edward C. Prescott, 1977. “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, June, 85:3, pp. 473-492.

Kydland, Finn, and Edward C. Prescott. 1982. “Time to Build and Aggregate
Fluctuations.” Econometrica. November, 50:6, pp. 1345-1371.

Long, John. B. and Charles Plosser. 1983. “Real business cycles.” Journal of Political
Economy. February, 91:1, pp. 39-69.

Lucas, Robert E, Jr. 1973. “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs.”
American Economic Review. June, 63:3, pp. 326-34.

24

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. 1976. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique." Carnegie
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. 1, pp. 19-46.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1980. “The Death of Keynesian Economics.” Issues and Ideas
(University of Chicago, Chicago, IL). Winter, pp. 18-19.

Lucas, R.E. Jr. and T.J. Sargent. 1979. “After Keynesian Macroeconomics.” Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review. Spring, 3:2, pp. 1-16.

Malinvaud, Edmund. 1977. The Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered. Oxford:
Blackwell.

Mankiw, N. Gregory. 1985. "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A
Macroeconomic Model of Monopoly." Quarterly Journal of Economics. May, 100:2, pp.
529-537.

McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson. 1999. “An Optimizing IS-LM Specification for
Monetary Policy and Business Cycle Analysis.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
August, 31:3, Part 1, pp. 296-316.

Meyer, Laurence H. 2004. A Term at the Fed: An Insider’s View. New York: HarperCollins.

Modigliani, Franco. 1944. "Liquidity Preference and the Theory of Interest and Money."
Econometrica. January, 12: 1, pp. 45-88.

Phelps, Edmund. 1968. “Money Wage Dynamics and Labor Market Equilibrium.” Journal
of Political Economy. July/August, 76:4, pt. 2, pp. 678-711.

Pigou, Arthur. 1927. Industrial Fluctuations. London: Macmillan and Company.

25

Quandt, Richard E. 1976. “Some Quantitative Aspects of the Economics Journal
Literature.” Journal of Political Economy. August, 84:4, pt. 1, pp. 741-55.

Romer, Paul. 1986. "Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth." Journal of Political
Economy. October, 94:5, pp. 1002-37.

Samuelson, Paul A. 1948. Economics: An Introductory Analysis. New York: McGrawHill.
Samuelson, Paul. A. 1988. "Keynesian Economics and Harvard: In the Beginning."
Challenge: The Magazine of Economic Affairs. July/August, 31, pp. 32-34.
Samuelson, Paul A. and Robert M. Solow. 1960. "Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation
Policy.” American Economic Review. May, 50:2, pp. 177-194.

Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace. 1975. "Rational Expectations, the Optimal
Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule.” Journal of Political
Economy. April, 83:2, pp. 241-54

Solow, Robert M. 1980. “On Theories of Unemployment.” American Economic Review.
March, 70:1, pp. 1-11.

Summers, Robert and Alan Heston. 1991. “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An
Expanded Set of International Comparisons, 1950-1988.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics. May, 106:2, pp. 327-68.

Taylor, John B. 1980. "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts." Journal of
Political Economy. February, 88:1, pp. 1-23.

Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

26

