                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              VOLATILITY AND DISPERSION IN BUSINESS GROWTH RATES:
                 PUBLICLY TRADED VERSUS PRIVATELY HELD FIRMS

                                             Steven J. Davis
                                            John Haltiwanger
                                               Ron Jarmin
                                             Javier Miranda

                                         Working Paper 12354
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12354


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




University of Chicago, NBER and American Enterprise Institute; University of Maryland and NBER; U.S.
Census Bureau; and U.S. Census Bureau. For many helpful comments on earlier drafts, we thank Chris Foote,
Eva Nagypal, the editors, participants in the 2006 NBER Macroeconomics Annual Conference, the CEPR
Conference on Firm Dynamics, the Ewing Marion Kauffman – Max Planck Conference on Entrepreneurship
and Growth and seminars at the Brookings Institution, the Census Bureau, New York University and the
University of Chicago. We thank Marios Michaelides for excellent research assistance and the Kauffman
Foundation for financial support. The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent those of the Census Bureau. The paper has been screened to ensure that it does not
disclose any confidential information. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Steven J. Davis, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin and Javier Miranda. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Volatility and Dispersion in Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms
Steven J. Davis, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin and Javier Miranda
NBER Working Paper No. 12354
June 2006
JEL No. D21, E32

                                            ABSTRACT

We study the variability of business growth rates in the U.S. private sector from 1976 onwards. To
carry out our study, we exploit the recently developed Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), which
contains annual observations on employment and payroll for all U.S. businesses. Our central finding
is a large secular decline in the cross sectional dispersion of firm growth rates and in the average
magnitude of firm level volatility. Measured the same way as in other recent research, the
employment-weighted mean volatility of firm growth rates has declined by more than 40% since
1982. This result stands in sharp contrast to previous findings of rising volatility for publicly traded
firms in COMPUSTAT data. We confirm the rise in volatility among publicly traded firms using the
LBD, but we show that its impact is overwhelmed by declining volatility among privately held firms.
This pattern holds in every major industry group. Employment shifts toward older businesses
account for 27 percent or more of the volatility decline among privately held firms. Simple cohort
effects that capture higher volatility among more recently listed firms account for most of the
volatility rise among publicly traded firms.

Steven J. Davis                                        Javier Miranda
University of Chicago Graduate School of               Center for Economic Studies
Business                                               U.S. Bureau of the Census
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                             4700 Silver Hill Road
Chicago, IL 60637                                      Stop 6300
and NBER                                               Washington, DC 20233
steve.davis@gsb.uchicago.edu                           javier.miranda@census.gov

John Haltiwanger
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
haltiwan@econ.bsos.umd.edu

Ron Jarmin
Center for Economic Studies
U.S. Bureau of the Census
4700 Silver Hill Road
Stop 6300
Washington, DC 20233
ron.s.jarmin@census.gov
I. Introduction
    We study the variability of business growth rates in the U.S. economy from 1976
onwards. To carry out our study, we exploit the recently developed Longitudinal
Business Database (LBD) (Jarmin and Miranda, 2002a), which contains annual
observations on employment and payroll for all establishments and firms in the private
sector. Compared to other longitudinal business databases for the United States, the LBD
is unparalleled in its comprehensive coverage over an extended period of time. The
underlying sources for the LBD are periodic business surveys conducted by the Census
Bureau and federal government administrative records. 2
    Macroeconomists increasingly recognize the importance of interactions between
aggregate economic performance and the volatility and heterogeneity of business level
outcomes. Idiosyncratic shocks are central to modern theories of unemployment.
Frictions in product, factor and credit markets that impede business responses to
idiosyncratic shocks can raise unemployment, lower productivity and depress investment.
Financial innovations that facilitate better risk sharing can simultaneously encourage risk
taking and investment, amplify business level volatility, and promote growth. Several
recent studies hypothesize a close connection between declining aggregate volatility and
trends in business level volatility. These examples of interactions between business level
and aggregate outcomes help motivate our empirical study. Our chief objective is to
develop a robust set of facts about the magnitude and evolution of business level
volatility and the cross sectional dispersion of business growth rates in the U.S. economy.
    Previous empirical work in this area yields an unclear picture. Several recent studies
find a secular rise in average volatility among publicly traded firms. Examples include
Campbell et al. (2001), Chaney, Gabaix and Philippon (2002), Comin and Mulani (2006),
and Comin and Philippon (2005). In Figure 1, we replicate a key finding from the latter
two studies. The figure shows that the average magnitudes of firm level volatility in the
growth rates of sales and employment have roughly doubled since the early 1960s. 3 In a


2
  The LBD is confidential under Titles 13 & 26 U.S.C. Research access to the LBD can be granted to non-
Census staff for approved projects. See www.ces.census.gov for more information. COMPUSTAT, which
provides information on publicly traded firms only, has been the primary data source for recent work on
firm level volatility.
3
  Firm level volatility is calculated from COMPUSTAT data as a moving ten-year window on the standard
deviation of firm level growth rates. See equation (5) in section III below.


1
different line of research, Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2006) and Faberman (2006)
produce evidence of a downward trend in the excess job reallocation rate, a measure of
cross sectional dispersion in establishment growth rates.4 As seen in the top panel of
Figure 2, the quarterly excess job reallocation rate in the U.S. manufacturing sector fell
from about 12 percent in the early 1960s to 8 percent by 2005. The shorter time series in
the lower panel shows a decline in excess job reallocation for the U.S. private sector from
16 percent or more in the early 1990s to less than 14 percent by 2005. 5 The data
underlying Figure 2 are not restricted to publicly traded firms.
    There is an unresolved tension between the evidence of rising firm level volatility and
declining cross sectional dispersion in establishment growth rates. To appreciate the
tension, consider a simple example in which all employers follow identical and
independent autoregressive processes. Then an increase in the innovation variance of
idiosyncratic shocks implies an increase in employer volatility and in the cross sectional
dispersion of growth rates. Of course, it is possible to break the tight link between
employer volatility and cross sectional dispersion in more complicated specifications. It
is also possible that firm and establishment growth processes have evolved along sharply
different paths in recent decades. Yet another possibility is that the restriction to publicly
traded businesses in previous studies paints a misleading picture of firm level volatility
trends in the economy as a whole. 6 A related possibility is that the economic selection
process governing entry into the set of publicly traded firms has changed over time in
ways that affect measured trends in volatility.
    In what follows, we explore each of these issues. We find similar trends in cross
sectional dispersion and firm level volatility, so the different measures cannot account for
the contrast between Figures 1 and 2. Instead, the resolution turns mainly on the
distinction between publicly traded and privately held businesses. For the private
nonfarm sector as a whole, both firm level volatility and cross sectional dispersion

4
  Excess job reallocation equals the sum of gross job creation and destruction less the absolute value of net
employment growth. Dividing excess reallocation by the level of employment yields a rate. One can show
that the excess reallocation rate is equivalent to the employment-weighted mean absolute deviation of
establishment growth rates about zero. See Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996).
5
  Job flow statistics for the whole private sector are from the BLS Business Employment Dynamics. They
are unavailable prior to 1990.
6
  Acemoglu (2005), Eberly (2005) and Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2006) question whether sample
selection colors the findings in previous studies of firm level volatility.


2
measures show large declines in recent decades. For publicly traded firms, we provide
independent evidence that cross sectional dispersion and firm level volatility have risen
during the period covered by the LBD. We also show, however, that this rise for publicly
traded firms is overwhelmed by the dramatic decline among privately held firms, which
account for more than two-thirds of private business employment. Very similar results
obtain when we treat establishments, rather than firms, as the unit of observation.
    Two basic patterns hold across major industry groups. First, the volatility and
dispersion of business growth rates are considerably greater for privately held firms. As
of 1978, the average standard deviation of firm-level employment growth rates is 3.7
times larger for privately held than for publicly traded firms. This volatility ratio ranges
from 2.3 in Services to 6.3 in Transportation and Public Utilities. Second, volatility and
dispersion decline sharply among privately held businesses in the period covered by the
LBD, and they rise sharply among publicly traded firms. The overall private-public
volatility ratio falls to 1.6 by 2001, and it drops sharply in every major industry group.
We refer to this phenomenon as “volatility convergence.”
    We also provide proximate explanations for these patterns. First, much of the decline
in dispersion and volatility for the private sector as a whole, and for privately held firms
in particular, reflects a decline in (employment-weighted) business entry and exit rates.
Second, the age distribution of employment among privately held firms shifted towards
older businesses in the period covered by the LBD. Because volatility declines steeply
with age, the shift toward older businesses brought about a decline in overall volatility.
We estimate that 27 percent or more of the volatility decline among privately held firms
reflects the shift toward older businesses. Third, the evolution toward larger firms in
certain industries, especially Retail Trade, accounts for about 10 percent of the volatility
decline among nonfarm businesses during the period covered by the LBD.
    Fourth, and perhaps most striking, changes over time in the number and character of
newly listed firms played a major role in the volatility rise among publicly traded firms
and in the volatility convergence phenomenon. There was a large influx of newly listed
firms after 1979, and newly listed firms are much more volatile than seasoned listings.
Moreover, firms newly listed in the 1980s and 1990s exhibit much greater volatility than
earlier cohorts. Indeed, simple cohort dummies for the year of first listing in



3
COMPUSTAT account for 67 percent of the volatility rise among publicly traded firms
from 1978 to 2001, and they account for 90 percent of the smaller rise over the 1951-
2004 period spanned by COMPUSTAT. Other evidence discussed below also points to
important changes over time in the selection of firms that become public.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section II reviews the role of idiosyncratic shocks,
producer heterogeneity and risk-taking in selected theories of growth, fluctuations and
unemployment. Section II also identifies several factors that influence business volatility
and its connection to aggregate volatility. Section III describes our data and
measurement procedures. Section IV presents our main empirical findings on volatility
and cross sectional dispersion in business outcomes. Section V explores various factors
that help to amplify and explain our main findings. Section VI offers concluding remarks.

II. Conceptual Underpinnings and Theoretical Connections
       Theories of growth and fluctuations in the Schumpeterian mold envision a market
economy constantly disturbed by technological and commercial innovations. Firms and
workers differ in their capacities to create, adopt and respond to these innovations, so that
winners and losers emerge as unavoidable by-products of economic progress. According
to this view, an economy’s long term growth rate depends on how well it facilitates and
responds to the process of creative destruction (Aghion and Howitt, 1998). Institutions
and policies that impede restructuring and adjustment can mute the disruptive nature of
factor reallocation – at the cost of lower productivity, depressed investment and, in some
circumstances, persistently high unemployment (Caballero, 2006).
       Empirical evidence supports the Schumpeterian view in its broad outlines. Large-
scale job reallocation is a pervasive feature of market economies (Davis and Haltiwanger,
1999). The large job flows and high firm level volatility reflect the restructuring,
experimentation and adjustment processes at the heart of Schumpeterian theories.
Empirically, gross job flows are dominated by reallocation within narrowly defined
sectors, even in countries that undergo massive structural transformations. Thus
longitudinal firm and establishment data are essential for helping gauge the pace of
restructuring and reallocation. Empirical studies also find that excess job reallocation
rates decline strongly during the early lifecycle of firms and establishments (Davis and
Haltiwanger, 1992, and Bartelsman, Haltiwanger and Scarpetta, 2004). This finding


4
indicates that experimentation and adjustment in the face of uncertainty about demand,
technologies, costs and managerial ability are especially pronounced among younger
businesses.
       A closely related empirical literature highlights the role of factor reallocation in
productivity growth. Over horizons of five or ten years, the reallocation of inputs and
outputs from less to more productive business units typically accounts for a sizable
fraction of industry-level productivity growth (Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan, 2001).
Several studies reviewed in Caballero (2006, chapter 2) provide evidence that trade
barriers, entry barriers, impediments to labor mobility, and misdirected financing can
hamper efficient factor reallocation and, as a result, retard restructuring and undermine
productivity growth. In short, there are sound theoretical and empirical reasons to treat
restructuring and factor reallocation as key aspects of growth and fluctuations. The
business volatility and dispersion measures that we construct in this study capture the
pace of restructuring and reallocation on important dimensions. In this respect, they are
useful inputs into theories of growth and fluctuations in the Schumpeterian mold.
       Theories of unemployment based on search and matching frictions (Mortensen
and Pissarides, 1999, and Pissarides, 2000) rely on idiosyncratic shocks to drive job
destruction and match dissolution. A greater intensity of idiosyncratic shocks in these
models produces higher match dissolution rates and increased flows of workers into the
unemployment pool. The measures of employer volatility and dispersion that we
consider provide empirical indicators for the intensity of idiosyncratic shocks. Evidence
regarding trends in these indicators can serve as useful inputs into theoretical
explanations for longer term movements in the rates of unemployment and match
dissolution. These indicators also provide grist for empirical studies of how long term
changes in idiosyncratic shock intensity affect unemployment.
       Another class of theories stresses the impact of risk-sharing opportunities on the
willingness to undertake risky investments. Obstfeld (1994), for example, shows that
better diversification opportunities induce a portfolio shift by risk-averse investors toward
riskier projects with higher expected returns. Greater portfolio diversification also
weakens one motive for organizing production activity around large, internally
diversified firms. On both counts, improved opportunities for diversification lead to



5
more volatility and dispersion in producer outcomes. Empirical indicators of increased
financial diversification include the rise of mutual funds and institutional investors, lower
trading costs for financial securities, higher stock market participation rates by
households, and greater cross-border equity holdings. Motivated in part by these
developments, Thesmar and Thoenig (2004) build a model whereby a bigger pool of
portfolio investors encourages listed firms to adopt riskier business strategies with greater
expected profits. More aggressive risk-taking by listed firms also leads unlisted firms to
adopt riskier strategies in their model, raising firm level volatility throughout the
economy. 7 In the model of Acemoglu (2005), risk-taking by firms increases with
aggregate capital accumulation, technical progress and financial development, so that
firm volatility naturally rises with economic development. Acemoglu stresses that his
model can deliver rising firm volatility accompanied by falling aggregate volatility.
        In contrast, Koren and Tenreyro (2006) highlight a mechanism that generates
declines in both aggregate and firm volatility as an economy develops. In their model,
input variety rises naturally with economic development. As input variety expands,
shocks to the productivity of specific varieties lead to less output volatility, provided that
the correlation of variety-specific shocks is imperfect and not rising in the number of
varieties. Koren and Tenreyro argue that this economic mechanism linking development
to input variety helps to explain the negative relationship between GDP per capita and the
volatility of GDP growth rates across countries and over time within countries. Whether
economic development ultimately dampens firm volatility through the impact of greater
input variety or amplifies it as a result of better opportunities for financial diversification
is obviously an empirical question.
        Another line of research stresses the role of competition in goods markets.
Philippon (2003) considers a model with nominal rigidities that links goods-market
competition to firm and aggregate volatility. In his model, greater competition in the
form of a bigger substitution elasticity among consumption goods magnifies the effects of
idiosyncratic shocks on profitability. As a result, greater competition leads to more firm

7
 French stock market reforms in the 1980s considerably broadened the shareholder base for French firms.
Thesmar and Thoenig (2004) provide evidence that these reforms led to a rise in the volatility of sales
growth rates among listed firms relative to unlisted ones. Their analysis sample contains about 5,600
French firms per year with more than 500 employees or 30 million Euros in annual sales, and that were
never owned, entirely or in part, by the French state.


6
volatility in sales growth rates and a higher frequency of price adjustments. In turn, more
frequent price adjustments dampen the response to aggregate demand disturbances in a
calibrated version of the model. Thus, insofar as aggregate demand shocks drive
aggregate fluctuations, Philippon’s model produces divergent trends in aggregate and
firm volatility. Comin and Mulani (2005) argue that increased R&D-based competition
leads to more firm volatility but weaker comovements and, hence, lower aggregate
volatility. As Acemoglu (2005) points out, however, R&D investments can act to
increase or decrease competitive intensity, and the link to aggregate volatility is also
tenuous. Comin and Philippon (2005) point to deregulation as a source of greater goods-
market competition and rising firm level volatility. While deregulation is likely to
increase firm volatility in the short term, its longer term impact is less clear. For example,
when regulatory restrictions hamper horizontal consolidation, deregulation can lead to an
industry structure with fewer, larger firms. Horizontal consolidation is, in turn, a force
for less firm level volatility. The removal of regulatory restrictions on branching and
interstate banking accelerated this type of evolutionary pattern in the U.S. banking sector
(Jayaratne and Strahan, 1998).
        Although much recent work focuses on the potential for better risk-sharing
opportunities or greater goods-market competition to produce opposite trends in
aggregate and firm level volatility, there is a simple mechanical reason to anticipate that
micro and macro volatility will trend in the same direction. To see the argument, write
the firm level growth rate as a linear function of K aggregate shocks that (potentially)
affect all firms and an idiosyncratic shock, ε i , that affects only firm i:
                                       K
                               γ it = ∑ β ik Z kt + ε it , i = 1, 2,...N .                            (1)
                                       k =1


The aggregate growth rate is    ∑α γ
                                   i   it it   , where α i is firm i’s share of aggregate activity.

Assuming mutually uncorrelated shocks, equation (1) implies the following expressions
for firm level and aggregate volatility:
                                                           n             n
                                                                               ⎡   K
                                                                                           ⎤
              Weighted Mean Firm Volatility =             ∑ α itσ ε2t + ∑ α it ⎢∑ βik2σ kt2 ⎥
                                                          i =1          i =1   ⎣ k =1      ⎦
                                                                                                      (2)




7
                       n              n
                                              ⎡K            ⎤     n
                                                                            ⎡K                 ⎤
Aggregate Volatility = ∑ α it2σ it2 + ∑ α it2 ⎢ ∑ βik2σ kt2 ⎥ + 2∑ α itα jt ⎢ ∑ β ik β jkσ kt2 ⎥   (3)
                       i              i       ⎣ k =1        ⎦    j >i       ⎣ k =1             ⎦
In light of the positive comovements that typify aggregate fluctuations, we assume that
the weighted cross-product of the β coefficients is positive for each k.
        Inspecting (2) and (3), we see that firm and aggregate volatility respond in the
same direction to a change in any one of the shock variances, provided that the firm
shares α i and the shock response coefficients β ik are reasonably stable. In particular, a

decline in the variability of aggregate shocks leads to a decline in both aggregate and firm
volatility. Hence, insofar as the well-established secular decline in aggregate volatility
reflects a decline in the size or frequency of aggregate shocks, we anticipate a decline in
average firm volatility as well. Another argument stresses the importance of
idiosyncratic shocks to large firms. Especially if σ i is independent of size (α i ) at the

upper end of the firm size distribution, as in Gabaix’s (2005) granular theory of aggregate
fluctuations, trend changes in the idiosyncratic shock variance for, say, the 100 largest
firms can be a powerful force that drives micro and macro volatility in the same direction.
Of course, (2) and (3) do not require that aggregate and firm volatility trend in the same
direction. A mix of positive and negative changes in the shock variances could drive
micro and macro volatility measures in opposite directions, as could certain changes in
the pattern of shock-response coefficients or the firm size distribution. Still, big trends in
the opposite direction for micro and macro volatility strike us as an unlikely outcome.
        Evolutions in market structure can also drive the trend in firm volatility,
particularly in sectors that undergo sweeping transformations. Consider Retail Trade.
The expansion of Wal-Mart, Target, Staples, Best Buy, Home Depot, Borders and other
national chains has propelled the entry of large retail outlets and displaced thousands of
independent and smaller retail establishments and firms. Jarmin, Klimek and Miranda
(2005) report that the share of U.S. retail activity accounted for by single-establishment
firms fell from 60 percent in 1967 to 39 percent in 1997. In its initial phase, this
transformation involved high entry and exit rates, but over time the Retail Trade size
distribution shifted towards larger establishments and much larger firms. Empirical
studies routinely find a strong negative relationship between business size and volatility.



8
Hence, we anticipate that the transformation of the retail sector led to a secular decline in
the volatility and dispersion of growth rates among retail businesses.
       One other key issue involves the impact of developments that expand business
access to equity markets. Financial developments of this sort can profoundly alter the
mix of publicly traded firms and drive volatility trends among all listed firms that are
unrepresentative of trends for seasoned listings and the economy as a whole. Some
previous studies point strongly in that direction. For example, Fama and French (2004)
report that the number of new lists (mostly IPOs) on major U.S. stock markets jumped
from 156 per year in 1973-1979 to 549 per year in 1980-2001. Remarkably, about 10%
of listed firms are new each year from 1980 to 2001. Fama and French also provide
compelling evidence that new lists are much riskier than seasoned firms and increasingly
so from 1980 to 2001. They conclude that the upsurge of new listings explains much of
the trend increase in idiosyncratic stock return volatility documented by Campbell et al.
(2001). They also suggest that there was a decline in the cost of equity that allowed
weaker firms and those with more distant payoffs to issue public equity. Fink et al.
(2005) provide additional evidence in support of these conclusions. Drawing on data
from Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001), they report that firm age at IPO date (measured
from its founding date or date of incorporation) fell dramatically from nearly 40 years old
in the early 1960s to less than 5 years old by the late 1990s. They find that the positive
trend in idiosyncratic risk is fully explained by the proportion of young firms in the
market. After controlling for age and other measures of firm maturity (book-to-market,
size, profitability), they find a negative trend in idiosyncratic risk. These studies imply
that the selection process governing entry into the set of publicly traded firms shifted
dramatically after 1979, and that the shift continued to intensify through the late 1990s.

III. Data and Measurement
A. Source Data: The LBD and COMPUSTAT
       The Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) is constructed from the Census
Bureau’s Business Register of U.S. businesses with paid employees and enhanced with
survey data collections. The LBD covers all sectors of the economy and all geographic
areas and currently runs from 1976 to 2001. In recent years, it contains over 6 million
establishment records and almost five million firm records per year. Basic data items


9
include employment, payroll, 4-digit SIC, employer identification numbers, business
name, and information about location. 8 Identifiers in the LBD files enable us to compute
growth rate measures for establishments and firms. 9 Firms in the LBD are defined based
on operational control, and all establishments that are majority owned by the parent firm
are included as part of the parent’s activity measures. We restrict attention in this study
to nonfarm businesses in the private sector.
         We also exploit COMPUSTAT data from 1950 to 2004. 10 A unit of observation
in COMPUSTAT is a publicly traded security identified by a CUSIP. We exclude certain
CUSIPs because they reflect duplicate records for a particular firm, multiple security
issues for the same firm, or because they do not correspond to firms in the usual sense.
Duplicate entries for the same firm (reflecting more than one 10-K filing in the same
year) are few in number but can be quite large (more than 500,000 workers). We also
exclude CUSIPs for American Depository Receipts (ADRs) – securities created by U.S.
banks to permit U.S.-based trading of stocks listed on foreign exchanges. All together,
we exclude approximately 1100 CUSIPs because of duplicates and ADRs. The presence
of duplicates, ADRs and other features of COMPUSTAT imply the need for caution in
measuring firm outcomes and in linking COMPUSTAT records to the LBD.
         We use COMPUSTAT to supplement the LBD with information on whether firms
are publicly traded. For this purpose, we created a bridge file that links LBD and
COMPUSTAT records based on business taxpayer identification numbers (EINs) and
business name and address. 11 Missing data on equity prices, sales and employment data
for some COMPUSTAT records do not cause problems for our LBD-based analysis,
because we rely on LBD employment data whether or not the COMPUSTAT data are
missing. Our matching procedures also work when there are holes in the COMPUSTAT
data. In particular, we classify a firm in the LBD as publicly traded in a given year if it
matches to a COMPUSTAT CUSIP by EIN or name and address, and if the CUSIP has
non-missing equity price data in the same year or in years that bracket the given year.
8
  Sales data are available in the LBD from 1994. Sales data from the Economic Censuses are available
every five years for earlier years. More recent years in the LBD record industry on a NAICS basis.
9
  See the data appendix regarding the construction of longitudinal links, which are critical for our analysis.
10
   Our COMPUSTAT data are from the same provider (WRDS) as in recent work by Comin and Mulani
(2006), Comin and Philippon (2005) and others.
11
   See McCue and Jarmin (2005) for details. We extend their methodology to include the whole period
covered by the LBD.


10
       Table 1 presents LBD and COMPUSTAT summary statistics for firm counts,
employment and firm size in selected years. As of 2000, the LBD has almost five million
firms with positive employment in the nonfarm private sector, of which we identify more
than 7000 as publicly traded. Average LBD firm size in 2000 is about 18 employees,
which is tiny compared to the average of 4,000 employees for publicly traded firms.
Publicly traded firms account for a trivial fraction of all firms and less than one-third of
nonfarm business employment during the period covered by the LBD. The highly
skewed nature of the firm size distribution is also apparent in the enormous difference
between average firm size and the employment-weighted mean firm size (the coworker
mean). For example, the upper panel of Table 1 reports a coworker mean of 92,604
employees at publicly traded firms in the LBD in 2000, roughly 23 times larger than the
simple mean of firm size. The highly skewed nature of the firm size distribution implies
the potential for equally weighted and size-weighted measures of business volatility and
dispersion to behave in dissimilar ways.
       Comparisons between the upper and lower panels of Table 1 require some care,
because the LBD and COMPUSTAT differ in how they define a firm and in how key
variables are measured. LBD employment reflects the count of workers on the payroll
during the pay period covering the 12th of March. The employment concept is all
employees subject to U.S. payroll taxes. COMPUSTAT employment is the number of
company workers reported to shareholders. It may be an average number of employees
during the year or a year-end figure. More important, it includes all employees of
consolidated subsidiaries, domestic and foreign. For this reason, discrepancies between
the LBD and COMPUSTAT are likely to be greater for large multinationals and for
foreign firms with U.S. operations (and listings on U.S. stock exchanges). Since the
source data from annual reports can be incomplete, some COMPUSTAT firms have
missing employment even when the firm has positive sales and a positive market value.
       With these cautions in mind, consider the lower panel of Table 1 and its
relationship to the upper panel. The lower panel provides information about the match
rate in the LBD/COMPUSTAT Bridge. In 1990, for example, there are 6239 CUSIPs
with positive COMPUSTAT employment. We match 5716 of these CUSIPs to firms in
the LBD, which amounts to 92% of COMPUSTAT firms with positive employment and



11
92% of COMPUSTAT employment. 12 It is instructive to compare total employment,
average firm size and the coworker mean between the upper and lower panels of Table 1
for the bridge cases. COMPUSTAT figures for these quantities exceed the corresponding
LBD statistics by a very wide margin in all years. For example, among matched publicly
traded firms in the Bridge file, the LBD employment figure (Panel A) is only 70.8
percent of COMPUSTAT employment (Panel B) in 1980, 72.2 percent in 1990, and 72.5
percent in 2000. These large discrepancies for matched cases reflect significant
differences in the LBD and COMPUSTAT employment concepts, e.g., domestic versus
global operations. See the Data Appendix for additional comparisons between the two
data sources.
        We can use the information reported in Table 1 to construct an estimate for the
percentage of nonfarm business employment in publicly traded firms. First, adjust the
COMPUSTAT employment totals for “Not Matched” cases in Panel B by multiplying by
the ratio of LBD-to-COMPUSTAT employment for matched cases. Second, add the
adjusted COMPUSTAT employment figure for “Not Matched” cases to LBD
employment for “Publicly Traded (Bridge)” cases in Panel A, and then divide the sum by
LBD nonfarm business employment. The resulting estimates imply that publicly traded
firms account for 32.7 percent of nonfarm business employment in 1980, 27.2 percent in
1990 and 28.6 percent in 2000.
        To sum up, the LBD provides data from 1976 to 2001 on the universe of firms
and establishments with at least one employee in the U.S. private sector. We identify
publicly traded firms in the LBD using our COMPUSTAT/LBD Bridge. The empirical
analysis below focuses on the LBD, but we also carry out several exercises using
COMPUSTAT data.
B. Measuring Firm Growth, Volatility and Cross Sectional Dispersion
        We focus on employment as our activity measure because of its ready availability
in the LBD and COMPUSTAT. Recall from Figure 1 that volatility trends for
12
  If we require that matches have positive COMPUSTAT employment and positive LBD employment in
1990, then the number of matched CUSIPs drops from 5716 to 5035. However, this requirement is overly
restrictive in light of our previous remarks about missing COMPUSTAT employment observations, the
inclusion of employment from foreign operations in COMPUSTAT, and timing differences between
COMPUSTAT and the LBD. For instance, when we relax this requirement and instead allow CUSIPs with
positive sales, price or employment to match to LBD firms with positive employment, then the number of
matches exceeds 5700.


12
employment and sales growth rates are similar in COMPUSTAT data. We use a growth
rate measure that accommodates entry and exit. In particular, our time-t growth rate
measure for firm or establishment i is
                                       xit − xit −1
                          γ it =                        .                                  (4)
                                   ( xit + xit −1 ) / 2
This growth rate measure has become standard in work on labor market flows, because it
offers significant advantages relative to log changes and growth rates calculated on initial
employment. In particular, it yields measures that are symmetric about zero and bounded,
affording an integrated treatment of births, deaths and continuers. It also lends itself to
consistent aggregation, and it is identical to log changes up to a second-order Taylor
Series expansion. See Tornqvist, Vartia and Vartia (1985) and the appendix to Davis,
Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996) for additional discussion.
         To characterize the variability of business outcomes, we consider several
measures of cross sectional dispersion in business growth rates and volatility in business
growth rates. Our basic dispersion measure is the cross sectional standard deviation of
the annul growth rates in (4), computed in an equal-weighted or size-weighted manner.
Our basic volatility measure follows recent work by Comin and Mulani (2005, 2006) and
Comin and Philippon (2005), among others. They measure volatility for firm i at t by
                                                               1/ 2
                                 ⎡1 5                      ⎤
                          σ it = ⎢ ∑ (γ i ,t +τ − γ it ) 2 ⎥          ,                    (5)
                                 ⎣10 τ =−4                 ⎦
where γ it is the simple mean growth rate for i from t-4 to t+5. This measure requires ten
consecutive observations on the firm’s growth rates; hence, short-lived firms and entry
and exit are not captured. 13
         Limiting the analysis to firms and establishments with ten consecutive years of
positive activity is quite restrictive. Hence, we also consider a modified volatility
measure that incorporates entry and exit and short-lived business units. The modified
measure differs from the basic measure in two main respects. First, we weight the

13
  When we implement (5) using LBD data, we permit the firm to enter or exit at the beginning or end of
the ten-year window. This is a small difference in measurement procedures relative to Comin and Mulani
(2005, 2006) and Comin and Philippon (2005). A more important difference is that our LBD-based
calculations include the pre-public and post-public history of firms that are publicly traded at t but privately
held before or after t. As a related point, we do not treat listing and de-listing in COMPUSTAT as firm
entry and exit.


13
squared deviation at t for firm i in proportion to its size at t relative to its average size in
the ten-year window from t-4 to t+5. Second, we apply a standard degrees-of-freedom
correction to avoid the small-sample bias that otherwise arises for second moment
estimates. 14 We ignored this issue in the basic volatility measure, following standard
practice, because the correction is the same for all firms and would simply scale up the
volatility magnitude by (10/9). However, the correction matters when some firms have
much shorter intervals of positive activity than others. The degrees-of-freedom
correction also enables us to obtain unbiased estimates for average volatility near the
LBD and COMPUSTAT sample end points, which truncate the available window for
estimating firm level volatility.
           Here are the details for constructing our modified volatility measure. Let
zit = .5( xit + xit −1 ) denote the size of firm i at time t, and let Pit denote the number of years
                                                                                                 5
from t-4 to t+5 for which zit > 0. Define the scaling quantity, K it = Pit / ∑ zi ,t +τ , and the
                                                                                               τ =−4

                                                                 5
rescaled weights, zit = K it zit . By construction,
                                                               τ
                                                                ∑ z
                                                                =−4
                                                                      it   = Pit . The modified firm volatility

measure with degrees-of-freedom correction is given by
                                                                                    1/2
                                          ⎡ 5 ⎛ z         ⎞                    ⎤
                                  σ it = ⎢ ∑ ⎜ i ,t +τ ⎟ (γ i ,t +τ − γ itw )2 ⎥         ,                   (6)
                                          ⎣τ =−4 ⎝ Pit − 1 ⎠                    ⎦

where γ itw is firm i’s size-weighted mean growth rate from t-4 to t+5, using the zit as
weights. We construct this measure for all businesses in year t with a positive value
for zit . In other words, we compute (6) on the same set of firms as the contemporaneous
dispersion measure.
           The average magnitude of firm volatility at a point in time can be calculated using
equal weights or weights proportional to business size. We prefer size-weighted
volatility (and dispersion) measures for most purposes, but we also report some equal-
weighted measures for comparison to previous work. In the size-weighted measures, the
weight for business i at t is proportional to zit .


14
     We thank Eva Nagypal for drawing our attention to this issue.


14
         Summing up, our dispersion measures reflect year-to-year, between-firm variation
in growth rates. Our volatility measures reflect year-to-year, within-firm variation in
growth rates. Some volatility measures restrict analysis to long-lived firms, but we also
consider modified volatility measures defined over the same firms as contemporaneous
dispersion measures. Volatility and dispersion measures have different properties, and
they highlight different aspects of business growth rate behavior. Still, they are closely
related concepts. For example, if business growth rates are drawn from stochastic
processes with contemporaneously correlated movements in second moments, then the
cross-sectional dispersion in business growth rates and the average volatility of business
growth rates are likely to move together over longer periods of time. 15
C. Firm Volatility – Robustness to the Bridge Cases
         To assess whether our results are sensitive to the use of publicly traded firms in
the LBD/COMPUSTAT Bridge, we compare firm volatility for the full COMPUSTAT to
firm volatility for matched cases. We consider all CUSIPs that match to the LBD in any
year during the LBD overlap from 1976 to 2001. Figure 3 displays the comparison. It
shows that restricting attention to those publicly traded firms that we identify in the
LBD/COMPUSTAT Bridge has no material effect on the volatility results. This result
gives us confidence that our LBD-based comparisons below of publicly traded and
privately held firms are not distorted by inadequacies in our matching algorithm.

IV. Business Volatility and Dispersion Trends
A. Results Using COMPUSTAT Data on Publicly Traded Firms
     We now compare the volatility and dispersion in business growth rates using
COMPUSTAT data. At this point, we do not restrict attention to firms in the Bridge
file. 16 Figure 4 shows the now-familiar pattern of rising firm volatility overlaid against a
similar trend for the cross sectional dispersion of firm growth rates. To ensure an apples-

15
   The shorter term response differs, however, as have verified in unreported numerical simulations. For
example, a one-time permanent increase in the variance of the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks leads to a
coincident permanent increase in the cross sectional dispersion of business growth rates, but it leads to a
gradual rise in the average volatility that begins several years prior to the increase in the shock variance and
continues for several years afterward.
16
   But we do exclude observations with growth rates of 2 and -2, because COMPUSTAT listing and de-
listing typically do not reflect true entry and exit by firms. In the LBD-based analysis below, we include
observations with growth rates of 2 and -2 (unless otherwise noted), because we can identify true entry and
exit in the LBD.


15
to-apples comparison, we calculate dispersion using only those firm-year observations for
which we calculate firm volatility. While the volatility and dispersion measures capture
different aspects of business dynamics, Figure 4 shows that they closely track each other
over the longer term. Similar results obtain for sales-based volatility and dispersion
measures and for dispersion measures calculated on all firm-year observations. However,
dispersion is uniformly larger than average firm volatility. That is, between-firm variation
in annual growth rates exceeds the average within-firm variation. The gap between the
dispersion and volatility measures shown in Figure 4 expanded over time from about 4
percentage points in 1955 to 7 percentage points in 1999.
     Figure 4 also shows that weighted measures are considerably smaller than the
corresponding unweighted measures at all times. This pattern reflects the greater stability
of growth rates at larger firms. The weighted measures also show a smaller and less
steady upward trend than the unweighted measures, as we saw in Figure 1. The rest of
paper reports weighted measures of dispersion and volatility, because we think they are
more relevant for aggregate behavior. Moreover, on an unweighted basis, publicly traded
firms have negligible effects on dispersion and volatility measures for the private sector
as a whole, because they are so few in number.
     B. Results Using Firm Level Data in the Longitudinal Business Database
        A concern with COMPUSTAT-based results is whether they generalize to the
entire economy. Figure 5 exploits LBD data to address this concern. 17 The figure shows
large declines in the volatility and dispersion of firm growth rates for the whole nonfarm
private sector and even larger declines among privately held firms. The dispersion in
growth rates falls by about 13 percentage points from 1978 to 2000 in the private sector
and by about 20 percentage points among privately held firms. 18 The average magnitude
of firm volatility falls by about 10 percentage points from 1981 to 1996 in the private
sector and by about 17 percentage points among privately held firms. The volatility



17
   A comparison between Figures 4 and 5 reveals that the level of volatility among publicly traded firms is
much greater in COMPUSTAT, perhaps because COMPUSTAT activity measures include the foreign
operations of multinational firms.
18
   Recall that we use all firm-year observations with positive values of zit when computing our basic
dispersion measure. That is, we include all continuing, entering and exiting firms. Below, we consider the
effects of restricting the analysis to continuing firms only.


16
decline in the private sector over this period is more than 40% of its 1981 value, a
striking contrast to the rise in volatility among publicly traded firms over the same period.
        The LBD-based results also show that privately held firms are much more volatile
than publicly traded firms, and their growth rates show much greater dispersion. This
pattern is not particularly surprising, because a bigger share of activity in the publicly
traded sector is accounted for by older and larger firms that tend to be relatively stable.
As Figure 5 shows, however, publicly traded and privately held firms are converging in
terms of the volatility and dispersion of their growth rates. We return to this matter
shortly.
        The finding that firm volatility in the private sector falls over time is consistent
with previous findings in the job flows literature (Figure 2). It is also consistent with
previous research using the LBD. One of the earliest findings from the LBD is a steady
decline in establishment entry rates (Foster, 2003 and Jarmin, Klimek and Miranda,
2003). Recent work also finds declining entry and exit rates in local retail markets for
establishments and firms (Jarmin, Klimek and Miranda, 2005). Jarmin et al. stress the
changing structure of retail trade as one factor underlying the decline in entry and exit.
They document the increasing share of activity accounted for by large, national retail
chains with many establishments. 19 This change in industry structure has a powerful
effect, because entry and exit rates are substantially higher for small, single-unit firms
than for large national chains. We return to the role of industry structure and business
turnover in section V.
     All volatility series displayed thus far are based on equation (5) and limited to firms
with at least ten consecutive observations. This selection criterion is especially restrictive
for privately held firms, most of which do not survive ten years. By and large, privately
held firms are relatively volatile, and so are short-lived firms. If the objective is to
examine the overall magnitude of firm volatility, then it is desirable to use datasets and
statistics that capture the most volatile units in the economy. To do so, we now use LBD
data to calculate modified volatility measures based on equation (6). Figure 6 shows the


19
  Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan (2005) present related evidence using the Census of Retail Trade. They
show that much of the increase in labor productivity in the 1990s in retail trade reflects the entry of
relatively productive establishments owned by large national chains and the exit of less productive
establishments owned by single-unit firms. See, also, McKinsey Global Institute (2001).


17
results for the employment-weighted modified volatility measure. As before, volatility is
higher and falling for privately held business, lower and rising for publicly traded firms.
Modified volatility for privately held firms falls from 0.60 in 1977 to 0.42 in 2001, with
the entire fall occurring after 1987. Modified volatility for publicly traded firms rises
from 0.16 in 1977 to 0.29 in 1999.
     C. Volatility Convergence across Major Industry Groups
     The most striking features of Figures 5 and 6 are the opposite trends for publicly
traded and privately held firms and the dramatic convergence in their volatility levels.
Table 2 shows that these two features hold in every major industry group. Among
publicly traded firms, modified volatility rises for all industry groups, though by widely
varying amounts. The biggest volatility gains among publicly traded firms occur in
Transportation and Public Utilities, Wholesale, FIRE and Services. Among privately held
firms, the modified volatility measure declines by 23 percent for FIRE and by 30 percent
or more for all other industry groups. Overall volatility in the nonfarm business sector
declines for every industry group, with drops of more than 30 percent in Construction,
Wholesale, Retail and Services. The volatility convergence phenomenon is also present
in every industry group. Between 1978 and 2001, the ratio of volatility among privately
held firms to volatility among publicly traded firms fell from 3.2 to 1.7 in Manufacturing,
from 6.3 to 1.8 in Transportation and Public Utilities, from 4.2 to 2.2 in Retail, from 3.3
to 1.3 in FIRE and from 2.3 to 1.1 in Services.


V. Exploring and Refining the Main Results
A. Establishment-Based Measures
     Trends in the volatility and dispersion of establishment growth rates can differ from
trends for firm growth rates. In particular, a shift over time towards multi-unit firms
yields declines in the volatility and dispersion of firm growth rates through a simple
statistical aggregation effect. If two establishments with imperfectly correlated growth
rates combine into a single firm, for example, then the volatility of the firm’s growth
rates is lower than the average volatility for the two establishments. As mentioned earlier,
the Retail Trade sector has undergone a pronounced shift away from single-unit firms to
national chains. Motivated by these observations, Figure 7 shows the employment-


18
weighted dispersion and volatility of establishment growth rates, calculated from LBD
data. Publicly traded establishments are those owned by publicly trade firms. In line with
the statistical aggregation effect, the levels of volatility and dispersion are substantially
higher for publicly traded establishments than for publicly traded firms.
     As seen in Figure 7, the basic patterns for establishment-based measures are the same
as for firm-based measures. Dispersion and volatility fall for the privately held, and they
rise for the publicly traded. As before, the overall trend for the nonfarm business sector
is dominated by privately held businesses. Some differences between the firm-based and
establishment-based results are also apparent. Rather remarkably, there is full volatility
convergence between publicly traded and privately held establishments by the end of the
LBD sample period. In sum, Figure 7 shows that our main results are not sensitive to the
distinction between firms and establishments.
B. The Role of Entry and Exit
        Figure 8 shows the dispersion and volatility of employment growth rates for
continuing firms only. We calculate these measures on an employment-weighted basis
from LBD data, after excluding entry-year and exit-year observations at the firm level.
The exclusion of entry and exit mutes the downward trends for privately held firms and
for the nonfarm sector as a whole. Indeed, the modified volatility measure for the
nonfarm business sector is essentially flat from 1977 to 2001 when we restrict attention to
continuers. This sample restriction also mutes the rise in volatility and dispersion for
publicly traded firms. Not surprisingly, the levels of volatility and dispersion are also
much lower when we exclude entry and exit. A comparison of Figures 5 and 8 reveals,
for example, that the exclusion of entry and exit lowers the overall dispersion of firm
growth rates by about one third.
        Figure 9 provides direct evidence on the magnitude of entry and exit by
ownership status for firms and establishments. The figure shows three-year moving
averages of the employment-weighted sum of entry and exit, expressed as a percentage of
employment. As seen in the figure, the volatility convergence phenomenon also holds
for entry and exit rates, whether calculated for establishments or firms. Among privately
held businesses, the sum of establishment entry and exit rates declines from 20.6 to 12.9
percent of employment over the period covered by the LBD. It rises from 8.1 to 12.3



19
percent of employment for publicly traded. Thus, there is essentially full volatility
convergence by 2001 for establishment-based measures of business turnover.
        On average, each publicly traded firm operates about 90 establishments, which
implies considerable scope for statistical aggregation. This effect shows up in Figure 9 as
a large gap between firm-based and establishment-based turnover among publicly traded
businesses. In contrast, there are only 1.16 establishments per privately held firm, which
implies much less scope for statistical aggregation. Indeed, the sum of entry and exit
rates for privately held firms exceeds the corresponding establishment-based measure in
the early years of the LBD. This feature of Figure 9 indicates that a portion of the firm
entry and exit events identified in the LBD reflects ownership changes for continuing
businesses, rather than complete firm shutdowns or de novo entry. 20 Since the gap
between firm-based and establishment-based turnover narrows rapidly in the early years
of the LBD, Figure 9 also suggests that we overstate the decline in firm-based measures
of dispersion and volatility in the first few years. 21 Despite this concern, several
observations give confidence that our main findings about volatility and dispersion trends
and volatility convergence are not driven by ownership changes. First, the firm-
establishment turnover gap is close to zero after 1984 (Figure 9). Second, the basic
trends and volatility convergence results hold up strongly when we consider
establishment-based measures (Figure 7). Third, our main results also hold when we
restrict attention to continuing firms, which exclude improperly broken longitudinal links
by construction (Figure 8). 22
C. The Role of Size, Age and Industry Composition
        We now investigate whether shifts in the size, age and industry composition of
employment can account for the trends in firm volatility and dispersion. Shifts in the
employment distribution along these dimensions have potentially large effects, because
volatility and dispersion magnitudes vary by industry and especially by business size and



20
   While ownership changes can affect firm level longitudinal linkages in the LBD, they do not affect
establishment level linkages. See the Data appendix for more discussion of linkage issues.
21
   While not a trivial task, we can use the LBD to separately identify and measure firm ownership change,
de novo entry and complete firm shutdown. In future work, we plan to explore this decomposition.
22
   See the Data Appendix for details about the firm and establishment concepts used in the LBD and the
construction of longitudinal links.


20
age. 23 To investigate this issue, Table 3 reports modified volatility measures in 1982 and
2001 alongside the volatility values implied by fixing the industry, age and/or size
distribution of employment at 1982 shares while allowing category-specific volatilities to
vary over time as in the data. We employ a cell-based shift-share methodology, where
we compute the modified volatility measure for 448 size, age and industry cells per year.
We use 1982 employment shares, because it is the earliest year for which we can identify
seven distinct age categories in the LBD data – entrants, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6+ years of age,
where firm age is identified as the age of the firm’s oldest establishment. In addition to
seven age categories, we consider eight size categories and the eight industry groups
listed in Table 2.
         Table 3 contains several noteworthy findings. Turning first to publicly traded
firms, modified volatility rises by 21 percent from 0.21 in 1982 to 0.26 in 2001. The
volatility rise among publicly traded firms is essentially unchanged when we control for
shifts in the size and age distribution of employment. In contrast, when we fix the
industry employment distribution at 1982 shares, the volatility rise among publicly traded
firms is cut by half. To shed additional light on this result, Figure 10 shows the evolution
of selected industry shares among publicly traded firms over the period covered by the
LBD. The manufacturing employment share fell from almost 50 percent in the late 1970s
to 23 percent in 2001, while the shares accounted for by FIRE, Services and Retail rose.
As reported in Table 2, volatility among publicly traded Manufacturing and Retail firms
is about one-fifth lower than overall volatility for publicly traded firms in 2001. In
contrast, volatility among publicly traded firms in FIRE and Services is considerably
greater. Thus, the large contribution of industry composition changes to the volatility rise
among publicly traded firms is basically a story of shifts from Manufacturing to FIRE
and Services. The coincident shift to Retail actually muted the rise in volatility among
publicly traded firms.
     Turning next to privately held firms, Table 3 reports that volatility fell by 31 percent
from 0.60 in 1982 to 0.42 in 2001. In contrast to the story for publicly traded firms, shifts
in the industry distribution play essentially no role in the volatility trend for privately held

23
  There is a vast literature on the relationship of business entry, exit and growth rates to business size and
age. See Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson (1989), Sutton (1997), Caves (1998), Davis and Haltiwanger
(1999), and Davis et al. (2005) for evidence, analysis and extensive references to related research.


21
firms. Size effects play a rather modest role. However, when we fix the age distribution
of employment at 1982 shares, the volatility drop among privately held firms is cut by 27
percent. This 27 percent figure probably understates the contribution of shifts in the age
distribution, because we cannot finely differentiate age among older firms in the early
years covered by the LBD.
     Table 4 provides additional information about the role of shifts in the age distribution
among privately held firms. The table confirms that volatility declines steeply with firm
age. Note, also, that the share of employment in firms at least 6 years old increases from
75.6 percent in 1982 to 83.6 percent in 2001, and that volatility drops much more sharply
in the 6+ category than any other age category. Moreover, average volatility by age
among privately held firms continues to decline through 25 years of age in 2001, as
reported in the lower part of Table 4. These results are highly suggestive of unmeasured
shifts from 1982 to 2001 in the age distribution of employment toward older, less volatile
firms within the 6+ category. Hence, we conclude that shifts in the age distribution of
employment among privately held firms probably account for more than the 27 percent
figure suggested by Table 3. 24
         Turning last to the results for all firms, Table 3 implies that shifts in the age
distribution of employment account for 29 percent of the volatility decline. Size effects
alone account for 10 percent of the overall volatility decline. In unreported results that
use a finer size breakdown, we find that a shift toward larger firms accounts for 25
percent of the volatility decline in Retail Trade. 25 These results are related to the decline
in the employment-weighted entry and exit rates among privately held firms, documented
in Figure 9. Since older and larger firm have lower exit rates, a shift of employment
toward these firms leads to lower rates of firm turnover. Lastly, Table 3 implies that
shifts in the industry mix of employment actually work against the overall volatility
decline among nonfarm businesses.

24
   The precise contribution of shifts in the age distribution to the volatility decline among privately held
firms depends on exactly how we carry out the decomposition. Table 3, which evaluates volatilities at the
1982 age distribution, implies that the age distribution shift accounts for 27 percent of the volatility drop
from 1982 to 2001. Table 4, which evaluates volatilities at the 2001 age distribution, reports that the age
distribution shift accounts for 19.6 percent of the volatility drop. Both exercises are likely to understate the
impact of shifts toward older privately held firms for reasons discussed in the text.
25
   The finer size classification breaks the 1000+ category into 1000-2499, 2500-4999, 5000-9999, and
10,000+ categories.


22
D. Why the Rise in Volatility among Publicly Traded Firms?
     As discussed in Section II, there was a large upsurge in the number of newly listed
firms after 1979. Fama and French (2004), among others, provide evidence that new
listings are riskier than seasoned public firms, and that they became increasingly risky
relative to seasoned firms after 1979. These pieces of evidence point to a significant
change in the economic selection process governing entry into the set of publicly traded
firms. They also suggest that much of the volatility and dispersion rise among publicly
traded firms reflects a large influx of more volatile firms in later cohorts.
     We now investigate this issue, focusing on the modified volatility concept for
publicly traded firms. We rely on COMPUSTAT for this purpose, because it spans a
much longer period than the LBD. The scope of COMPSUTAT expanded in certain
years during our sample period, e.g., NASDAQ listings first became available as part of
COMPUSTAT in 1973. Since COMPUSTAT does not accurately identify first listing
year for firms that are added to COMPUSTAT because of changes in scope, we drop
such firms from the data set for the present analysis. 26 As before, we intentionally
exclude entry-year and exit-year observations in the COMPUSTAT data because listing
and delisting typically do not reflect the birth or shutdown of the firm.
     Figure 11 plots modified volatility time series for ten-year entry cohorts, defined by
time of first listing. Volatility appears to be somewhat higher for the 1960s and 1970s
cohort than earlier cohorts, and it is much higher still for the 1980s and 1990s cohorts. 27
To help understand how these cohort effects influence the evolution of overall volatility
among publicly traded firms, Figure 12 displays cohort employment shares over the
period covered by COMPUSTAT. This figure shows that cohort employment shares
initially grow quite rapidly, and that this effect is especially strong for the 1990s cohort.
By the latter part of the 1990s, firms that first listed in the 1980s or 1990s account for
about 40 percent of employment among publicly traded firms. Taken together, Figures



26
   In unreported results, this sample selection requirement has little impact on the overall volatility trend in
COMPUSTAT, but it does have an impact on the volatility trends for certain cohorts
27
   The modified volatility series in Figure 11 are employment weighted. We suppress the 1953 and 1954
values for the 1950s cohort, because they are calculated from only one or two firm level observations. In
unreported results, the equal-weighted modified volatility series show a stronger pattern of greater volatility
for later cohorts. So does the employment-weighted basic volatility measure.


23
11 and 12 suggest that cohort effects play a powerful role in the volatility rise among
publicly traded firms.
     Figure 13 quantifies the contribution of cohort effects to the evolution of volatility
among publicly traded firms. For the sake of comparison, the figure also provides
information about the contribution of size, age and industry effects. To construct Figure
13, we first fit employment-weighted regressions of firm volatility on year effects and
other variables using COMPUSTAT data from 1951 to 2004. Our basic specification
regresses firm volatility on year effects only. The fitted year effects in this basic
specification yield the “No Controls” series plotted in Figure 13. Next, we expand the
basic specification to include indicators for one-year entry cohorts. The fitted year
effects in this expanded specification yield the “Cohort” series plotted in Figure 13. To
isolate the impact of size, we expand the basic specification to include a quartic in log
employment, which yields the “Size” series. Finally, we add the quartic in size, 1-digit
industry controls and simple age controls (less than 5 years and 5+ years since listing) to
the basic specification to obtain the “Size, Age and Industry” series in Figure 13..
     The results in Figure 13 provide a powerful and simple explanation for the trend
volatility rise among publicly traded firms. According to the figure, neither size effects
alone nor the combination of size, age and industry effects account for much of the
volatility rise. 28 In sharp contrast, simple cohort controls absorb most of the volatility
rise for publicly traded firms. Table 5 quantifies this point by comparing the longer term
change in fitted year effects with and without cohort controls. From 1978 to 1999, for
example, the controls for entry cohort absorb 64 percent of the volatility rise among
publicly traded firms. Over the 1978 to 2004 period, the trend change in volatility among
publicly traded firms is actually negative once we control for entry cohort. In unreported
results using LBD data, we find even stronger results – controls for entry cohort absorb
85 percent of the volatility rise among publicly traded firms from 1977 to 2001.




28
  Industry effects play a substantially larger role in Table 3 (LBD data) than in Figure 13 (COMPUSTAT
data). Unreported results show that much of the difference arises because of different sample periods. In
particular, regardless of data set and whether we use a shift-share or regression-based method, industry
effects play a substantially larger role from 1982 to 2001 than from 1977 to 2001. Differences between
Table 3 and Figure 13 in method and data set play a smaller role.


24
VI.      CONCLUDING REMARKS
     Comprehensive micro data reveal that volatility and cross sectional dispersion in
business growth rates declined in recent decades. Our preferred measure of firm
volatility in employment growth rates (Figure 6) fell 23 percent from 1978 to 2001 and
29 percent from 1987 to 2001. Our most remarkable finding, however, is a striking
difference in volatility and dispersion trends by business ownership status. Among
privately held firms, volatility is relatively high but it fell by one third from 1978 to 2001.
Among publicly traded firms, volatility is lower but it rose by three quarters from 1978 to
1999. This pattern of volatility convergence between publicly traded and privately held
businesses prevails for every major industry group.
     Our study also provides some proximate explanations for these strong patterns in the
data. Employment shifts toward older businesses account for 27 percent or more of the
volatility decline among privately held firms. In addition, shifts toward larger businesses
played a role in certain industries, particularly Retail Trade. In line with the shifts toward
older and larger businesses, the employment-weighted business turnover rate declined
markedly after 1978. Finally, simple cohort effects that capture higher volatility among
more recently listed firms account for most of the volatility rise among publicly traded
firms.
     These empirical results suggest a number of interesting questions and directions for
future research. Consider, first, the connection between employer volatility and
unemployment. Employer volatility can be interpreted as a rough proxy for the intensity
of idiosyncratic shocks, a key parameter in unemployment models that stress search and
matching frictions. A lower intensity of idiosyncratic shocks in these models leads to
less job loss, fewer workers flowing through the unemployment pool, and less frictional
unemployment. Motivated by these models, Figure 14 plots our employment-weighted
modified volatility measure against annual averages of monthly unemployment inflow
and outflow rates. The figure suggests that secular declines in the intensity of
idiosyncratic shocks contributed to large declines in unemployment flows and frictional
unemployment in recent decades. More study is clearly needed to confirm or disconfirm
this view, and there is surely a role for other factors such as the aging of the workforce
after 1980.


25
         Another major development in U.S. labor markets since the early 1980s is a large
rise in wage and earnings inequality. 29 One line of interpretation for this development
stresses potential sources of increased wage and earnings flexibility: declines in the real
minimum wage, a diminished role for private sector unionism and collective bargaining,
intensified competitive pressures that undermined rigid compensation structures, the
growth of employee leasing and temp workers, and the erosion of norms that had
previously restrained wage differentials and prevented wage cuts. Greater wage (and
hours) flexibility can produce smaller firm level employment responses to idiosyncratic
shocks and smaller aggregate employment responses to common shocks. So, in principle,
greater wage flexibility can provide a unified explanation for the rise in wage and
earnings inequality and the declines in aggregate volatility, firm volatility and
unemployment flows. We mention the role of wage flexibility because we think it merits
investigation and may be a significant part of the story, not because we believe that
greater wage flexibility or any single factor can explain all aspects of longer term
developments in wage inequality, unemployment, firm volatility and aggregate volatility.
         The potential role of greater wage flexibility is related to another question raised
by our results. In particular, to what extent do trends in firm volatility reflect a change in
the size and frequency of shocks, and to what extent do they reflect a change in shock
response dynamics? One simple approach to this question is to fit statistical models that
allow for nonstationarity in the size and frequency of business level innovations and in
the response dynamics to the innovations. Another approach is to identify specific
shocks, quantify their magnitude and investigate whether shock magnitudes and firm
level responses to them have changed over time.
     Several pieces of evidence point to a major shift in the selection process governing
entry into the set of publicly traded firms. Figure 13 and Table 5 above indicate that
more than half of the volatility rise among publicly traded firms in recent decades reflects
an influx of more volatile firms in later cohorts. Other researchers find that later cohorts
of publicly traded firms are riskier in terms of equity return variability, profit variability,
time from IPO to profitability, and business age at time of first listing. The shift in the


29
  See Autor, Katz and Kearney (2005) for a recent contribution to this literature, a review of major
competing hypotheses about the reasons for rising inequality and references to related research.


26
selection process for publicly traded firms is a major phenomenon, in our view, but it
does not by itself explain the volatility convergence pattern we have documented or the
overall downward trend in firm volatility and dispersion. To appreciate this point,
consider a simple selection story that we sketch with the aid of Figure 15. The figure
shows a hypothetical density function for firm level risk and a risk threshold that
separates publicly traded from privately held firms. This figure captures, in a highly
stylized manner, the notion that publicly traded firms are less risky than privately held
ones. Suppose that the risk threshold moves to the right, so that a riskier class of firms
now goes public. This shift yields an increase in average risk among publicly traded
firms, but it also produces an increase in average risk among privately held firms and in
the share of activity accounted for by publicly traded firms. The latter two implications
are at odds with the evidence, at least when risk is measured by firm volatility and
activity is measured by employment.
     A richer story, with changing selection as one key element, is more consistent with
the evidence. As discussed in Section II, smaller aggregate shocks can readily explain
declines in macro volatility and the overall magnitude of firm volatility. In combination
with a changing selection process, smaller aggregate shocks can rationalize the volatility
convergence pattern we document and the declines in aggregate and average firm
volatility. A shift of activity toward older and larger firms may have contributed to
changes in the way firms respond to shocks. Shifts in the industry mix away from
manufacturing and other industries that traditionally accounted for a large share of
publicly traded firms help to explain why the share of employment in publicly traded
firms has not risen.
     Finally, our results also present something of a challenge to Schumpeterian theories
of growth and development. In particular, the sizable decline in average firm volatility
that we document coincided with a period of impressive productivity gains for the U.S.
economy. This coincidence belies any close and simple positive relationship between
productivity growth and the intensity of the creative destruction process, at least as
measured by firm-based or establishment-based measures of volatility in employment
growth rates. Perhaps there has been a large increase in the pace of restructuring,
experimentation and adjustment activities within firms. Another possibility is that a more



27
intense creative destruction process among publicly traded firms, partly facilitated by
easier access to public equity by high-risk firms, has been sufficient to generate the
commercial innovations that fueled rapid productivity gains throughout the economy.




28
                                         References

Abowd, John, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, Julia Lane, Paul Lengermann, Kristin McCue,
         Kevin McKinney, and Kristin Sandusky, 2005, “The Relationship Between
         Human Capital, Productivity and Market Value: Building Up From
         Microeconomic Evidence” in Measuring Capital in the New Economy (eds. Carol
         Corrado, John Haltiwanger and Daniel Sichel), University of Chicago Press.
Acemoglu, Daron, 2005, “Comments on Comin and Philippon, The Rise in Firm level
         Volatility: Causes and Consequences,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney, 2005, “Trends in U.S. Wage
         Inequality: Re-Assessing the Revisionists,” NBER working paper 11627.
Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger and Stefano Scarpetta, 2004, “Microeconomic
         Evidence of Creative Destruction in Industrial and Development Countries,”
         Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper 2004-114/3.
Caballero, Ricardo, 2006, The Macroeconomics of Specificity and Restructuring,
         forthcoming, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Caballero, Ricardo, Eduardo M.R.A. Engel and John C. Haltiwanger, 1997, “Aggregate
         Employment Dynamics: Building from Microeconomics,” American Economic
         Review 87(1), 115-137.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Kevin N. Cowan, Eduardo M.R.A. Engel and Alejandro Micco, 2004.
         “Effective Labor Regulation and Microeconomic Flexibility” NBER Working
         Paper No. 10744.
Campbell, JohnY., Martin Lettau, Burton Malkiel and Y. Xu, 2001, “Have Idiosyncratic
         Stocks Become More Volatile? An Empirical Exploration of Idiosyncratic Risk,”
         Journal of Finance, 56, no. 1, 1-43.
Caves, Richard, 1998, “Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and
         Mobility of Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature, 36, no. 4, 1947-1982.
Chaney, Thomas, Xavier Gabaix and Thomas Philippon, 2002, “Firm Volatility,”
         unpublished paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Comin, Diego and Sunil Mulani, 2005, “A Theory of Growth and Volatility at the
         Aggregate and Firm Level,” NBER Working Paper 11503.



 29
Comin, Diego and S. Mulani, 2006, “Diverging Trends in Aggregate and Firm Volatility,”
         Review of Economics and Statistics, 88, no. 2, 374-383.
Comin, Diego and Thomas Philippon, 2005, “The Rise in Firm level Volatility: Causes and
       Consequences,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

Davis, Steven J., Jason Faberman and John Haltiwanger, 2006, “The Flow Approach to
         Labor Market Analysis: New Data Sources and Micro-Macro Links,” Journal of
         Economic Perspectives, 20, no. 3 (Summer).
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, 1992, “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction,
       and Employment Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, no. 3
       (August), 819-863.

Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, 1999, “Gross Job Flows,” in David Card and Orley
       Ashenfelter, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics, North-Holland.

Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, 1999, “On the Driving Forces behind Cyclical
       Movements in Employment and Job Reallocation,” American Economic Review,
       89, no. 5, 1234-1258.

Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, C.J. Krizan, Javier Miranda, Alfred Nucci
       and Kristin Sandusky, 2005, “Measuring the Dynamics of Young and Small
       Businesses: Integrating the Employer and Nonemployer Business Universes,”
       unpublished paper, U.S Bureau of the Census.

Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger and Scott Schuh, 1996, Job Creation and
       Destruction, MIT Press.

Doms, M., Ron S. Jarmin and Shawn Klimek, 2004, “Information technology investment
         and firm performance in US retail trade,” Economics of Innovation and New
         Technology, 13, no .7, 595-613.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark Roberts and Larry Samuelson, 1989. “Plant Turnover, and Gross
         Employment Flows in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector,” Journal of Labor
         Economics, 7, no. 1, 48-71.
Eberly, Janice, 2005, “Comments on Comin and Philippon, The Rise in Firm level
         Volatility: Causes and Consequences,” NBER Macro Annual, 2005.



 30
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2004, “New Lists: Fundamentals and Survival
         Rates,” Journal of Financial Economics, 73, no. 2, 229-269.
Faberman, Jason, 2006, “Job Flows and the Recent Business Cycle: Not all ‘Recoveries’
         are Created Equal,” BLS Working Paper no. 391.
Fink, Jason, Kristin Fink, Gustavo Grullon and James Peter Weston, 2005, “IPO Vintage
         and the Rise of Idiosyncratic Risk” (February),” presented at the Seventh Annual
         Texas Finance Festival Paper. Avalable at http://ssrn.com/abstract=661321.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger and C.J. Krizan, 2001 “Aggregate Productivity Growth:
         Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence.” In Edward Dean, Michael Harper and
         Charles Hulten, editors. New Developments in Productivity Analysis, Chicago:
         University of Chicago Press.
Foster, Lucia, 2003, “Establishment and Employment Dynamics in Appalachia: Evidence
         from the Longitudinal Business Database.” CES Working Paper 03-19.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger and C.J. Krizan, 2005 “Market Selection, Reallocation and
         Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the 1990s.” Review of Economics
         and Statistics, forthcoming.
Gabaix, Xavier, 2005, “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” unpublished
         paper, MIT.
Jarmin, Ron, Shawn Klimek and Javier Miranda, 2003, “Firm Entry and Exit in the U.S.
         Retail Sector,” CES Working Paper 04-17.
Jarmin, Ron S., Shawn Klimek and Javier Miranda, 2005, “The Role of Retail Chains:
         National, Regional and Industry Results,” CES Working Paper 05-30.
Jarmin, Ron S., and Javier Miranda, 2002a, “The Longitudinal Business Database”, CES
         Working Paper 02-17.
Jarmin, Ron S., and Javier Miranda, 2002b, “Fixing Missed Reorganizations and Broken
         Links from Inactive Spells,” CES Technical Note 2002-06.
Jarmin, Ron S., and Javier Miranda, 2005, “Reassigning Incorrectly Timed MU Births and
         Deaths” CES Technical Note.
Jayaratne, Jith and Philip E. Strahan, 1998, “Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution and
         Dynamic Efficiency: Evidence from Commercial Banking,” Journal of Law and
         Economics, 41 (April), 239-273.



 31
Jovanovic, Boyan and Peter L. Rousseau (2001) “Why Wait? A Century of Life before
         IPO,” American Economic Review 91, no. 2 (May), 336-341.
Koren, Miklos and Silvana Tenreyro, 2006, “Technological Diversification,” Federal
         Reserve Bank of New York and London School of Economics.
McCue, Kristin, and Ron Jarmin, 2005, “Matching Compustat Data to the SSEL,” CES
         Technical Note.
McKinsey Global Institute, 2001, U.S. Productivity Growth, 1995-2000: Understanding the
         Contribution of Information Technology Relative to other Factors. Washington,
         D.C.: McKinsey Global Institute.
Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides, 1999, “New Developments in Models of
         Search in the Labor Market,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, editors,
         Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, 2567-2627.
Obstfeld, M., 1994, “Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth,” American
         Economic Review, 84, 1310-1329.
Philippon, Thomas, 2003, “An Explanation for the Joint Evolution of Firm and Aggregate
         Volatility,” unpublished paper, New York University.
Pissarides, Christopher, 2000, Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, second edition.
         Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Thesmar, David and Mathias Thoenig, 2004, “Financial Market Development and the Rise

         in Firm level Uncertainty,” Delta, unpublished paper.

Tornqvist, Leo, Pentti Vartia, and Yrjo Vartia, 1985. “How Should Relative Change Be
         Measured?” American Statistician, 39, no. 1 (February), 43-46.




 32
                                      Data Appendix
A. Additional Information about the LBD
     This appendix discusses improvements to the LBD that aided the analysis in this
paper. The LBD is comprised of longitudinally linked Business Register (BR) files. The
BR is updated continuously and a snapshot is taken once a year after the incorporation of
survey data collections. The resulting files contain a longitudinal establishment identifier,
the Permanent Plant Number (PPN). This identifier is designed to remain unchanged
throughout the life of the establishment and regardless of reorganizations or ownership
changes. However, there are known breaks in PPN linkages, and PPNs existed only for
the manufacturing sector prior to 1982. Jarmin and Miranda (2002a) addressed these
shortcomings in the BR files in creating the LBD. Their methodology employed existing
numeric establishment identifiers to the greatest extent possible to repair and construct
longitudinal establishment links. They further enhanced the linkages using commercially
available statistical name and address matching software.
        Construction of the longitudinal establishment links is relatively straightforward
because they are one to one, and because establishments typically have well-defined
physical locations. The construction of firm links requires additional work. Longitudinal
linkages of firm identifiers can be broken by the expansion of single location firms to
multi establishment entities and by merger and acquisition (M&A) activity. We address
the first problem by assigning a unique firm identifier to firms that expand from single to
multiple establishments. This process is straightforward because we can track
establishments over time. The second problem is harder to resolve, because M&A
activity can result in many-to-many matches, e.g., when a firm sells some establishments
and acquires others in the same period. We do not directly address this issue in the
current paper, but we recognize that it would be interesting to explore the role of M&A
activity in greater depth, and we plan to do so in future work.
        The combination and reconciliation of administrative and survey data sources in
the LBD lead to a more serious problem that we have addressed in the current analysis.
Early versions of the LBD contain a number of incorrectly timed establishment births and
deaths. To see how this timing problem arises, recall that the LBD is a longitudinally
linked version of the Business Register. Although the primary unit of observation in the



33
BR is a business establishment (physical location), administrative data are typically
available at the taxpayer ID (EIN) level. As the vast majority of firms are single
establishment entities, the EIN, firm and establishment levels of aggregation all refer to
the same business entity. Business births typically enter the BR from administrative
sources. Outside of Economic Census years, however, the Census Bureau directly
surveys only large births, as measured by payroll. In Economic Census years, all
establishments of “known” multi location firms are directly surveyed. A subset of larger
single location businesses are canvassed as well.
         The Census Bureau separately identifies the individual establishments of multi-
establishment companies based on primary data collections from the Economic Census
and certain annual surveys such as the Company Organization Survey and the Annual
Survey of Manufactures. Since a much larger portion of firms and establishments are
surveyed in Economic Census years (years ending in “2” and “7”), the Economic Census
becomes the primary vehicle by which the Census Bureau learns about establishment
entry and exit for smaller multi-unit firms. This information is then incorporated into the
LBD. The implication is that the unadjusted LBD files show large spikes in
establishment births and deaths for multi-unit firms in Economic Census years. Many of
those births and deaths actually occurred in the previous four years.
         We retime these incorrectly timed deaths and births following a two-phase
methodology, described more fully in Jarmin and Miranda (2005). The first phase uses
firm level information contained in the LBD to identify the correct birth and death years
for as many establishments as possible. The second phase adapts an algorithm developed
by Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996) to randomly assign a birth or death year for
those case that cannot be resolved in phase one. The randomization procedure is
constrained so that the temporal patterns of births and deaths for retimed cases match
those for the accurately timed births and deaths that we observe directly in the data
(single-unit births and establishment births in large multi-unit firms that are directly
canvassed). 30


30
  We construct birth and death retiming weights from accurate data on the timing of births and deaths
using a conditional logit model. The model includes controls for state, metro and rural areas and job
creation and destruction rates. The model is run separately by 2-digit SIC and for four different 5-year
census cycles.


34
        Finally, the LBD contains a substantial number of establishments that appear to
become inactive for a period of time (Jarmin and Miranda, 2002b). That is, the
establishment is active in period t-1 and t+1 but not in period t. 31 These gaps lead to
possibly spurious startups and shutdowns. In this paper, we take a conservative approach
by eliminating these establishment-year observations in the entry and exit computations.
Our goal in doing so is to focus on true entry and exit.
B. COMPUSTAT-LBD Employment Comparisons
     The top panel in Figure A.1 compares log employment levels between COMPUSTAT
and the LBD data sources for a matched set of publicly traded firms. The lower panel
compares five-year growth rates, calculated according to equation (4). Here, we restrict
attention to matched firms that have positive employment in the LBD and COMPUSTAT.
Much of the mass is concentrated along the 45 degree line in the top panel, but there are
clearly many large discrepancies between the two data sources. The simple correlation of
log employment levels is 0.89 on an unweighted basis and 0.83 on an employment-
weighted basis. The standardized employment difference, measured as LBD employment
minus COMPUSTAT employment divided by the average of the two, has an unweighted
median value of -13 percent and an unweighted mean of -26 percent . The weighted
values are -25 percent for the median -30 percent for the mean. The lower panel shows a
weaker relationship for growth rates, with a correlation of 0.64 unweighted and 0.54
weighted. Lower values for the weighted correlations probably reflect bigger
discrepancies for multi-national firms with significant global operations.
     In short, the results in Figure 1 indicate that COMPUSTAT measures of firm level
activity contain considerable measurement error, if the goal is to measure the U.S.
domestic operations of publicly traded firms. Despite the large COMPUSTAT-LBD
differences in employment levels and growth rates, the two data sources produce similar
trends in firm volatility measures, as seen by comparing Figures 4, 5 and 7.




31
  There are between 40,000 and 120,000 cases each year. Work by Davis et. al. (2005) shows that
business transitions between employer and non-employer status explains some of these cases.


35
Figure A1: Comparisons of Employment levels (logs) and Employment Growth
Rates for LBD and COMPUSTAT matched firms (pooled 1994-2001)




36
Table 1: Summary Statistics for COMPUSTAT, LBD and Matched Data Sets


A. Summary Statistics for LBD Using LBD/COMPUSTAT Bridge
                                     Number of    Total      Average    Coworker
 Year                                  Firms    Employment Employment     Mean
      Privately Held                  3,530,307   51,622,693       14.6     2,736
 1980 Publicly Traded (Bridge)            4,339   21,045,202    4,850.2    67,983
      Total                           3,534,646   72,667,895       20.6    21,632

        Privately Held                 4,222,385      68,896,957           16.3     4,235
 1990
        Publicly Traded (Bridge)           5,739      22,930,762        3,995.6    73,533
        Total                          4,228,124      91,827,719           21.7    21,540

        Privately Held                 4,744,020      83,845,864           17.7     4,761
 2000
        Publicly Traded (Bridge)           7,338      29,469,013        4,015.9    92,604
        Total                          4,751,358     113,314,877          23.8     27,605


B. Summary Statistics for COMPUSTAT Using LBD/COMPUSTAT Bridge
                        Number of Number of
                          CUSIPS      CUSIPS
                           with        with                  Average
                          Positive   Positive      Total     Employ- Coworker
Year                       Price    Employment Employment ment         Mean
     LBD Match (Bridge)       3,995         4,672 29,729,396    6,363  114,630
1980 Not Matched                835           880  3,841,700    4,366   39,050
     Total                    4,830         5,552 33,571,096    6,047  105,981

     LBD Match (Bridge)            5,986           5,716   31,755,052    5,555    110,374
1990 Not Matched                     847             523    2,793,759    5,342     72,865
     Total                         6,833           6,239   34,548,811    5,538    107,341

     LBD Match (Bridge)        8,394               7,168   40,672,986    5,674    137,678
2000 Not Matched               2,063               1,306    4,090,947    3,132     53,033
     Total                    10,457               8,474   44,763,932    5,283    137,570


Notes: In panel A, an LBD firm is identified as publicly traded if it appears in the
LBD/COMPUSTAT Bridge and its COMPUSTAT CUSIP has a positive security price in
the indicated year or in years that bracket the indicated year. In panel B, a COMPUSTAT
firm is identified as an LBD match if the CUSIP appears in the LBD/COMPUSTAT
Bridge. In panel B, we do not require the LBD match to have positive payroll in the
current year. In both panels, average employment is the simple mean over firms, and the
coworker mean is the employment-weighted mean firm size.




37
      Table 2: Firm Volatility Trends by Major Industry Group and Ownership
      Status
                                                                         Volatility Ratio:
                      All            Publicly Traded     Privately Held  Privately Held to
                     Firms                Firms              Firms       Publicly Traded
                                 Percent                    Percent                 Percent
Industry          1978   2001    Change    1978    2001     Change    1978   2001   Change     1978   2001    Change
Minerals          0.54   0.41     -24.2    0.25    0.28     10.9      0.74   0.52    -29.8      3.0    1.9     -1.1
Construction      0.78   0.51     -34.5    0.33    0.34      1.3      0.82   0.52    -36.6      2.5    1.5     -0.9
Manufacturing     0.34   0.30     -12.9    0.16    0.21     28.7      0.53   0.35    -33.5      3.2    1.7     -1.5
TPU               0.37   0.34      -6.7    0.11    0.25     129.4     0.67   0.45    -32.8      6.3    1.8     -4.4
Wholesale         0.53   0.33     -36.5    0.16    0.24     45.6      0.58   0.36    -38.3      3.6    1.5     -2.1
Retail            0.56   0.36     -36.1    0.17    0.20     16.8      0.70   0.44    -37.5      4.2    2.2     -1.9
FIRE              0.44   0.39     -13.1    0.17    0.33     96.4      0.54   0.42    -22.6      3.3    1.3     -2.0
Services          0.59   0.41     -30.7    0.27    0.38     38.5      0.61   0.41    -32.4      2.3    1.1     -1.2
All               0.49   0.38     -22.9    0.17    0.26     55.5      0.63   0.42    -33.4      3.7    1.6     -2.1

      Notes: Modified firm volatility measures calculated according to equation (6) with LBD
      data. Average volatility across firms computed on an employment-weighted basis.



     Table 3: The Role of Shifts in the Size, Age and Industry Distribution of
     Employment
   Fixing             Average Volatility,       Average Volatility,     Average Volatility,
   Employment              All Firms           Publicly Traded Firms Privately Held Firms
   Shares at 1982                    Percent                 Percent               Percent
   Values for:       1982 2001 Change 1982 2001              Change    1982 2001   Change
   Size, Age and
   Industry               0.49    0.40     -17.7     0.21     0.24      10.5        0.60     0.47     -22.7
   Industry               0.49    0.36     -25.6     0.21     0.24      11.2        0.60     0.41     -31.5
   Age                    0.49    0.41     -16.3     0.21     0.26      20.9        0.60     0.47     -22.7
   Size                   0.49    0.39     -20.7     0.21     0.26      21.5        0.60     0.43     -28.1
   Actual Volatility      0.49    0.38     -23.0     0.21     0.26      21.4        0.60     0.42     -31.1

      Notes: Modified firm volatility measures calculated according to equation (6) with LBD
      data. Average volatility across firms computed on an employment-weighted basis. The
      bottom row shows the actual average volatility values in 1982 and 2001 and the percent
      change. Entries for 2001 in the other rows show the volatility values implied by fixing
      employment shares at the 1982 distribution over the indicated category variables, while
      allowing the average volatility within categories to vary as in the data. We use seven firm
      age categories (entrants, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6+ years), eight size categories (1-9, 10-19, 20-
      49, 50-99, 100-249, 500-999, and 1000+ employees), and the eight industries listed in
      Table 2. “Size, Age and Industry” refers to a fully interacted specification with
      7 × 8 × 8 = 448 distinct categories.
Table 4: Employment Shares and Volatility by Firm Age, Privately Held Firms
                         Percent of                              Percent Change
                        Employment           Firm Volatility       In Volatility

     Age in Years      1982       2001     1982        1996         1982-1996
       Entrants         1.6         1.2    1.47        1.63            11.0
           1            3.4         2.6    1.36        1.37             1.3
           2            4.3         3.4    1.21        1.14            -5.2
           3            4.8         3.3    1.00        0.90            -9.5
           4            4.3         3.0    0.84        0.79            -5.9
           5            6.0         3.0    0.66        0.65            -1.2
          6+           75.6        83.6    0.47        0.38           -20.8
        Overall                            0.60        0.48           -20.2
       1982 Age-Specific Volatilities Evaluated at
        the 2001 Age Distribution of Employment        0.57
       Percentage of 1982-2001 Volatility Decline
     Accounted for by Shift to Firms 6+ Years Old      19.6

   Additional
 Statistics for                                    15-19       20-24
     2001            6-9 years   10-14 years       years       years      25+ years
  Percent of
 Employment            10.2           11.1           11.6       10.2         40.5
 Firm Volatility       0.45           0.37           0.32       0.30         0.28


Source: Own calculations on LBD data.

Notes: Modified firm volatility measures calculated according to equation (6). Average
volatility across firms computed on an employment-weighted basis.




39
Table 5: Cohort Effects in the Volatility Trend among Publicly Traded Firms,
COMPUSTAT Data

                       Initial   Change in Percentage of Volatility
              Time    Volatility Volatility Change Accounted for
             Interval  ×100        ×100       by Cohort Effects
            1951-1978   8.87       2.03             49.1
            1951-1999   8.87       7.14             59.4
            1951-2004   8.87       4.55             90.0
            1978-1999  10.89       5.11             63.5
            1978-2001  10.89       4.67             67.4
            1978-2004  10.89       2.52            122.9

Source: Own calculations on COMPUSTAT data.

Notes: “Initial Volatility” reports estimated year effects in a weighted least squares
regression of modified volatility on year dummies, with weights proportional to firm size
( zit ) . The data set consists of an unbalanced panel of firm level observations from 1951
to 2004. “Change in Volatility” reports the change in the estimated year effects
( Δŷ ) from the same regression. To quantify the percentage of the volatility change
accounted for by cohort effects, we expand the regression to include one-year cohort
dummies (year of first listing) and calculate the change in estimated year effects with
cohort controls ( Δyˆ CC ) . Lastly, we calculate the “Percentage of Volatility Change
Accounted for by Cohort Effects” as 100 ( Δyˆ − Δyˆ CC ) / Δŷ.




40
Figure 1: Firm Level Volatility for Publicly Traded Firms, COMPUSTAT Data

                                           Average Volatility of Sales Growth Rates

     0.25

     0.20

     0.15

     0.10

     0.05
            1954
                   1956
                          1958
                                 1960
                                        1962
                                               1964
                                                      1966
                                                             1968
                                                                    1970
                                                                           1972
                                                                                  1974
                                                                                         1976
                                                                                                1978
                                                                                                        1980
                                                                                                               1982
                                                                                                                      1984
                                                                                                                             1986
                                                                                                                                    1988
                                                                                                                                           1990
                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                                                                                1996
                                                                                                                                                                       1998
                                                                                                                                                                              2000
                                                               Simple Mean                             Sales-weighted mean




                                   Average Volatility of Employment Growth Rates

     0.26
     0.22
     0.18
     0.14
     0.10
     0.06
            1954
                   1956
                          1958
                                 1960
                                        1962
                                               1964
                                                      1966
                                                             1968
                                                                    1970
                                                                           1972
                                                                                  1974
                                                                                         1976
                                                                                                1978
                                                                                                        1980
                                                                                                               1982
                                                                                                                      1984
                                                                                                                             1986
                                                                                                                                    1988
                                                                                                                                           1990
                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                                                                                1996
                                                                                                                                                                       1998
                                                         Simple Mean                            Employment-weighted mean                                                      2000

Source: Own calculations on COMPUSTAT data.
Notes: Calculations exclude entry and exit. Firm-level volatility calculated according to
equation (5).




41
Figure 2a: Quarterly Excess Job Reallocation Rate, U.S. Manufacturing, 1947-2005
                                   Excess Reallocation        H-P Trend

 15.0

 14.0

 13.0

 12.0

 11.0                                        R

 10.0

     9.0

     8.0

     7.0
       1947 1952 1957 1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002
Figure 2b: Quarterly Excess Job Reallocation Rate, U.S. Private Sector, 1990-2005

 18.0



 17.0



 16.0



 15.0



 14.0



 13.0
       1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Source: Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2006) and Faberman (2006)




42
Figure 3: Full COMPUSTAT Compared to COMPUSTAT-LBD Bridge File



            Average Volatility of Firm Employment Growth Rates:
            COMPUSTAT and COMPUSTAT-LBD Bridge Compared


     0.23
                                                                                   0.15
     0.19
                                                                                   0.13
     0.15
                                                                                   0.11

     0.11                                                                          0.09

     0.07                                                                          0.07
            1954


                   1959


                          1964


                                 1969


                                        1974


                                               1979


                                                      1984


                                                              1989


                                                                     1994


                                                                            1999
                      COMPUSTAT, unweighted                  Bridge, unweighted
                      COMPUSTAT, weighted                    Bridge, weighted




Source: Own calculations on COMPUSTAT data and COMPUSTAT-LBD Bridge file.
Notes: Calculations exclude COMPUSAT entry and exit. Firm volatility calculated
according to equation (5).




43
Figure 4: Firm Volatility and Dispersion of Employment Growth Rates Compared,
COMPUSTAT Data


                                          Publicly Traded Firms, Unweighted



     0.26                                                                                                                                  0.35
     0.22                                                                                                                                  0.3
     0.18                                                                                                                                  0.25
     0.14                                                                                                                                  0.2
     0.10                                                                                                                                  0.15
     0.06                                                                                                                                  0.1
        0

               3

                      6

                             9

                                     2

                                           5

                                                  8

                                                         1

                                                                4

                                                                       7

                                                                              0

                                                                                     3

                                                                                            6

                                                                                                   9

                                                                                                          2

                                                                                                                 5

                                                                                                                        8

                                                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                                      4
         5

                5

                       5

                              5

                                     6

                                            6

                                                   6

                                                          7

                                                                 7

                                                                        7

                                                                               8

                                                                                      8

                                                                                             8

                                                                                                    8

                                                                                                           9

                                                                                                                  9

                                                                                                                         9

                                                                                                                                0

                                                                                                                                       0
      19

             19

                    19

                           19

                                  19

                                         19

                                                19

                                                       19

                                                              19

                                                                     19

                                                                            19

                                                                                   19

                                                                                          19

                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                    20
                                  Firm Level Volatility                 Cross Sectional Dispersion (right axis)




                                   Publicly Traded Firms, Employment Weighted


     0.15                                                                                                                                  0.25

     0.13                                                                                                                                  0.2

     0.11                                                                                                                                  0.15

     0.09                                                                                                                                  0.1

     0.07                                                                                                                                  0.05
        50

        53

        56

        59

        62

        65

        68

        71

        74

        77

        80

        83

        86

        89

        92

        95

        98

        01

        04
      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      20

      20




                                   Firm Level Volatility                    Cross Sectional Dispersion (right axis)



Source: Own calculations on COMPUSTAT data.
Notes: Calculations exclude COMPUSTAT entry and exit. Firm volatility calculated
according to equation (5).




44
Figure 5: Dispersion and Volatility of Employment Growth Rates by Ownership Status,
LBD Data

                                         Employment-Weighted Dispersion of Firm Growth Rates,
                                                     Three-Year Moving Averages

                                      0.85
                                      0.75
                 Standard Deviation




                                      0.65
                                      0.55
                                      0.45
                                      0.35
                                      0.25
                                      0.15
                                         1977     1980     1983    1986    1989       1992      1995       1998        2001
                                                                           Year

                                                         Total       Privately Held           Publicly Traded


                                               Employment-Weighted Volatility of Firm Growth Rates


                                      0.35
 Average Firm Volatility




                                       0.3

                                      0.25

                                       0.2
                                      0.15

                                       0.1

                                      0.05
                                           7        0        3       6       9        2          5         8         1
                                        197      198      198     198     198      199        199       199       200
                                                                             Year
                                                          Total Economy      Privately Held          Publicly Traded

Source: Own calculations on LBD data.
Notes: Calculations in the top panel include entry and exit. Firm volatility in the bottom
panel is calculated according to equation (5) and, hence, excludes short-lived firms.



45
Figure 6: Modified Measure of Volatility in Firm Growth Rates, 1977-2001, LBD Data


                                    Modified Volatility, Employment Weighted


                           0.7

                           0.6
 Average Firm Volatility




                           0.5

                           0.4

                           0.3

                           0.2

                           0.1
                               7   9   1   3   5   7   9   1   3   5   7   9   1
                            197 197 198 198 198 198 198 199 199 199 199 199 200
                                                        Year
                                        Total Economy   Privately Held   Publicly Traded

Source: Own calculations on LBD data.
Notes: Calculations include entry and exit and short-lived firms. Firm volatility
calculated according to equation (6).




46
Figure 7: Dispersion and Volatility of Establishment Growth Rates, LBD Data


                                 Employment-Weighted Dispersion of Establishment
                                    Growth Rates, Three-Year Moving Averages

                           0.8
                          0.75
     Standard Deviation




                           0.7
                          0.65
                           0.6
                          0.55
                           0.5
                             1977    1980     1983       1986     1989        1992     1995        1998    2001
                                                                   Year

                                            Total          Privately Held            Publicly Traded

                                            Modified Establishment Volatility,
                                                 Employment Weighted

     0.75

     0.65

     0.55

     0.45

     0.35
                                                           87

                                                                  89
                 77

                               79

                                      81

                                             83

                                                    85




                                                                         91

                                                                                93

                                                                                       95

                                                                                              97

                                                                                                     99

                                                                                                            01
                                                         19

                                                                19
               19

                             19

                                    19

                                           19

                                                  19




                                                                       19

                                                                              19

                                                                                     19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                          20




                                       Total Economy              Privately Held            Publicly Traded

Source: Own calculations on LBD data.
Notes: Calculations include entry and exit and short-lived establishments. Modified
establishment volatility calculated according to equation (6).




47
Figure 8: Dispersion and Volatility of Firm Growth Rates, Continuers Only, LBD Data


                                      Weighted Dispersion of Employment Growth Rates,
                                               Three-Year Moving Averages

                           0.5
                          0.45
     Standard Deviation




                           0.4
                          0.35
                           0.3
                          0.25
                           0.2
                          0.15
                             1977       1980        1983   1986        1989      1992     1995        1998   2001

                                                  Total         Privately Held          Publicly Traded

                                      Modified Firm Volatility, Employment Weighted


     0.35

     0.30

     0.25

     0.20

     0.15
                          77

                                 79

                                       81

                                               83

                                                      85

                                                            87

                                                                    89

                                                                           91

                                                                                  93

                                                                                          95

                                                                                                 97

                                                                                                        99

                                                                                                              01
                   19

                               19

                                      19

                                             19

                                                     19

                                                           19

                                                                  19

                                                                         19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                        19

                                                                                                19

                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                             20




                                           Total Economy            Privately Held             Publicly Traded

Source: Own calculations on LBD data.
Note: Calculations exclude entry and exit.




48
Figure 9: Employment-Weighted Sum of Entry and Exit Rates for Establishments and
Firms by Ownership Status, Three-Year Moving Averages


                     Sum of Business Entry and Exit Rates,
                      Publicly Traded versus Privately Held

     30
     25
     20
     15
     10
      5
      0
      1975        1980         1985      1990            1995        2000        2005

             Firm(private)      Firm(public)          Est(private)     Est(public)
Source: Own calculations on LBD data.
Note: The employment-weighted sum of entry and exit rates at t is expressed as a
percentage of the simple average of employment in t − 1 and t.

Figure 10: Industry Employment Shares among Publicly Traded Firms, 1976-2001

                Employment Shares Among Publicly Traded Firms,
                              Selected Industries

     0.6
     0.5
     0.4
     0.3
     0.2
     0.1
      0
      1975         1980        1985       1990           1995        2000        2005

                     Manufacturing     Retail Trade         FIRE      Services

Source: Own calculations using LBD data and COMPUSTAT/LBD Bridge.



49
Figure 11: Modified Volatility by Cohort among Publicly Traded Firms

                  Modified Firm Volatility By Cohort, 1951-2004

  0.25


    0.2


  0.15


    0.1


  0.05
       1   5   9   3   7   1   5   9   3   7   1   5   9    3
    195 195 195 196 196 197 197 197 198 198 199 199 199 200
          1950s        1960s        1970s         1980s        1990s        Left-Censored

Source: Own calculations on COMPUSTAT data.
Notes: Calculations exclude entry and exit. Firm volatility calculated according to
equation (6). Average volatility computed on an employment-weighted basis.

Figure 12: Employment Shares by Cohort, Publicly Traded Firms

              Share of Employment By Cohort, 1950-2004

    1
   0.9
   0.8
   0.7
   0.6
   0.5
   0.4
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
    0
     50      54 958 962 966 970 974 978 982 986 990 994 998 002
   19     19    1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   2

          1950s        1960s         1970s        1980s        1990s         Left-Censored

Source: Own calculations on COMPUSTAT data
Figure 13: The Role of Size, Age, Industry and Cohort Effects for Publicly Trade Firms

               Modified Volatility among Publicly Traded Firms: The
                 Role of Size, Age, Industry and Cohort Effects

     0.18

     0.16

     0.14

     0.12

      0.1

     0.08
            1951
                   1954
                           1957
                                  1960
                                         1963
                                                1966
                                                       1969
                                                               1972
                                                                      1975
                                                                             1978
                                                                                    1981
                                                                                           1984
                                                                                                  1987
                                                                                                         1990
                                                                                                                1993
                                                                                                                        1996
                                                                                                                               1999
                                                                                                                                      2002
                            No Controls                  Size                Size, Age & Industry                      Cohort

Source: Own calculations on COMPUSTAT data.
Notes: Calculations exclude entry and exit. Firm volatility calculated according to
equation (6). Average volatility computed on an employment-weighted basis.

Figure 14: Firm Volatility Compared to Unemployment Inflows and Outflows

                          Firm Volatility and Unemployment
                                         Flows
     4.0                                                                                                                              0.6
     3.5                                                                                                                              0.55
     3.0                                                                                                                              0.5
     2.5                                                                                                                              0.45
     2.0                                                                                                                              0.4
     1.5                                                                                                                              0.35
           1977           1981            1985                1989           1993           1997            2001


                          Unemployment Inflow                                         Unemployment Outflow
                          Volatility (Right axis)

Source: Figure 6 for volatility measure and the Current Population Survey.
Notes: Unemployment flows are annual averages of monthly flows, expressed as a
percentage of the labor force.

51
     Figure 15: Selection on Risk and Firm Ownership Status




     Publicly
     Traded
     Firms




                                Firm level Risk Æ




52
