NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFLATION AND GROWTH

Stanley Fischer

Working Paper No. 1235

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1983

The research reported here is part of the NBERts research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1235
November 1983

Inflation and Growth

ABSTRACT

Models of inflation and growth in the sixties emphasized the
portfolio substitution mechanism by which higher inflation made capital
more attractive to hold relative to money, leading to higher capital
intensity, and in the transition period to higher growth.

The empirical

evidence, however, is that growth and inflation are negatively correlated.
Reasons for this negative correlation are investigated, and then embodied

in a simple monetary maximizing model. Higher inflation is associated
with lower growth because lower real balances reduce the efficiency of
factors of production, and because there may be a link between government

purchases and the use of the inflation tax. Comparative steady states
and comparative dynamics is analyzed and the generally negative association

between inflation and growth, both in steady states and in transition
processes, is demonstrated.

Stanley Fischer
Department of Economics
M.I.T. E52—280A

Cambridge, MA 02139
(617) 253—6666

INFLATION kND GROWTH

Stanley Fischer*
Much of Miguel Sidrauski's research focussed on the relationship between

inflation and economic growth. Two of his contributions stand out. The first is
the famous intertemporal optimizing model (1967a)——the

Sidrauski model-—in which

the basic result is that changes in the growth rate of money have no effect on

the capital stock in the long run. The second is his paper (1967b) developing
Tobin's (1965) money and growth model, with constant savings rate, in which the

equilibrium capital intensity increases with the inflation rate. In the short

run

in

this model, though, an increase in the growth rate of money reduces the

growth rate of output while increasing the inflation rate.
Sidrauski's approach to the money, inflation, and growth question emphasized
portfolio substitution as the basic driving force in determining the relationship

between inflation and growth. For instance, in his descriptive model (Sidrausici
(1967b)), an increase in the growth rate of money leads to an increase in the
expected rate of inflation, thereby reducing the demand for real balances. With
the savings rate given, more of savings takes the form of physical capital and

less is in (high—powered) money. Equilibrium capital intensity is thereby

increased. Fiscal factors enter in the background, since in both these papers
the money stock is changed through lump sum transfer payments.

*Prepared for delivery as the Miguel Sidrauski Memorial Lecture. Latin American
Econometric Society Meetings, Santiago, Chile, July 21, 1983. I am grateful to
David' Wilcox for research assistance and the National Science Foundation for
financial support.

—2--

In his work with Duncan Foley (1970 and 1971), Sidrauski was able both to
use a more sophisticated definition of monetary policy and to take a step away

from the treatment of money growth as exogenous to the economy. There are three
assets in the Foley-Sidrauski model, money, bonds, and capital. The three assets
are imperfect portfolio substitutes. Monetary policy is now defined by changes
in the ratio of money to bonds, caused for instance by an open market operation.

Because money and bonds are imperfect substitutes, open market operations have

real effects.1 In this work the government is viewed as having desired paths for
the inflation rate and other endogenous variables and as using its policy
variables——including the composition of the debt, and the growth rate of the
nominal stock of debt—-to achieve those paths.

In the Foley-Sidrauski model, changes in the actual and expected inflation

rates typically increase the steady state capital stock.2 The change in the
capital stock is again the consequence of the portfolio shift away from money
towards capital that accompanies a reduction in the expected real return on
money, combined with the specification of the consumption function.

If the

change in the inflation rate occurs as a result of a change in the rate of growth
of the nominal stock of debt, with the composition of the debt being adjusted

1The importance of assumptions about asset substitutability was emphasized by
Tobin (1961). It is clear that the Foloy—Sidrauski model owes part of its
structure to the Yale tradition in which Foley was trained. This is evident not
only in the asset menu but also in the key role played in the model by the
relative price of capital, which in this two—sector model is equivalent to
Tobin's "q" in a one—sector model.

2The analysis is presented in Chapter 12 of Foley—Sidrauski (1971). It is
interesting to note that in this chapter, the authors take great care that jumps
in the price—level are prevented through appropriate monetary and fiscal policy
when the inflation rate changes. This is so that the government does not
"dissappoint private expectations" (p.190). However, in the exercises presented
in Chapter 12, a change in the expected rate of inflation may change the relative
price of capital unanicipatedly, so that the analysis cannot be taken as
assuming perfect foresight.

-3-

through monetary policy to prevent a jump in the price level when the inflation
rate changes, there is no effect on the capital stock of a change in the
inflation rate.

Despite the ambiguities of the relationship between inflation and capital
intensity in Sidrauski's work, the overall results suggest that higher inflation

will be associated with higher capital intensity. This has no implications for
the inflation—growth relationship since in steady state the the rate of growth is

determined by population and productivity increase. But the steady state capital
inten8it3r-iflflatiofl relationship implies a relationship between inflation and

growth in the adjustment process. If a higher inflation rate is associated with
higher capital intensity, then in the transition from one steady state to another
the growth rate of output has on average to be above the growth rate of

population and productivity. Thus if higher inflation is associated with greater
capital intensity, we should expect that on average higher inflaton rates will be

associated with higher growth rates of output. Further, even in the Sidrauski
optimizing model, increases in the inflation rate that do not affect the steady
state capital stock may increase the growth rate of output in the short run.

(Fischer, i979).
•

Sidrauski wrote his papers on inflation and growth in the second half of the

1960's. After the stagflationary decade of the 1970's, we would be surprised to
find any systematic relationship between the growth rate of output and the

inflation rate. Equations (Ri) and (R2) present the results of cross—section
31n Sidrauski (1967b) an increase in the growth rate of money in the short run is
associated with a lower growth rate of output, despite the positive relationship
between steady state inflation and capital intensity. This result depends on the
assumption of adaptive expectations; it disappears if expectations are formed
rationally and the price level is allowed to jump when the growth rate of money
changes.

-4-

time—series regressions for the periods 1961—1973 and 1973-1981 respectively for
a sample of 53 countries, chosen purely by the availability of data on the
International Financial Statistics tapes.t'

=

(Ri)

a

+

at

—

.O49Y,_1

—

(.044)

•i92P,

+
(.023)

(.022)

2

R = .508
=

(R2)

a+

+ .34lcY1,..i
(.047)

—

.S68P1,
(.021)

+
(.045)

2

R = .803

In these regressions
and

is the growth rate of output in country i in period t,

is the inflation rate. The time period and country specific

coefficients, at and a are not presented.
Both regressions show the same pattern: a negative contemporaneous
relationship between growth and the inflation rate, and a positive lagged

relationship. The coefficients of the inflation variables are strongly
significant in all cases. Taking averages across the 54 countries for the two
time periods, we obtain the data presented in Table 1. As we would have
expected, there is no sign of a positive relationship between inflation and

growth between the two periods. And even within each sub-period, the regressions
show a predominately negative rather than positive relationship between inflation
• and growth.

£The sample is not random, since it is the higher income countries that typically
maintain more complete data. The countries are listed in appendix 1.

—5—

Table 1: Inflation and Growth, Annual Averages Across Countries and Years
per annum)
1961 —1973

Years
Inflation rate
Growth rate

1973—1981

6.83
5.10

14.31

4.33

The facts thus disagree with the implication that inflation and growth are
positively correlated: there is a significant negative contemporaneous

correlation. In the next section I review hypotheses about the links among
inflation, output, and growth. Then in the remainder of the paper I present a
simple Sidrauski type optimizing model based on some of these links that suggests

why we might observe a negative relationship between inflation and growth.

1. The Mechanisms Linking Inflation, Output, and Growth.
There are several economic mechanisms linking inflation, output, and

growth. (i) The first is the portfolio link emphasized by Sidrauski. An
increase in the expected rate of inflation causes a shift from money to capital

in the portfolio. In a two sector model this increases the relative price of
installed capital, leading to higher rates of investment and growth, and

ultimately to higher capital intensity in production. However, savings behavior

may sever the link. For instance, if savings drives the real interest rate to
equality with the rate of time preference (adjusted for growth), changes in the

inflation rate may leave the steady state capital intensity unaffected, as in

—6—

Sidrau ski (1 967a) .5

(ii) Non-adjustment of the tax system for inflation may make the aftertax real return to capital a decreasing function of the inflation rate, even if

the pre-tax rate of return is independent of the inflation rte. This is the
mechanism emphasized by Feldstein (1976). This mechanism tends to reduce steady
state capital intensity as the inflation rate rises.

(iii) If the growth rate of the money stock is given, an inrrease in the
growth rate of output tends to reduce the inflation rate because the demand for

real balances increases more rapidly. Equivalently, an adverse supply shock will
lead to an increase in the inflation rate at the same time as the level of output
or, in the short run, the growth rate of output, declines.

(iv) If government spending is financed in part through the printing of
money, then a reduction in the growth rate of output, reducing the demand for
real balances, may require the government to increase the growth rate of money.
This is a special case of "passive money", the approach emphasized by Olivera
(1970).

(v) Increases in the inflation rate lead to lower real balances and the

diversion of real resources to the makingof transactions. This reduces output.
More generally, it appears that higher rates of inflation—-anticipated as well as
unanticipated-—reduce the efficiency of the price system, and reduce factor
productivity.

5Dornbusch and Frenkel (1973) show that the relationship between inflation and
equilibrium capital intensity depends on the reduced form effect of an increase
in the inflation rate on consumption.

-7—

(iv)

The short—run Phillips curve implies that increases in output and

the inflation rate (perhaps the unanticipated inflation rate) are positively
associated.

In this lecture I use a variant of the Sidrauski optimizing model to study
the relationships among inflation, output, and growth under the assumptions that
money enters the production function, and that the printing of money is used to

finance government spending. I thus embody in the model two of the potential
links between inflation and growth that were outlined above: reductions in real

balances reduce the productivity of factors of production (point (v)); and that
changes in the inflation rate may be a result of changes in government spending

(point (iv)). I shall also examine the effects of supply shocks, thus allowing
also for the impact of autonomous changes in ouput on the inflation rate (point

(iii)). The general results to be expected are that inflation and growth will be
negatively related.

2. An Optimizing Model with Money in the Production Function.
I start with a simple model in which the growth rate of money is exogeneous

but money enters the production function rather than the utility function. As
noted by Sidrauski in his thesis (1967c, p.53), the inclusion of money in the
production function removes the superneutrality of money that is the best known

result of his monetary optimizing model. Money is included in the production
function to represent the notion that higher levels of real balances free labor

and other resources for productive use. The practice can be rigorously
justified. (Fischer, 1974).
The representative family maximizes the additively separable utility
functional

-8-

(1) V0 = .i0u(ct)e

-ot

dt

subject to the constraints

(2) at =
(3)

rkt + w+

itmt

+ Vt -

c - flat

akt+mt

Most letters represent the standard variables and all relevant variables are per
capita: a is wealth, r the real interest rate, w the wage rate, i the nominal
interest rate, it

the

expected inflation rate, v is the real per capita value of

the transfers through which money balances are introduced, n is the growth rate

of the family. The family has amount at of wealth at time t that it allocates
between capital and the holding of money.

The money stock is growing at a constant write 0, so that the real value,
S

I

M

per capita, of transfer payments v. is equal to

=

-

MM

=

where P is the price level and N is population.
Physical capital and real balances are rented to firms at rental rates of r
and

i respectively. Firms maximize profits, producing output by the neoclassical

production function

"

= f(k,m)

where again all variables are per capita.

First order conditions for an interior maximum
(5)

u'

(6)

for

the household are

=

— itt

=

rt

.

x1

uc
(7) _—---_Here

is the multiplier on the flow budget constraint (2). Note that for an

—9-

interior maximum

the

real returns on capital and real balances have to be equal.

First order conditions for the figure are:
(8) fk(1C,m) =

(9) f(k,m) =

r

i

=

rt itt
+

a function of k and
For later purposes it is useful to solve (8) and (9) for it as
rn:6

> 0
=fmm -fkm <0
=

= it(k,m)

(10) it

1mic

it

2

From the definition of the per capita money stock m

=

we obtain

(ii) m = Le — (jt(k,m) + n)jm
The Steady State: In steady state k, m, c, and it

are constant. From (ii) we

obtain that in steady state:

(12) i = e - n
where it

is

=

,t(k,m)

the steady state rate of inflation. From (7) we obtain:

(13) r* = 8 + n =

fk(k,m)

implying that the real interest rate is invariant to the steady state inflation
rate.

However, money is not superneutral in this model. Using (12) and (13) and
> 0 we show in Figure 1 the loci in (k,m) space

making the assumption that
.

on which c and m are zero: these are equations (13) and (12) respectively.

It

.

can be shown

that

the (c =

0)

locus is steeper than the (in =

0)

schedule.

6[t is more intuitive to think of (8) and (9) as giving demand functions for the
factors of production as functions of r and it. Equation (10) then merely inverts
the relationship. For simplicity I henceforth assume f > 0.

In

(o)
(=O)

k

9ure 1: Determination of Steady—State Peal Balances and Capital.
In

/
/
/

/

/
'I
/

//

I,
(i=O)

I,

/
k

Figure 2: The Effects of an Increase in the Grcth Rate of Population.

-10-

Now, using (12), an increase in the growth rate of money (which increases
S

S

the steady state inflation rate) shifts the (in =

0)

locus down to (in =

0)'.

k and in fall, and equilibrium output per capita therefore falls. Thus, as

Both
is to

be expected in this case, higher inflation reduces output. In the transition
between steady states, higher inflation is accompanied by lower output growth.

Similarly, in Figure 2 e analyze the effects of an increase in the rate of
S

S

population growth, n. Both the (in = 0) and (c

0) loci shift back as shown, to

S

(in =

0)'

and (c =

0)'

respectively. It can be shown that the shifts are such as

to reduce both k* and m. The economy thus moves from a position like E to one
like B'. Per capita steady state output is thus reduced.

Since an increase in n

reduces the steady state inflation rate we once again have a negative
relationship between inflation and output, this time across steady states. By
the same token, we should expect a negative relationship in the transition
between steady states.

The Steady State with Productivity Growth. Assume next that there is labor
augmenting technical progress at rate p., and that the utility function is of the
form:
C

I -R

(14) iJ(c) =

R > 0

where R is the coefficient of relative risk aversion and also the elasticity of
marginal utility.

In this case there exists a steady state in which ratios of variables to

effective labor units are constant. The steady state real interest rate is given
by

(15) r* = 8 + n + R p.
and the steady state inflation rate is

—11—

(16) i* = e

(

—

+

The growth rate and the inflation rate are inversely related in this case

too. Further, it appears likely, though not certain, that the short run
relationship between output growth and inflation is also negative. The ambiguity
arises because there may be a phase of capital decumulation and perhaps lower
growth immediately after the increase in the rate of productivity growth.7

The Adjustment Path. I assume there is perfect foresight so that actual and
expected inflation rates are the same. In that case the dynamic equations of the
model are (17), (ii) and (7):

(17) kt =
(7)

(ii)

f(kt,mt)

=

c

-

-

nkt

La + n -

in = Le

—

(it(m,k)

+ n)Jm

Equation (17) is not an explicit constraint on the behavior of any individual
agent in the model, but has to be satisfied in perfect foresight equilbrium.

It is shown in Appendix 2 that there is a unique stable root for the dynamic

system (17), (7) and (ii), linearized around the steady state. The solution for
the optimal path of the capital stock can be written as

(18) kt -

k = (k0_k*)eZt

where z is the unique stable root of the system, k* is the steady state capital
stock, and k0 is the initial capital stock.

The behavior of the inflation rate in the adjustment process can be derived
from (10), given the dynamics of in and k. In particular, we obtain

7Because k and in are now ratios of capital and real balances respectively to
effective and not actual labor, it is difficult to compare the pre— and post—
productivity increase situations.

—12—

(19) n =

z+lt2rn

Both numerator and denominator of the ratio in (19) are negative, so that the

ratio itself is positive. This means that the rate of inflation is increasing so
long as capital is being accumulated. This result may appear paradoxical until
we realize that on the adjustment path the growth rate of the capital stock is

falling as capital is accumulated. Thus we find a negative relationship between
the rate of inflation and the rate of growth on the adjustment path.

A Supply Shock: Suppose that the economy is in a steady state, and that there is

a Hicks-neutral supply shock. We represent this by rewriting the production
function (4) as

4'

=

Af(k,m)

The supply shock is represented by a fall in A from 1 to a lower level.

We can analyze the consequences of a fall in A by considering its effects on

the equilibrium capital stock. Using equations (12) and (13), it can be shown
that an adverse Hicks—neutral supply shock reduces both the equilibrium capital

stock and the equilibrium stock of real balances. Dynamic adjustment thus takes
the form of a gradual reduction of the capital stock, accompanied by a falling
inflation rate.

Since the steady state inflation rate after the permanent supply shock is
back to the level at which it started, the transition period is marked by higher
than steady state inflation, along with lower than steady state growth as capital

is being decumulated. Again, there is a negative relationship between the rate
of growth of ouput and the inflation rate in the adju3trnent process.

—13—

In the model of this section in which the rate of growth of the money stock
is exogenous, the predominant relationship between the inflation rate on one hand

and the growth rate or the level of ouput on the other hand is negative. In
every case we have examined, we have found such a negative relationship. The
primary difference between the structure of the present model and that of
Sidrauski (1967a) is that money is treated in this section as a factor of

production, rather than an argument of the utility function. This-—as noted by
Sidrauski-—makes for non-neutrality of the inflation rate.

Beyond this, the theory also suggests that the inflation rate and the growth

rate of output should in general be negatively correlated. Such a result also
obtains in Sidrauski's model for certain of the exercises we have examined. For
instance, given the growth rate of the money stock, an increase in the rate of
productivity growth will reduce the steady state inflation rate in both this

model and Sidrauski's. Thus there is no implication even in the original
Sidrauski model that there can be only a one—directional relationship between
inflation and growth.

3. Money Financing of Government Spending.
The final possible link we examine between inflation and output arises from

the use of the inflation tax to finance government spending.8 The set-up changes

very little. In equation (2), the consumer's flow budget constraint, the term v
disappears since the government no longer makes transfer payments. First order
conditions for both households and firms are unchanged, as is the inflation
equation (10).

8See Dornbusch (1977) for an earlier analysis of endogenous money.

-14-

The changes come in the description of the dynamic system, equations (7),

(11) and (17). Assume that government purchases each period are equal to yc.
The ratio of government purchases to consumption is now constant.9 The dynamic
equations are:
.

(20)

k =

(21) c =
(22)

f(k,m)

— c(1 +

y)

—

nk

ii-(8 + '' — fk(k,m))

in = yc

—

[t(m,k)

+

n]m

The following results can be demonstrated, for small values of y. First,
with constant y there is a unique perfect foresight path for the economy, with

the same dynamic behavior as that in Section 2. Second, there are the expected
comparative steady state results. An increase in y-—an increase in government
spending financed through the inflation tax——reduces steady state real balances
and capital stock, and increases the steady state inflation rate.

It was to be expected, given that real balances enter the production
function, that we would find here as in the previous model a negative steady—

state relationship between inflation and output. However, the result is not
dependent on the inclusion of real balances in the production function, for even
if money were a consumer good as in the original Sidrauski maximizing model, we
would find a similar relationship.

4.

Concluding

Comments.

Ye have shown, using essentially the model introduced by Sidrauski, that
several economic factors can each account for the observed negative relationship
between inflation and growth or between inflation and output-—even overlooking

91n a more complete analysis with a maximizing government, this ratio could be
endogenous.

—15—

the possibly significant tax effects. It is only the Phillips curve that
suggests we might find an opposite relationship between inflation and growth, at

least in the short run. But the present model, in which there is full
information and full flexibility of prices, is not well—suited to the analysis of
the Phillips curve.

Of course, the contrast between the results in this paper and those in
Sidrauski (1967a) suggest a warning that is conveyed also by considering the
history of the Phillips curve: there is unlikely to be a unique correlation
between two endogenous variables that is independent of the disturbances—-policy

induced or otherwise-—that cause them to change. Typically someone examining a
relationship like that between inflation and growth has a policy question in
mind: for instance, does money financing of a deficit result in a higher capital

stock than debt financing? It is preferable to address the policy question
directly than to ask about the general relationship between inflation and
growth.

Many of the results presented in this lecture are derived from comparative

steady state analysis. But it is noteworthy that it is also possible to use the
models to examine impact effects of policy changes and to study the adjustment

process. The only innovation here is the use of perfect foresight, for in his
thesis Sidrauski examined adjustment processes in his maximizing model, using

adaptive expectations. Sidrauski of course did not use rational expectations
assumptions in his work. But in his building of a complete macro model with
maximizing agents, he was thoroughly in the spirit that is dominant in much of
macroeconomics today.

—16—

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Dornbusch, Rudiger (1977), "Inflation, Capital, and Deficit Finance," Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 9 (Feb.), 141—150.

________ and Jacob A. Frenkel (1973), "Inflation and Growth: Alternative
Approaches," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 5 (Feb.), 141—156.

Feldstein, Martin (1976), "Inflation, Income Taxes, and the Rate of Interest: A
Theoretical Analysis," American Economic Review, 66 (Dec.), 809—820.
Fischer, Stanley (1974), "Money and the Production Function," Economic Inguiry,
(Dec.) 517—533.

________ (1979), "Capital Accumulation on the Transition Path in a Monetary
Optimizing Model," Econometrica, 47 (Nov.), 1433—1439.
Foley, Duncan and Miguel Sidrauski (1970), "Portfolio Choice, Investment and
Growth," American Economic Review, 60 (March), 44—63.

______— (1971), Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a Growing Economy, New York:
Macmillan.

Olivera, Julio H. G. (1970), "On Passive Money," Journal of Political Economy,
78, 4 (Part II) (July/Aug.), 805—809.

Sidrauski, Miguel (1967a), "Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary
Economy," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 57 (May), 534544.

_______ (1967b), "Inflation and Economic Growth," Journal of Political Economy,
75, (Dec.), 796—810.

________ (1967c), "Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary Economy,"
unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.

Tobin, James (1961), "Money, Capital, and Other Stores of Value," American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 51 (May), 26—37.
(1965), "Money and Economic Growth," Econometrica, 33, (Oct.) 671—684.

</ref_section>

-17-

Appendix 1

Countries Included in the Data Sample.

Argentina

Korea

Australia

Luxembourg

Austria

Malawi

Belgium

Nepal

Burma

Netherlands

Canada

New Zealand

Columbia

Nigeria

Costa Rica

Norway

Cyprus

Pakistan

Denmark

Paraguay

Ecuador

Peru

El Salvador

Phillipines

Finland

Singapore

France

South Africa

Germany

Spain

Greece

Sweden

Guyana

Switzerland

Haiti

Thailand

Honduras

Tunisia

Iceland

Turkey

India

United Kingdom

Indonesia

United States

Ireland

Venezuela

Israel

Yugoslavia

Italy

Zaire

Jamaica

Zambia

Japan

-18-

Appendix 2: Stability Analysis

1. The model discussed in Section 2 is described by equations (17), (7),

and (ii). Linearizing those equations around the steady state we obtain:

I

k
•

.Al)

=

C

-

U

•
in

f

-1

6

r

dk

in

r

f

0

0

—lt1m

-

U

I

d C

din

it2m

2. The determinant of the above system is

(A2)

=

m.u'

-

f2]

< 0

Since the determinant is the product of the roots, there are either one or three
negative roots.

3. The trace of the above matrix is

(A3) Tr5 -it2in>0
The trace is the sum of the roots. Since the sum of the roots is positive, not
all roots can be negative. Accordingly there is only one negative root.

