NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSIDE THE FAMILY FIRM: THE ROLE OF FAMILIES
IN SUCCESSION DECISIONS AND PERFORMANCE
Morten Bennedsen
Kasper M. Nielsen
Francisco Pérez-González
Daniel Wolfenzon
Working Paper 12356
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12356
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2006
Contact information: Bennedsen (mb.eco@cbs.dk), Nielsen (kmn.fi@cbs.dk), Pérez-González
(fp2010@columbia.edu), and Wolfenzon (dwolfenz@stern.nyu.edu). We thank Renee Adams, Marianne
Bertrand, Douglas Diamond, Mariassunta Giannetti, Denis Gromb, Maria Guadalupe, Atif Mian, Thomas
Rønde, Jonah Rockoff, Amir Sufi, Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, David Yermack, and seminar participants at
Aarhus School of Business, BI Norwegian School of Management, Brown (economics), Chicago (GSB),
Columbia (GSB), Copenhagen Business School, Duke (Fuqua), Harvard Business School, Harvard Law
School, MIT (Sloan), Northwestern (Kellogg), Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (Business), Maryland (Smith),
SUNY (Binghamton), Texas-Austin (McCombs), Stanford (GSB), the finance lunch at Chicago GSB, the
CEPR annual meeting in Gerzensee, the Corporate Governance of Closely Held Firms Conference in
Copenhagen, the CEBR conference on Entrepreneurship: Occupational Choice and Financing, and the
Berkley Center for Entrepreneurial studies at Stern for comments. Pérez-González thanks Chicago-GSB for
providing a stimulating research environment while writing this paper. We are grateful to the Berkley Center
for Entrepreneurial Studies, CEBR and the Danish Social Science Research Foundation (project GOCOW)
for financial support. We are also grateful to the Danish Commerce and Companies Agency and the Research
Office in Statistics Denmark for providing us with data. We thank Frederik Vinten for excellent research
assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Morten Bennedsen, Kasper M. Nielsen, Francisco Pérez-González and Daniel Wolfenzon. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Inside the Family Firm: The Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance
Morten Bennedsen, Kasper M. Nielsen, Francisco Pérez-González and Daniel Wolfenzon
NBER Working Paper No. 12356
July 2006
JEL No. G32, G34, M13
ABSTRACT
This paper uses a unique dataset from Denmark to investigate the impact of family characteristics
in corporate decision making and the consequences of these decisions on firm performance. We
focus on the decision to appoint either a family or external chief executive officer (CEO). The paper
uses variation in CEO succession decisions that result from the gender of a departing CEO’s
firstborn child. This is a plausible instrumental variable (IV), as male first-child firms are more likely
to pass on control to a family CEO than are female first-child firms, but the gender of the first child
is unlikely to affect firms’ outcomes. We find that family successions have a large negative causal
impact on firm performance: operating profitability on assets falls by at least four percentage points
around CEO transitions. Our IV estimates are significantly larger than those obtained using ordinary
least squares. Furthermore, we show that family-CEO underperformance is particularly large in
fast-growing industries, industries with highly skilled labor force and relatively large firms. Overall,
our empirical results demonstrate that professional, non-family CEOs provide extremely valuable
services to the organizations they head.
Daniel Wolfenzon
NYU Stern School of Business
Finance Department
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
dwolfenz@stern.nyu.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Family firms have gained increasing attention in the economics and finance literature due
to recent research showing that the majority of firms around the world are controlled by their
founders or their founders’ descendants [La Porta, López-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1999; Morck,
Stangeland, and Yeung, 2000; Claessens, Fan, and Lang, 2000; Faccio and Lang, 2002]. Even in
the United States, where firm ownership is widely dispersed [Berle and Means, 1932], founding
families own and control at least one-third of large, publicly held firms [Anderson and Reeb,
2003].
One of the most contentious issues surrounding family firms relates to chief executive
officer (CEO) succession decisions. CEO transitions are likely to play a key role in determining a
firm’s prospects and they are arguably influenced by the preferences of controlling families, which
often struggle between hiring a family member or an unrelated CEO.
From a theoretical perspective, the impact of family CEOs on performance is ambiguous
[Donnelley, 1964]. Family CEOs could perform better than other managers because they are
exposed to higher non-monetary rewards associated with the firms’ success that other CEOs do not
share [Kandel and Lazear, 1992; Davis, Schoorman, and Donaldson, 1997]. They are also argued to
have hard-to-obtain, firm-specific knowledge and higher levels of trust from key stakeholders
[Donnelley, 1964]. Further, family managers could have a long-term focus that unrelated CEOs
lack [Cadbury, 2000]. In contrast, family CEOs might underperform due to tensions between
family and business objectives [Christiansen, 1953; Levinson, 1971; Barnes and Hershon, 1976;
Lansberg, 1983] and, perhaps most importantly, due to the fact they are selected from a small pool
of managerial talent [Burkart, Panunzi and Shleifer, 2003; Pérez-González, 2006].
The controversy has deepened in light of recent research that has shown large declines in
firm performance around family CEO appointments [Pérez-González, 2006], leading to significant
underperformance of heir-controlled firms, relative to those managed by unrelated CEOs [Morck et

1

al., 2000; Pérez-González, 2006; Villalonga and Amit, 2006]. 1 Furthermore, the consequences of
allocating assets to inferior managerial talent can potentially extend beyond family firms, hurting
aggregate total factor productivity and economic growth [Morck et al., 2000; Caselli and
Gennaioli, 2004; Bloom and Van Reenen, 2006].
An important concern with pre-existing studies on the impact of family or family-heir
status on firm performance is that they rely either on pure cross-sectional variation in family-CEO
status [Morck et al., 2000; Villalonga and Amit, 2006; Bloom and Van Reenen, 2006], or on
changes in family-CEO status around management turnover [Pérez-González, 2006], both of which
are unlikely to be random. 2 As a result, it has been difficult to establish whether family CEOs do
indeed hurt firm performance.
The objective of this paper is to isolate the causal effect of family CEOs on firm
performance. To this end, we use heterogeneity in the outgoing CEOs family characteristics as a
plausible source of exogenous variation in management succession decisions. 3 To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first paper that seeks to establish the causal effect of family CEOs on firm
performance.
To assess this question empirically, we construct a dataset that contains accounting and
management information for the universe of limited liability firms in Denmark. Our dataset is
unique because we are able to link top managers in the sample to their family information in the
official Danish Civil Registration System. These records contain information related to individuals’
marital histories and children, which allow us to construct detailed CEOs’ family trees.
1

Beyond the focus of family descendants, the impact of family firms on performance has been previously
examined by Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny [1988], Yermack [1996], McConaughy, Walker, Henderson, and
Mishra [1998], Anderson and Reeb [2003], and Adams, Almeida, and Ferreira [2005], among others, with
mixed results.
2
Family status and low performance ex-post could be explained, for example, by an endogenously
determined board that is optimally weak relative to the CEO [Hermalin and Weisbach, 1998; Weisbach,
1988] and by mean-reversion. Alternative, omitted variables, such as, anti-takeover provisions [Gompers,
Ishii, and Metrick, 2003] could explain both results.
3
Our focus on the interaction between family characteristics and economic decisions relates to the seminal
work of Becker [1981] and to the large body of work in economics that links the gender of offspring to
various economic decisions [Angrist and Evans, 1998; Dahl and Moretti, 2004; and Bertrand, Johnson,
Samphantharak and Schoar, 2005, among others].

2

Using this dataset we are able to replicate the difference-in-differences (DD) result that
firms that promote a family CEO underperform relative to those that choose an unrelated CEO
[Pérez-González, 2006]. Yet, as anticipated above, an important drawback of the least squares DD
estimates is that they are subject to endogeneity and omitted variables problems. For example, even
when family and unrelated CEOs are equally competent, the DD estimator might erroneously
attribute differential improvements in investment opportunities to a gap in CEO abilities.
To overcome these concerns, we study the impact of family CEOs on firm performance
using instrumental variables (IVs). We focus on variation in CEO succession decisions arising
from heterogeneity in the outgoing CEO’s family characteristics. As in Bertrand et al. [2005], we
find that family size and marital history affect both the decision to appoint family CEOs, as well as
which family member (child, spouse, etc.) is promoted. However, using these variables as
instrumental variables is potentially problematic if these family characteristics respond to economic
incentives [Becker, 1981].
Consequently, we instrument for family successions using a family trait that is likely to be
randomly assigned: the gender of the firstborn child of a departing CEO. 4 The gender of the first
child is a plausible instrument for family successions because it affects the probability of observing
a family succession (primogeniture) and because it is unlikely to be correlated with firms’
prospects. For departing CEOs in the sample, it is likely to be determined by nature: over 80
percent of first-child births occurred prior to 1980, before current techniques to identify the gender
of children were widespread. Moreover, there is no evidence, that we are aware of, related to a
“missing women” problem [Sen, 1992] in Denmark.
We show that the gender of the firstborn child of a departing CEO is strongly correlated
with the decision to appoint a family CEO: the frequency of family transitions is 29.4 percent when

4

The paper also provides results for alternative instruments, such as the number of male children or the ratio
of male to total children.

3

the firstborn child is female, and increases to 39 percent (a 32.7 percent increase) when the
firstborn is male. This difference is statistically significant at the one-percent level.
To assess if the gender of the first child is likely to affect firm or family characteristics
through channels other than the choice of succeeding CEOs, we compare firm and family traits for
male first-child and female first-child firms at the time of CEO succession. We find that firms’
profitability, age, and size do not differ statistically as a function of the gender of the first child.
Moreover, the family characteristics of departing CEOs are comparable across groups: the number
of children, spouses, and even the divorce rate are not significantly different for male first-child or
female first-child firms. These results strengthen the case for the gender of the first child as a
plausible instrumental variable for family CEO decisions.
Following the CEO turnover literature [Denis and Denis, 1995; Huson, Malatesta, and
Parrino, 2004; Pérez-González, 2006], our main variable of interest is the change in operating
return on assets (OROA) around CEO succession decisions. In assessing differential performance
around CEO transitions, we adjust OROA using industry- and industry-and-performance-matched
benchmarks to control for industry-wide trends and for potential mean-reversion in accounting
variables [Barber and Lyon, 1996].
Our main finding is that family successions are significantly negatively correlated with
firm performance around CEO successions. The relationship between family successions and firm
performance is extremely strong and economically large: family CEOs cause an average decline in
firm profitability on assets of at least four percentage points. Our IV results are significantly larger
than those obtained using ordinary least squares (OLS), which might point to large biases in OLS
estimates. Heir underperformance is robust to the inclusion of an array of controls for firm
characteristics that have been found in the literature to affect firms’ prospects around succession.
Moreover, the results are not explained by mean-reversion in firm performance.
While the gender of the first child is likely to provide exogenous variation in terms of the
identity of incoming CEOs, the timing of successions is unlikely to be random. We test for

4

differences in pre- and post-CEO transition changes in performance and we fail to find significant
differences in performance across groups prior to CEO transitions. Also, we do not observe familyCEO firms recovering after CEO transitions, bolstering the case for the causal interpretation of our
findings.
To further address potential concerns related to the timing of transitions, we instrument for
family CEOs using the death of departing chief executives around succession as an instrument
[Johnson, Magee, Nagarajan, and Newman, 1985]. Deaths provide likely exogenous variation in
the timing of succession, yet they might raise concerns related to the exclusion restriction. Deaths
can affect firms and families through channels other than the identity of a CEO replacement. We
find that using deaths as an alternative instrument, however, leads to the same conclusion: family
CEOs hurt firm profitability.
Another concern with the above-described results is that they might be explained by
reported, but not real, differences in performance. Family CEOs might be more prone to divert
firms’ cash flows to the controlling family relative to unrelated CEOs, even when the core
operating performance of the two groups of firms is identical. We test for this empirically by
examining whether the results are explained by firms that lack a formal board of directors or by
small firms, which presumably are more susceptible to such behavior. We show that this is not the
case.
The superior performance of unrelated CEOs might instead be explained by changes in the
governance structure of firms and not by managerial ability. That would occur if, for example,
acquisitions accounted for a significant share of unrelated transitions. We show that family CEOs
underperform relative to unrelated managers even when the departing CEO’s family remains on the
board of directors after transition.
We also examine whether industry characteristics that might be associated with differential
costs of employing “professional,” rather than family CEOs, affect our findings. We find that
family CEOs tend to be costlier in fast-growing industries, as well as in industries with high

5

relative wages or highly skilled labor forces, environments where managerial skills are presumably
more valuable. Conversely, we do not find a statistically significant gap in performance for firms
that promote family CEOs in industries where family succession concentration is high relative to
the sample. Failing to find significant differences in performance in this latter group might also
help to explain the gap between OLS and IV estimates. The latter estimates are calculated on firms
that promote a family CEO due to the gender of the first child. By randomly selecting family
CEOs, the IV would under-represent those industries where family CEOs are normally present.
We also investigate the impact of family CEOs on alternative measures of performance.
Specifically, we assess the effect of family CEOs on firms’ return on assets (ROA), return on
capital employed (ROCE), total assets, as well as on the likelihood of bankruptcy and liquidation.
ROA and ROCE results underscore the negative impact of family CEOs on firm performance.
Further, we fail to find support for the notion that family CEOs engage in significantly larger
investments relative to unrelated CEOs. Finally, we show that family CEOs are not associated with
lower rates of bankruptcy or liquidation as would be expected if the lower return generated by
family CEOs were the result of a conservative management style. In contrast, and consistent with
family CEOs underperformance, we find that relatively less profitable firms that are managed by
family CEOs are more likely to file for bankruptcy or be liquidated, relative to comparable firms
that are headed by non-family CEOs.
A common caveat in interpreting IV estimates is that not every firm in the sample responds
to the instrument, and as such, the results might only be representative of those firms whose
succession decisions are affected by it [Imbens and Angrist, 1994]. We assess whether the gap in
CEO skills between family and unrelated CEOs is significantly different for the average, relative to
the marginal, family CEOs by comparing the OLS and IV estimates of the differences in previous
job qualifications or educational records for family and unrelated CEOs. We find no statistically
significant differences between OLS and IV estimates. In contrast, and in line with the overall

6

results of the paper, we find that unrelated CEOs are significantly more qualified than family
CEOs: they are more likely to be seasoned CEOs and more likely to have attended college.
An alternative way to interpret our analysis is that it provides a clean test of the direct
effect of professional CEOs on firm performance. An ideal laboratory to test professional CEOs’
worth would be to randomly assign individuals from the general population and professional
managers to the CEO position, and then compare their outcomes. This is close to what the IV
estimator does: it compares the performance of firms with an unrelated CEO to the performance of
firms that promote a family member only because the departing CEO’s firstborn child was male. If
unrelated CEOs were valuable, then the performance of the former firms should exceed the latter,
which is indeed what we find. Professional CEOs seem to provide extremely valuable services to
the organizations they head.
Overall, our results cast doubt on the benefits of promoting a CEO from within the ranks of
the controlling family of a corporation. These findings are important for the governance of both
public and private firms around the world. Controlling families that enjoy the private benefits of
control might select a family CEO even when performance is negatively affected as a result. Other
stakeholders, from minority shareholders to creditors or workers, might not share in these benefits
and would therefore be negatively affected by family successions.
The rest of the paper is as follows. Section II describes the data and presents summary
statistics; Section III outlines our empirical strategy; Section IV presents the results of the paper;
and Section V concludes.

II. DATA DESCRIPTION AND SUMMARY STATISTICS
II.A. Data Sources
We construct a dataset with 5,334 successions between 1994 and 2002 in limited liability
(publicly and privately held) firms in Denmark. Our dataset contains financial information on

7

firms, as well as personal and family information about departing and incoming CEOs. The dataset
was constructed based on three different sources, as explained below.
1. Financial and management information are from Købmandsstandens Oplysningsbureau
(KOB). KOB is a dataset assembled by a private firm using the annual reports that all limited
liability firms are required to file at the Danish Ministry of Economic and Business Affairs. The
dataset contains selected accounting and management information on the universe of limited
liability companies in Denmark. Local regulations only mandate disclosure of firms’ assets and
measures of firm profitability, such as operating or net income. The disclosure of alternative firmlevel attributes, such as sales or employment, is not required, although some firms do selectively
report them. Management data, which all firms are required to report, include the names and
position of executives and board members.
We obtained access to management information from 1994 to 2002, and financial data
from 1991 to 2003. Even though a large fraction of KOB firms are privately held, KOB data are
likely to be reliable, as Danish corporate law requires annual reports to be approved by external
accountants. Given our focus on changes in firm performance around CEO transitions, for our
analysis, we only require that reporting biases are consistent at the firm level.
2. Individual and family data about departing and incoming CEOs are from the official
Danish Civil Registration System. These records include the personal identification number (CPR),
name, gender, and dates of birth and death of all Danish citizens. In addition, these records contain
the names and CPR numbers of parents, siblings, and children, as well as the individual’s marital
history (number of marriages, divorces, and widowhoods). We use these data to construct CEOs’
family trees and to identify whether departing and incoming CEOs are related by blood or
marriage.
3. To match the names of top management reported in KOB with their CPR numbers,
which are needed to access their individual and family information in the Danish Civil Registration
System, we use a database from the Danish Commerce and Companies Agency (Erhvervs- og

8

Selskabsstyrelsen, or ES), at the Ministry of Economic and Business Affairs. The ES dataset
reports both the names and CPR numbers of management and board members of all limited
liability corporations. Under Danish corporate law, firms are required to file with ES any change in
CEO or board positions within two weeks of the actual date of occurrence.
Firm by firm, we match the name of the CEO reported in KOB with the name reported in
the ES dataset. For all these matches, we use the CPR number from ES to obtain family
information from the official Danish Civil Registration System. Based on this procedure, we match
around 90 percent of all managers involved in CEO transitions. In addition, despite the fact that
women often drop their maiden names after marriage, we are able to match men and women
equally well. We do it by using women’s family trees to reconstruct their maiden names, as well as
other names they had in previous marriages. In the paper, we classify an incoming CEO as
“family” whenever official records indicate that the incoming and the departing CEOs are related
by blood or marriage.
We report a CEO succession when four conditions are met: First, based on data from KOB,
the departing (entering) CEO had been (stayed) in his/her position for at least two years. Second,
CEO names were matched to their relevant CPR number using the ES dataset. Third, we required
that matching financial information from KOB was available around CEO transitions and that firm
employment, where available, was not zero. Fourth, we retained the first CEO transition per firm.
II.B. Firm Characteristics
Table I presents summary statistics of the firms in the sample both as a group (Column I)
and classified by the family links between the departing and incoming CEOs. Family (Column II)
indicates the incoming CEO is related by blood or marriage to the departing CEO and unrelated
(Column III) indicates otherwise.
The first row in Table I shows the natural logarithm of total assets for the firms in the
sample. Not surprisingly, firms that undergo family successions are relatively smaller than those

9

that select unrelated CEOs. On average, family succession firms had 2000 Danish Kroner (DKR)
11.2 million or US$1.4 million in assets. 5 In contrast, firms that selected unrelated CEOs had, on
average, DKR 64.4 million or US$8.0 million in assets. The difference in firm size is significant at
the one-percent level.
Given that regulations only mandate disclosure of firms’ assets and measures of
profitability such as operating and net income, in Table I we scale operating and net income using
the book value of assets in order to present comparable measures of firm performance at the time of
CEO transitions.
Operating return on assets (OROA) is measured as the ratio of earnings before interest and
taxes (EBIT) to the book value of assets. OROA is a natural measure of performance that has been
previously used in the CEO turnover literature to assess if firms operations change around
successions [Denis and Denis, 1995; Huson, Malatesta, and Parrino, 2004; Pérez-González, 2006].
It compares a comprehensive proxy of firms’ cash flows (EBIT) to the total asset base used to
generate them. Unlike net income-based measures, such as return on assets, it is unaffected by
differences in the firms’ capital structure decisions. In contrast to return on equity or return on
capital employed, it compares firm performance relative to total assets, not only, a fraction of them.
Average OROA is 6.5 percent for all firms in the sample. Splitting firms by the family links of the
departing CEO, we find that firms that experience family successions are, on average, more
profitable than those firms that promote unrelated CEOs: 7.4 and 6.1 percent, respectively; the
difference of 1.3 percentage points is significant at the one-percent level.
In Table I we also present the ratio of net income to assets, calculated using after-tax
profits relative to the book value of assets. The average net income to assets is 3.3 percent and, as
before, family-CEO firms are more profitable than unrelated-CEO firms at the time of succession.
The difference is 0.7 percent, significant at the 10-percent level.

5

The average exchange rate in 2000 was equivalent to 8.08 Kroner per U.S. dollar (World Development
Indicators).

10

Table I also reports industry-adjusted measures of OROA. Industry controls are calculated
using equally weighted averages of all active firms, including those that do not experience a CEO
transition. For each industry, we require that at least 20 non-event firms exist in any given year. We
favor four-digit industry (NACE, European industry classification system) controls, and move to
two-digits if the 20-firm restriction is not satisfied with four- or three-digit groupings.
Industry-adjusted OROA shows that the difference in profitability for family- and
unrelated-CEO firms is not driven by industry characteristics: the difference is 1.4 percentage
points, comparable to the difference obtained using unadjusted OROA. Finally, Table I shows that
firms in the sample do not systematically differ as a function of age.
Overall, Table I shows that family successions are likely to occur in relatively smaller and
more profitable firms. The marked difference between these firms and those that promote unrelated
CEOs indicates that CEO succession decisions might not be random. As a result, it is not obvious
that family or unrelated CEOs are a fair counterfactual for each other observed succession.
Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to provide a comprehensive view of family
CEO successions in an economy, as prior work has focused on analyzing the characteristics of
these firms using data from publicly traded corporations [for example, Morck et al., 2000; PérezGonzález, 2006; Villalonga and Amit, 2006].

II.C. Family Characteristics and CEO Succession Decisions
In Table II we explore the correlation between family characteristics and the choice of
incoming CEO. We present the number and share of CEO transitions when classified as family
(Columns II and III) or unrelated (Columns IV and V) successions. We further breakdown family
successions into family—children transitions, when the incoming CEO is the child of the departing
CEO (Columns VI and VII), and family—others, when the incoming CEO is related, but not an
offspring of the outgoing CEO (Columns VIII and IX).

11

Family successions occur in 1,776 out of 5,334 CEO successions (33.3 percent).
Column VI shows that 863 family transitions (48.6 percent) involve the children of the departing
CEO. Given that firms in our dataset are mostly privately held, the fraction of family transitions
might appear low. However, according to La Porta, López-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny [1998],
Denmark is among the highest-ranked countries in terms of “rule of law” (10 out of 10 in their
measure), which might reduce the expropriation potential by unrelated CEOs and diminish the
relative attractiveness of family CEOs [Burkart et al., 2003].
In Table II Panel A, we document that the marital history of CEOs can potentially affect
both the choice of family or unrelated CEOs and whether children are chosen for the CEO position.
We show that family successions are less common in firms in which the outgoing CEO has no
spouse than in firms in which they have exactly one spouse. This could simply reflect the fact that
the pool of potential family candidates is larger when the outgoing CEO has a spouse. More
interestingly, the frequency of family transitions decreases for CEOs that, at the time of succession,
have had more than one spouse. For this group, it is 10.7 percentage points, or 29.7 percent lower
than in the case of firms in which the departing CEO has had only one spouse, a difference that is
significant at the one-percent level. Panel A also shows that this difference is explained by a
reduction in the frequency with which children gain the top post (Column VII), and not by the
change in the probability that other family members get promoted (Column IX).
In Panel B we show the frequency of family successions as a function of the number of
children of the departing CEO. We find that the frequency of family successions increases with the
number of children. It rises from 29.1 percent for departing executives with one child to 41.3
percent for those with three children. The associated difference of 12.2 percentage points is
significant at the one-percent level and it represents an increase in the probability of a family
transition of 41.9 percent. In addition, we find that the rate of increase in family successions falls
with the number of children. Specifically, moving from three to four children does not increase the
share of family transitions.

12

Family firms seem to exhibit a preference for children over spouses, parents, or siblings at
the time of succession. In Table II Panel B, we observe that firms in which the departing CEO has
one child appointed a child CEO in 11.9 percent of the successions. By construction, this ratio was
zero when departing CEOs have no children. Interestingly, part of this increase comes at the
expense of non-children relatives. When we compare the share of non-children family CEOs for
one- and no-children departing CEOs, we observe that the frequency with which other family
members are promoted to the CEO position decreases by 7.5 percentage points with the first child;
this decline is significant at the one-percent level. This evidence suggests that children crowd out
other members of the family.
In Table II Panel C, we explore the correlation between the ratio of male to total number of
children and succession decisions. We report that firms in which more than 50 percent of the
outgoing CEO’s children are male are 10.8 percentage points more likely to have a family
successor than firms in which less than half of the children are male; the difference is significant at
the one-percent level.
Although Panels A, B, and C show interesting and strong correlations between family
characteristics and the probability of family successions, it is difficult to assert causality. The
correlation between the number of children and family CEOs might be explained, for example, by
omitted variables such as the departing CEO’s preference for a large and close family. Of the
family characteristics described above, an attractive feature of the gender ratio is that it is partly
exogenous: departing CEOs are unlikely to control the gender of a given child. The ratio is,
however, endogenous because individuals can affect its variance through their choice of family
size: it would tend to converge to 50 percent as the number of children increases.

II.D. The Gender of the Firstborn Child
To explore whether family characteristics might have a causal impact on the probability of
family succession, we report in Table II Panel D the correlation between the decision to promote a

13

family CEO and a family trait that is likely to be random: the gender of the firstborn child of a
departing CEO. For departing CEOs in the sample, the gender of the firstborn child is likely to be
determined by nature, as over 80 percent of them had their first child prior to 1980, before
techniques to identify the gender of children were widespread.
Table II Panel D shows that outgoing executives whose firstborn child is male are 9.6
percentage points more likely to be succeeded by a family member than their counterparts whose
firstborn child is female; the difference is significant at the one-percent level. Moreover,
Column VII shows that this difference is driven by changes in the probability of children of the
outgoing executive getting the top position. Interestingly, Column IX shows that the gender of the
first child does not affect the frequency with which other relatives get the CEO position.
These correlations are consistent with anecdotal evidence that male children are preferred
to females at the time of succession. The magnitude of the difference (32.7 percent) might appear
large given that Denmark is a country with a high overall level of gender equality (it ranks fourth
among 58 countries surveyed by the World Economic Forum) and one of the highest female labor
force participation rates in the world. 6 Nevertheless, these numbers are consistent with the low
levels of female participation among top management positions in Denmark. In 2004, the fraction
of women among top managers was only 25 percent, compared with 61 percent in intermediatelevel positions. 7
Having shown that a family trait that is arguably exogenous affects the decision to name a
family CEO, we now turn to describing our empirical strategy to investigate the consequences of
family CEOs on firm performance.

6

See http://www.weforum.org/pdf/Global_Competitiveness_Reports/Reports/gender_gap.pdf for statistics
on gender inequality and 2001 Statistical Yearbook published by Statistics Denmark for cross-country
comparison on women’s labor force participation.
7
See http://www.dst.dk/HomeUK/Statistics/ofs/Publications/Yearbook (Table 136).

14

III. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
III. A. Empirical Specifications
A simple way to evaluate the impact of family CEOs on firm performance is to estimate
the difference in firm profitability around CEO successions and assess the way in which firm
outcomes change as a result of management transitions. This difference is attractive because it
provides an estimate of the impact of CEOs on performance that is not affected by firms’ timeinvariant characteristics. However, a concern with this approach is that it can fail to control for
aggregate changes in performance due to, for example, industry or aggregate trends, successionspecific shocks, or mean-reversion in performance measures.
Common solutions to this problem include adjusting the measures of profitability using
industry or industry-and-performance benchmarks [Barber and Lyon, 1996] and using a differencein-differences (DD) analysis, relative to a control group. In this case, we compare the changes in
performance of firms that name a family member to the CEO position to that of firms that
experience a succession by an unrelated CEO, as described by the following equation:

y i = a1 + X i' b1 + c1 famCEO i + ε 1i ,

(1)

where yi is the difference in performance around CEO transitions. famCEOi is an indicator
variable equal to one if the incoming CEO is family and zero if unrelated. Under the null that all
CEOs are equally talented, c1 would not be different from zero.
A fundamental shortcoming of implementing a DD analysis is that it requires that the
program to be evaluated not be implemented based on differences in outcomes. In our setting, this
requirement implies that CEO decisions are uncorrelated with determinants of firm performance.
This assumption is challenging, as succession decisions are likely to incorporate firms’ prospects.
We use IVs to overcome this problem. The main advantage of using IVs is that we are
explicit about the source of variation used to evaluate the relative impact of family and unrelated

15

CEOs. In this paper, we use the gender of the first child to instrument for whether a new CEO is a
family CEO or unrelated. Because this variation is arguably orthogonal to firms’ prospects, it
mitigates concerns about the causal interpretation of the results.
However, a drawback of IV estimation is that it is only based on the subset of firms that are
affected by the instrument. Specifically, the IV estimates the effect of family CEOs on the subset of
firms that appoint a family CEO when the gender of the first child is male, but an unrelated CEO
when the gender of the first child is female. If the effect of family CEOs is not constant across
firms, then the IV only estimates the average effect of family managers on the set of firms that
respond to the instrument [Imbens and Angrist, 1994].
To implement the IV estimator, we first run the following regression (first stage):

famCEO i = a 2i + X i' b2 + c 2 genderfirs t + ε 2i ,

(2)

where famCEOi is an indicator variable equal to one if the incoming CEO is related by blood or
marriage to the departing CEO and zero otherwise. Here, genderfirst is an indicator variable that is
equal to one if the first child is male and zero if female. Note that even though famCEOi is a
dichotomous variable, we estimate (2) using OLS, since a probit or a logit first stage can harm the
consistency of the estimates [Angrist and Krueger, 2001]. The second-stage equation estimates the
impact of family successions on changes in firm performance:

yi = a3 + X 3' b3 + c3 famCˆ EOi + ε 3i ,

(3)

ˆ
where yi is defined as in (1) and famCEO
i are predicted values from (2). We are interested in c3,
which captures the direct effect of a family succession on performance.

16

III. B. Gender of the Firstborn Child: Firm and Family Characteristics
A valid instrumental variable requires meeting two criteria: it should affect the probability
of observing a family succession, which we show in Table II Panel D, and it should not affect firm
performance through other channels except for its direct effect on CEO succession decisions. 8 In
Table III we explore the correlation of the gender of the first child of a departing CEO and an array
of firm and family characteristics.
At the time of transition, we find no difference in terms of firm size, operating profitability,
and net income between those firms whose departing CEO had a male or female first child.
Table III stands in stark contrast to Table I, in which we found significant differences in firm
characteristics for family and unrelated transitions.
One concern is that the gender of the first child might have a direct effect on family
characteristics, which might, in turn, be affecting performance. For example, families with a strong
preference for male children and whose firstborn child is female would tend to be larger in size
than their male first-child counterparts. Family size could, in turn, affect firm performance, but its
effect would be attributable to our instrument. To assess this potential channel, Table III presents
the average number of children born to departing CEOs. It shows that, conditional on having at
least one child, the average number of children is 2.2, irrespective of the gender of the first child. In
short, we find no evidence that the gender of the first child affects family size.
Alternatively, and given the evidence from Dahl and Moretti [2004], who document
differential marriage rates as a function of the gender of children (larger for males), male first
children might affect the departing CEOs’ marriage decisions, and marriage could potentially
directly affect firms’ prospects. If this effect were present in this sample, the IV strategy would be
incorrectly attributing this effect to CEO talent. However, Table III shows that the fraction of

8

In case of heterogeneous treatment effects, monotonicity is also required to estimate a local average
treatment effect. In our setting, monotonicity requires that, other things equal, there is no firm that chooses a
family CEO when the first child is female but an unrelated successor when the first child is male. If treatment
effects are, in contrast, homogenous, then the two conditions above suffice.

17

outgoing CEOs who are divorced is not statistically different for departing CEOs with female or
male first children. Moreover, the last line of Table III shows that the total number of spouses that
the outgoing CEO has had is no different for these two groups.
Furthermore, Table II Panel D previously highlighted that there is no significant difference
in the share of non-child family CEOs for male first-child or female first-child firms, which
suggests that male first-child firms do not differ in the degree of participation of non-child
relatives.
In sum, based on Table III we find no evidence that firm or family characteristics differ as
a function of our instrument. This “no difference” table bolsters our confidence that the gender of
the first child of a departing CEO is uncorrelated to firms’ outcomes, other than through its impact
on CEO succession decisions.

IV. RESULTS
IV.A. Difference-in-Differences
To analyze the relative performance of family CEOs and despite its shortcomings
highlighted in the previous sections, we present basic DD results as a benchmark.
Table IV Panel A presents results using industry-adjusted OROA for a three-year window
before and after CEO transitions. Column I indicates that firms that experience CEO transitions
exhibit lower-than-average profitability before succession. After transitions, however, they
outperform their industry peers. The increase in performance is 0.8 percentage points, significant at
the one-percent level. An average increase in performance around CEO transitions is consistent
with previous studies in the CEO turnover literature [Denis and Denis, 1995; Huson et al., 2004].
When we compare profitability levels prior to family and unrelated successions
(Columns II and III, respectively), we find that family (unrelated) transitions tend to occur in firms
with above- (below-) average OROA. Prior to CEO transitions, the difference in profitability
between these groupings is 1.6 percentage points, significant at the one-percent level.

18

Examining within-group variations in performance, we find that firms that promote family
CEOs do not exhibit significant differences in performance around successions. In contrast, firms
that promote external CEOs observe improvements in profitability of 1.3 percentage points, an
increase that is significant at the one-percent level.
As a result, the average DD estimates suggest family successions are associated with a
lower profitability of 1.41 percentage-points, relative to unrelated successions. This decline is
equivalent to 21.7 percent of the average unadjusted OROA. The estimated gap in profitability is
similar in magnitude to that found by Pérez-González [2006] using data from U.S. publicly traded
firms.
In Table IV Panel B, we present the relative impact of family and unrelated CEOs using
alternative measures of firm performance. To investigate whether the decline in performance
around family transitions is due to firm or industry effects, as in Panel A, the first row shows
unadjusted OROA as the performance measure and the second row presents industry-adjusted
OROA. For both measures, the profitability of firms undergoing a family transition drops relative
to other firms. One difference is that unadjusted measures suggest that the main effect is driven by
a decline in performance of family CEOs, while the adjusted OROA shows it is driven by gains in
profitability in unrelated-CEO firms. Median differences in unadjusted and industry-adjusted
OROA indicate that the gap across groups is unlikely to be driven by outliers.
To test whether the results might be explained by mean-reversion relative to pre-transition
performance, we also report changes in industry-and-performance–adjusted OROA [Barber and
Lyon, 1996]. This measure is constructed using, as a control, firms in the same industry-adjusted
performance decile grouping in the year prior to succession. The third row of Panel B shows that
results are negative and significant at the one-percent level even after controlling for this effect.
Also, using net income to assets obtains similar conclusions.
The last two rows of Table IV Panel B test for differences in the natural logarithm of assets
and net sales to determine whether the gains in profitability for unrelated CEOs are a result of

19

declining assets or increased profits. The results indicate that unrelated successors increase the
asset base more than family CEOs and that, unlike family heirs, they are able to increase revenue
relative to pre-transition levels.
Overall, DD results indicate a robust result: family CEOs underperform relative to
unrelated CEOs. The results hold regardless of the measure of performance used for both mean and
median differences. Yet, it is difficult to establish causality. Results might be explained by omitted
variables that account for both the decision to promote a family CEO and lower performance
around transitions.

IV.B. Instrumental Variables Main Results
Given that the main objective of this paper is to isolate the causal effect of family CEOs on
firm performance, we now turn to estimating the effect of family CEOs on firm performance using
instrumental variables.
Table V Panel A presents the first-stage relationship between the gender of the departing
CEO’s firstborn child and the type of succession. Consistent with Table II, having a male first child
is strongly positively correlated with a family transition. Firms whose departing CEO had a male
first child are 9.6 percentage points more likely to appoint a family CEO, relative to those that had
a female first child, a difference that is statistically significant at the one-percent level. In economic
terms, it implies an increase in the probability of observing a family succession of 32.7 percent.
Moreover, the F-statistic of 48.1 suggests that the gender of the first child is unlikely to be a weak
instrument. As a result, the IV estimates are unlikely to be biased towards those of OLS [Bound,
Jaeger, and Baker, 1995; Staiger and Stock, 1997; Stock and Watson, 2003].
One concern with the gender of the first-child indicator variable is that its variation might
be capturing the effect of having a male child, a trait that families could partially affect by having
more children, rather than the effect of the firstborn child, whose gender is presumably random. To
investigate this possibility, we include in Column II a dummy variable indicating whether the

20

departing CEO has a male child. Not surprisingly, the coefficient of the gender of the first-child
dummy falls significantly to four percentage points. Yet, the gender of the first-child indicator
variable continues to be economically large and significant at conventional levels.
It is important to stress that, even though the male-child indicator variable is strongly
positively correlated with family CEO appointments, it is difficult to convincingly claim that it
meets the exclusion restriction. Families can affect the odds of having a male child by having more
children. Similarly, while the number of male children and the ratio of male to total children are
likely to be affected by CEO and firm characteristics, for reference, we also report first-stage
results based on these variables in Columns III and IV.
In Column V we present an alternative specification using the gender of the first child as
instrument and firm age and year dummies as added controls. In Column VI we further control for
size and lagged industry-adjusted OROA, and in Column VII we use lagged industry-andperformance-adjusted OROA as a control. As suggested in Table I, the results show that family
successions tend to occur in smaller and more profitable firms relative to those that promote
unrelated CEOs. Results also indicate that older firms are more likely to undergo family transitions.
In all cases, the point estimate on the gender of the first-child indicator variable hardly changes.
In sum, first-stage results indicate that the gender of the first child has a strong impact on
firms’ succession decisions. Moreover, the robustness of its estimated coefficient to the inclusion
of firm characteristics suggests that the effect of the gender of the first child on family CEO
appointments is potentially unaffected by firms’ characteristics.
Having examined the strong impact of the gender of the first child on family CEO
decisions, we turn to analyzing its effect on performance. We start by exploring the reduced-form
correlation between the instrument and difference in firm OROA around CEO successions, our key
dependent variable of interest.
The results are presented in Table V Panel B. We find a strong and negative correlation
between changes in firm performance and having a male first child. The estimated coefficients

21

show that firms in which the departing CEO’s firstborn child is male experience an average drop in
OROA in the range of 0.8-1.2 percentage points relative to female first-child firms (Columns I, V,
VI, and VII). In all cases, the reduced-form correlation is significant at the five-percent level. For
reference, we show similar results using alternative “instruments” based on male children controls
(Columns II-IV).
In reading the results from Table V Panel B, it is important to highlight that, while the
gender of an individual’s first child is likely to be randomly assigned, it is still possible that the
timing of family versus unrelated CEO successions might differ in a way that could affect
performance evaluations. However, the evidence presented in Table III suggests that firm
characteristics conditional on the gender of the departing CEO’s firstborn child are comparable:
firm size, age, and profitability prior to CEO transitions are not statistically different from zero,
which might ease some of these concerns. We will revisit these issues in Table VII.
Reduced-form results provide strong evidence that family successions hurt firm
performance. They are arguably free from endogeneity and omitted variable concerns. Yet, the
magnitude of this difference needs to be scaled to reflect the fact that it is driven by the subset of
firms that appointed a family CEO due to the instrument.
In Table VI we examine the impact of family CEOs on performance around CEO
successions using alternative specifications. To facilitate the comparison between OLS and IV
estimates, in Columns I and II we provide OLS estimates of the effect of family successions on
performance. As measures of firm performance, we use industry-adjusted (Columns I-VII) and
industry-and-performance–adjusted (Column VIII) OROA.
The estimates in Table VI Column I are comparable to those shown in Table IV,
conditional on having at least one child (Table IV shows OLS estimates based on the entire
sample). As shown before, family CEOs are associated with lower performance around CEO
transitions. The gap between family and unrelated CEOs is statistically significant at the onepercent level. In Column II we control for size, age, and profitability the year before the

22

succession. OLS estimates suggest that firms that promote family CEOs trail other firms around
successions by approximately 0.8 to 1.4 percentage points in terms of profitability. Furthermore,
consistent with mean-reversion, we find lower gains in performance for larger firms and for those
whose pre-transition performance was superior. Firm age does not seem to affect changes in
performance around successions.
Columns III through VIII of Table VI present the estimated coefficients using IVs. As
anticipated by Table V, the impact of family CEOs on profitability is negative and statistically
significant, regardless of the instrument we use. This result holds when we use the gender of the
first child as the instrument, as well as when we replace it by the number of male children or the
ratio of male to total children. 9
In all cases, the magnitude of the estimated coefficient is larger than the one estimated
using OLS, implying a reduction in profitability relative to unrelated transitions of at least six
percentage points. 10 The large gap between IV and OLS estimates suggests that family successions
tend to occur when unobserved firm performance is expected to improve or, alternatively, that
unrelated CEOs tend to face more challenging environments. As a result, OLS underestimates the
true differential in performance between family and unrelated CEOs.

9

The differences in the family-CEO estimated coefficients in Columns (III) to (VI) are hard to interpret as
the number of male children or the gender ratio of children might not meet the exclusion restriction. For
example, the number of family candidates is larger in firms in which the departing CEO has a large number
sons and, as a result, family CEOs chosen in these firms are probably better than those chosen in firms in
which the departing CEO has few sons. This alternative channel works against finding family CEO
underperformance. Consistent with this notion, the estimated coefficient in Columns (IV) increases when we
control for family size (results not shown). In addition, given the large standard errors, we cannot reject that
the estimated coefficient varies significantly for these alternative instruments..
10
An alternative explanation for the large gap between IV and OLS estimates is measurement error in the
family succession variable. Given that family tree information is obtained from the official Danish Civil
Registration System, measurement error concerns would tend to be minor. We also address this potential
concern by examining the robustness of our estimates to different definitions of family transitions.
Alternatively, we classify as family successions: (a) those events where the last names of the incoming and
departing CEOs coincide or (b) those transitions where the incoming CEO was the offspring (as opposed to
other relatives) of the departing CEO. Alternative family definitions do not affect the results (results not
shown).

23

IV.C. Timing of CEO successions
Even though Table III provides evidence that the first child male–female groupings are
comparable prior to succession in terms of size and profitability, a potential concern with the
preceding results is that we might be capturing differences in performance attributed to a
differential timing of CEO successions for family or unrelated managers.
In Table VII we present instrumental-variables-two-stage-least-squares (IV-2SLS) results
for alternative windows of analysis before, during, and after CEO transitions. In Column I we
examine changes in profitability using a window before the transition, estimated around year t = -3.
In Column II we replicate the basic specification of Table VII containing a CEO transition, and in
Column III we use a post-transition window centered at year t = +3. In all cases, changes in
performance are computed as the difference in the three-year average industry-and-performanceadjusted OROA around the key date. Results are computed for all firms with data in each relevant
window of analysis.
We fail to find a statistically significant difference between firms that undergo family
successions and those that promote unrelated CEOs in any window of analysis, except for the
window that contains CEO transitions (Column II). The result of Column I in Table VII indicates
that performance prior to succession is not affected by the gender of the departing CEO’s firstborn
child. This result casts doubt on the idea that CEOs time their succession differentially as a
function of the instrument. In addition, the result in Column III indicates that firms that undergo
family transitions do not recover from the decline in performance suffered after succession. The
lack of post-succession recovery is evidence of a permanent negative impact of family CEOs.
In Columns IV and V of Table VII, we examine the robustness of our findings on
alternative subsamples based on the departing CEO’s age. In Column IV we only include CEO
transitions in which the departing CEO left the helm at a “normal” retirement age (between 55 and
70), as we want to test whether family underperformance is explained by late (early) retirement of
founders. We find that normal retirement age transitions exhibit similar patterns of performance

24

between family and unrelated CEOs, compared to the entire sample. Specifically, the estimated gap
in performance is 8.4 percentage points, significant at the five-percent level. In Column V of
Table VII, we restrict the sample to successions in which the departing CEO leaves the position
either before age 55 or after age 70. In this latter case, the estimated coefficient is comparable to
that estimated in Column IV. However, the first stage is weaker, as younger CEOs are less likely to
have adult children at the time of succession, and the standard errors in the second stage are twice
as large.
An alternative test of the merits of family and unrelated CEOs that is less prone to criticism
related to the timing of the transition is, following Johnson et al. [1985], to instrument for family
CEOs using an indicator variable equal to one in cases where the departing CEO died in the year of
the CEO change. The main advantage of this test is that the timing of the CEO succession is likely
to be exogenous, as the timing of death tends to be unexpected. Yet, CEO deaths can potentially
affect performance through other channels beyond the effect of a family or unrelated CEO. In
Table VII Column VI, we present results using this alternative instrument. Consistent with our
prior findings, we find that family CEOs harm firm performance. The estimated coefficient points
to a decline in performance of 3.7 percentage points, significant at the one-percent level.
In the last column in Table VII, we present results when the sample is restricted to
observations in which the outgoing CEO died around management transitions, and we use the
gender of the first child as an instrument. A clear advantage of this specification is that it addresses
both concerns related to the endogeneity of the timing of successions, as well as concerns related to
the exclusion restriction. One disadvantage, however, is that the sample size falls dramatically. We
find that even in this case, the estimated coefficient is negative and similar in magnitude to
previous specifications, although its associated standard errors are almost four times those in
Column II.

25

IV.D. The Impact of Firm and Industry Characteristics on the Value of Family CEOs
A different concern is that results might be explained by differences in reported, rather than
actual, performance. Family CEOs might be more prone than unrelated CEOs to divert firms’ cash
flows to the controlling family, even when the core operating performance of the two groups is
identical. In Table VIII we test for this possibility by examining whether the results are explained
by small firms (Column I) or by firms that lack a formal board of directors (Column II). In
Denmark, limited liability firms incorporated as ApS corporations (43 percent of the sample) can
choose whether to have a board of directors. We show that these less-formal firms do not explain
our results. Family-CEO underperformance exists for firms with above-median asset size, as well
as for firms with a formal board of directors.
We also explore if the superior performance of unrelated CEOs is alternatively explained
by changes in the governance structure of firms around CEO transitions. For example, unrelated
CEOs might coincide with acquisitions by larger and more efficient firms. If that were the case, the
finding of superior performance relative to family CEOs could not be interpreted as the product of
outside managerial talent per se. To test for this possibility and in lieu of our lack of detailed
ownership data, we restrict our analysis to firms in which at least one family member of the
departing CEO stays on the board post-CEO transition. For this subsample, the economic
magnitude and statistical significance of the estimated coefficient is almost identical to what we
found for the full sample.
In Table VIII Columns IV to X, we assess the role of industry characteristics in explaining
the differential performance of family and unrelated CEOs. In evaluating alternative industry
characteristics, we hypothesize that managerial skills are potentially more valuable in certain
economic environments, such as innovative industries, and less important in others, such as mature
businesses with established production processes or organizational cultures.
A natural place to start this analysis is investigating the family-CEO gap in industries
where family CEOs are relatively more common and, presumably, better suited for their positions.

26

To measure the relative frequency of family successions by industry, we divide the firms in the
sample into two subsamples based on whether or not firms belonged to industries with an abovemedian concentration of family transitions. In Column IV we present results for the relative high
family succession subsample. As expected, the negative impact of family transitions is mitigated.
The point estimate is negative, although the coefficient is not statistically different from zero.
Failing to find significant differences in performance in this latter case can potentially help to
explain the gap between OLS and IV estimates. The latter are based on firms that promote a family
CEO due to the gender of the first child. By randomly selecting family CEOs, the IV would underrepresent those industries where family CEOs are normally present, relative to OLS.
We also test for the impact of family CEOs under a variety of industry environments using
industry information on production growth, research and development (R&D) activities, wages per
employee, average years of schooling by workers, import penetration, and growth volatility. 11
Column V in Table VIII shows that family CEOs significantly underperform in high-growth
industries, while the coefficient on family succession in lower-growth and mature industries
(results not shown) is lower and only significant at the 15-percent level. Column VI presents the
estimated coefficient for family-CEO firms in industries with R&D spending, which is higher than
the average for the entire sample but only marginally significant.
We further test for the skills required to manage firms by assessing the value of family
CEOs in industries with relatively higher wages and educational attainment levels. There are
several advantages of these alternative measures relative to R&D information. First, wage data are
available for every industry in the economy. Second, a significant fraction of firms in the service

11

To investigate the impact of industry growth, industry wages, workers’ schooling levels, import
penetration, and output volatility, we divide the sample into two groups based on the median of the relevant
variable. Industry growth and volatility is calculated using the value of production. Data on production
growth, volatility, labor compensation, and import penetration are from Statistics Denmark (www.dst.dk).
Data on industry schooling levels was constructed by the authors using confidential data on individual
schooling and industry of employment from Statistics Denmark. We assess the impact of R&D activities by
reporting the results for those firms in industries that report R&D expenses in the OECD Structural Analysis
(STAN) database (www.oecd.org).

27

sector are high skilled with little or no R&D. Educational attainment levels, in contrast, provide a
direct approximation for the formal skills acquired by workers in a given industry. Interestingly,
both proxies for skill suggest that family CEOs are only statistically significantly harmful to
performance in firms that operate in industries where human capital seems to be important. This
result contrast with OLS differences, where no such pattern is evident. 12
The level of import penetration does not seem to be important in explaining the gap
between family and unrelated CEOs. High import penetration industries exhibit a similar estimated
family-CEO effect as the average of the sample (Column IX). Conversely, output volatility does
suggest that family CEOs might be particularly detrimental to performance in uncertain
environments (Column X).
Overall, Table VIII documents that unrelated CEOs are particularly valuable in industries
where professional managers would be expected to matter the most.
IV.E. Alternative Dependent Variables
In Table IX we investigate the impact of family CEOs on alternative measures of
performance. We compute differences in net income, return on capital employed (ROCE), and firm
assets around CEO transitions and report the results in Columns I, II, and III, respectively. 13 Firms
that appoint family CEOs undergo economically and statistically significant declines in net income
relative to assets. The estimated effect of family CEOs is -0.069, which, as it was the case with
operating income, is significantly larger than the OLS estimate. Net income results suggest that the
negative impact of family CEOs on operating profitability is not counterbalanced by a significant
change in capital structure. Similarly, firms that promote family CEOs experience large declines in
ROCE. The fact that ROCE falls significantly indicates that the lower operating return associated

12

Results not shown.
Differences are estimated using the three-year post-succession performance measures minus the three-year
average before transition. Net income is analyzed as a ratio of total assets. Return on capital employed is the
ratio of operating income to the sum of the book value of equity plus the book value of debt. The measure of
assets is the natural logarithm of assets in 2000 Danish Kroner.
13

28

with family CEOs is absorbed by firms’ investors and is not the product of temporarily high levels
of assets due to normal business transactions.
In Column III of Table IX, we assess if the lower performance of family CEO is explained
by significantly larger investments relative to unrelated CEOs. Increases in the asset base could
enhance future performance at the cost of short-term profitability. We do find support for that
hypothesis: the estimated effect of family CEOs on total assets is negative, although statistically
insignificant.
Finally, in Table IX Columns IV and V we assess whether the gap between family and
unrelated CEOs can be explained by excessive risk-taking by unrelated CEOs. Family CEOs might
focus on low-risk but valuable projects, while unrelated CEOs might instead seek high-risk highreward investments. In Column IV we show that family CEOs are not associated with lower rates
of bankruptcy or liquidation.
Given that financial distress is more likely to occur in those firms with relatively lower
profitability, in Table IX Column V we examine the impact of family CEOs in the bottom 50
percent of the sample in terms of profitability. We find no evidence that family CEOs are less
likely to fail. Interestingly and consistent with family-CEO underperformance, we find that firms
with a family CEO are more likely to file for bankruptcy or to be liquidated than firms managed by
unrelated CEOs. Moreover, higher rates of financial distress by family CEOs cast doubt on the idea
that differences in operating performance across CEO types might be driven by strategic
underreporting of firms’ cash flows by family CEOs.
In sum, alternative measures of performance do not provide support to the idea that family
CEOs invest at higher rates or fail less frequently than unrelated CEOs. They, in contrast, reinforce
the hypothesis that non-family CEOs are valuable for firm performance.

29

IV.F. Local Effects and the Value of CEOs
A common caveat in interpreting the estimated results using instrumental variables is that
not every firm in the sample responds to the instrument and, as such, the results of this paper are
only representative for those firms whose succession decisions are affected by it. In particular, one
might posit that the subsample of family CEOs who are promoted due to the instrument are of a
lower average quality relative to the pool of family CEOs that gain control irrespective of it. If that
were the case, the average causal effect of family CEOs on performance might not be as large as
our IV results have documented. We proceed to address this potential concern by investigating the
observable characteristics of incoming CEOs. We are particularly interested in assessing whether
the gap in CEO skills between family and unrelated CEOs is significantly different for the average
and the marginal family CEOs. 14
Based on the KOB management files used to identity CEO successions, we are also able to
determine if incoming CEOs previously held a CEO or a board position. Additionally, based on
official educational attainment records at Statistics Denmark, we can estimate the number of years
of schooling by incoming CEOs and whether they attended college or pursued graduate studies. 15
Panel A in Table X presents average CEO characteristics for the entire sample (Column I)
and as a function of the instrument: male (Column II) and female (Column III). We find that 24
percent of incoming CEOs were previously a CEO at other corporations. Interestingly, the ratio is
22.8 and 25.1 percent for male first-child and female first-child firms, respectively. The difference
is two-percentage points, significant at the ten-percent level. In contrast, the share of incoming
CEOs with an outside board position does not significantly vary as a function of the instrument.

14

In untabulated results we also investigate if the gap in performance for family and unrelated CEO is
affected by incoming CEOs characteristics. We find that the difference in family CEO performance is larger
in the seasoned relative to the inexperienced CEO subsamples. Yet, family-CEOs significantly underperform
non family CEOs even in the subsample without previous CEO experience. We do not report those results as
it is hard to claim that CEO characteristics are orthogonal to firms’ investment prospects.
15
We have information about the highest degree obtained by individuals. We use this information to identify
whether incoming CEOs attended college or graduate studies. Also, we calculate years of schooling using the
official length of educational programs, including technical degrees, which are widespread in Denmark.

30

Educational records provide striking evidence that CEO characteristics differ for male firstchild and female first-child firms. While firms with a female first-child hire CEOs with only
slightly higher number years of schooling (0.2 more years of schooling, or 1.5 percent), their
incoming CEOs are 3.1 percentage points (eight percent) more likely to have attended college,
relative to CEOs in male first-child firms; the difference is significant at the five-percent level.
In Panel B, we report summary CEO characteristics for family- and unrelated-CEO firms.
It shows that there is a substantial difference in CEO experience and skills between family and
unrelated CEOs: all measures of CEO experience indicate economically and statistically large
differences in favor of unrelated CEOs (Column III). In line with the main results of this paper,
Column IV in Panel B shows the IV-2SLS estimate of the gap in CEO attributes. As anticipated by
the reduced form correlations in Panel A, family CEOs are significantly less likely to be seasoned
CEOs and less likely to have attended college, relative to unrelated CEOs.
Columns III and IV of Panel B allow for a direct comparison between the characteristics of
the average family CEO and those of the marginal family CEO, who are only promoted to the post
as a result of the instrument. These columns report the average gap between family CEOs and
unrelated CEOs for the entire sample (Column III) and for the marginal family CEOs (Column IV).
In all cases, we cannot reject that the OLS and the IV-2SLS estimated differences in CEO
characteristics are different from each other at conventional levels.
An alternative way to test if the average family CEO differs relative to the marginal CEO
induced by the instrument is to compare the observable differences in CEO characteristics between
male first-child family CEOs and other family CEOs. In Panel C we find no evidence that male
primogeniture CEOs are different in terms of CEO experience or academic records.
In sum, Table X provides evidence that unrelated CEOs are significantly more qualified
than family CEOs: they are more likely to have previously served as CEOs and to have attended
college than family CEOs. Table X also shows that there are no statistically significant differences

31

in terms of observable CEO characteristics between the average family CEOs and those CEOs
elected due to the instrument.
IV.G. Interpretation
In this paper we are explicit about the source of variation in family CEO appointments we
use to examine the impact of family CEOs on firm performance. Given that the variation from the
gender of the departing CEO’s firstborn child is likely to be uncorrelated to firms’ prospects, the
results demonstrate that family successions cause significant declines in firm performance.
The findings show that qualified CEOs provide extremely valuable services to the
organizations they head. They also demonstrate that primogeniture rules, which dictate who gains
access to the helm of a firm based on birth order or gender, but not competence, can have large and
negative consequences for firm performance.
The result that family members are selected to the top post despite their inferior
performance is consistent with a non-pecuniary benefit of naming a CEO in accordance to the
preferences of the departing CEO, which is reminiscent of Becker’s [1957] and Goldberg’s [1982]
analyses of discrimination and nepotism, respectively. Moreover, the negative effect of family
CEOs on performance suggests that minority shareholders at family-controlled firms are likely to
suffer the most since they are unlikely to enjoy the private benefits of control of naming a family
CEO. The results also indicate that other stakeholders interacting with family firms should pay
close attention to succession decisions, as the competence gap between family and unrelated CEOs
is substantial.

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we used a unique dataset from Denmark to investigate the inside workings of
family firms. Our objective was to shed light on two questions: First, do family characteristics

32

affect firm decisions? Second, what are the consequences of these decisions on firm performance?
These questions were examined in the context of CEO succession decisions.
We showed that family characteristics have economically large effects on the decision to
promote a family or an unrelated CEO. We addressed this question using a family trait that is likely
to be exogenous: the gender of the firstborn child of the departing CEO. In particular, we found
that male first-child firms are 32.7 percent more likely to appoint a family CEO than female firstchild firms.
Using the variation in family CEO appointments associated with the gender of the first
child, we then showed that family CEOs have a dramatically large and negative causal impact on
firm performance. Our estimates are significantly larger than prior estimates in the literature and
suggest that addressing endogeneity and omitted variable concerns is extremely important for
understanding the impact of families on firm outcomes.
Our results provide direct evidence that unrelated CEOs are extremely valuable for the
firms they lead. Moreover, the finding that family CEOs hurt firm performance might suggest that
countries where the control and management of assets is commonly transferred among kin can
potentially under-perform, compared to economies where assets and management are competitively
matched.
The implications of our findings are also important for other settings in which families play
an active role in firm decision making. La Porta et al. [1999] have documented that families are the
most common large shareholders of publicly traded corporations and private firms are commonly
associated with one family. Our results indicate that controlling families that enjoy the private
benefits of control can endorse decisions that might be inferior for other stakeholders.
Finally, our findings could also be interpreted as evidence against having primogeniture
rules in inheritances.

33

REFERENCES
Adams, Renée, Heitor Almeida, and Daniel Ferreira, “Understanding the Relationship between
Founder-CEOs and Firm Performance,” unpublished, New York University, 2005.
Anderson, Ronald C., and David M. Reeb, “Founding-Family Ownership and Firm Performance:
Evidence from the S&P 500,” Journal of Finance, LVIII (2003), 1301–1328.
Angrist, Joshua D., and William N. Evans, “Children and Their Parents’ Labor Supply: Evidence
from Exogenous Variation in Family Size,” American Economic Review, LXXXVIII (1998),
450–477.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger, “Instrumental Variables and the Search for Identification:
From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, XV
(2001), 69–85.
Barber, Brad M., and John D. Lyon, “Detecting Abnormal Operating Performance: The Empirical
Power and Specification of Test Statistics,” Journal of Financial Economics, XLI (1996), 359–
399.
Barnes, Louis B., and Simon A. Hershon, “Transferring Power in the Family Business,” Harvard
Business Review, LIV (1976), 105–114.
Becker, Gary, The Economics of Discrimination, (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 1957).
Becker, Gary, A Treatise on the Family, (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981).
Berle, Adolf A., and Gardiner C. Means, The Modern Corporation and Private Property (New
York, NY: Mcmillan, 1932).
Bertrand, Marianne, Simon Johnson, Krislert Samphantharak, and Antoinnete Schoar, “Mixing
Family with Business: A Study of Thai Business Groups and the Families behind Them,”
unpublished, University of Chicago, 2005.
Bloom, Nick, and John Van Reenen, “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices across
Firms and Countries,” unpublished, London School of Economics, 2006.
Bound, John, David Jaeger, and Regina Baker, “Problems with Instrumental Variables Estimation
When the Correlation between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory Variables is
Weak,” Journal of American Statistical Association, XC (1995), 443–450.
Burkart, Mike, Fausto Panunzi, and Andrei Shleifer, “Family Firms,” Journal of Finance, LVIII
(2003), 2167–2202.
Cadbury, Adrian, Family Firms and Their Governance: Creating Tomorrow’s Company from
Today’s, (Great Britain: Egon Zehnder International, 2000).
Caselli, Francesco, and Nicola Gennaioli, “Dynastic Management,” NBER Working Paper No.
9442, 2003.
Christiansen, Christopher, Management Succession in Small and Growing Enterprises (Boston,
MA: Division of Research, Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University,
1953).

34

Claessens, Stijn, Joseph P.H. Fan, and Larry H.P. Lang, “The Separation of Ownership and Control
in East Asian Corporations,” Journal of Financial Economics, LVIII (2000), 81–112.
Dahl, Gordon B., and Enrico Moretti, “The Demand for Sons: Evidence from Divorce, Fertility and
Shotgun Marriage,” NBER Working Paper No. 10281, 2004.
Davis, James H., F. David Schoorman, and Lex Donaldson, “Toward a Stewardship Theory of
Management,” Academy of Management Review, XXII (1997), 20–47.
Denis, David J., and Diane K. Denis, “Performance Changes Following Top Management
Dismissals,” The Journal of Finance, L (1995), 1029–1057.
Donnelley, Robert G., “The Family Business,” Harvard Business Review, XLII (1964), 93–105.
Faccio, Mara, and Larry H.P. Lang, “The Ultimate Ownership of Western European Corporations,”
Journal of Financial Economics, LXV (2002), 365–395.
Goldberg, Matthew S., “Discrimination, Nepotism, and Long-Run Wage Differentials,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, XCVII (1982), 307–319.
Gompers, Paul, Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, “Corporate Governance and Equity Prices,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVIII (2003), 107–155.
Hermalin, Benjamin E., and Michael S. Weisbach, “Endogenously Chosen Boards of Directors and
Their Monitoring of the CEO,” American Economic Review, LXXXVIII (1998), 96–118.
Huson, Mark R., Paul Malatesta, and Robert Parrino, “Managerial Succession and Firm
Performance,” Journal of Financial Economics, LXXIV (2004), 237–275.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist, “Identification and Estimation of Local Average
Treatment Effects,” Econometrica, LXII (1994), 467–475.
Johnson, Bruce W., Robert Magee, Nandu Nagarajan, and Herry Newman, “An Analysis of the
Stock Price Reaction to Sudden Executive Death: Implications for the Management Labor
Market,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, VII (1985), 151–174.
Kandel, Eugene, and Edward P. Lazear, “Peer Pressure and Partnerships,” Journal of Political
Economy, C (1992), 801–817.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Law and
Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, CIV (1998), 1113–1155.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “Corporate Ownership Around
the World,” Journal of Finance, LIV (1999), 471–517.
Lansberg, Ivan S., “Managing Human Resources in Family Firms: The Problem of Institutional
Overlap,” Organizational Dynamics, XII (1983), 39–46.
Levinson, Harry, “Conflicts That Plague Family Businesses,” Harvard Business Review, XLIX
(1971), 90–98.
McConaughy, Daniel L., Michael C. Walker, Glenn Jr. Henderson, and Chandra S. Mishra,
“Founding Family–Controlled Firms: Efficiency and Value,” Review of Financial Economics,
VII (1998), 1–19.

35

Morck, Randall K., David A. Stangeland, and Bernard Yeung, “Inherited Wealth, Corporate
Control and Economic Growth: The Canadian Disease?” in Randall K. Morck, ed.,
Concentrated Corporate Ownership (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 319–
369.
Pérez-González, Francisco, “Inherited Control and Firm Performance,” American Economic
Review, (2006), forthcoming.
Sen, Amartya, “Missing Women,” British Medical Journal, CCCIV (1992), 587–588.
Staiger, Douglas, and James H. Stock, “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
Instruments,” Econometrica, LXV (1997), 557–586.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson, Introduction to Econometrics, (Boston, MA: Addison
Wesley, 2003)
Villalonga, Belen, and Raphael Amit, “How do Family Ownership, Management and Control
Affect Firm Value?” Journal of Financial Economics, (2006), forthcoming.
Weisbach, Michael S., “Outside Directors and CEO Turnover,” Journal of Financial Economics,
XX (1988), 431–460.
Yermack, David, “Higher Market Valuation of Companies with a Small Board of Directors,”
Journal of Financial Economics, XL (1996), 185–211.

36

TABLE I. FIRM CHARACTERISTICS BY TYPE OF CEO SUCCESSION
Type of Succession
Variable

All
(I)

Family

Unrelated

(II)

(III)

Difference
(IV)

Ln assets

8.605
(0.0240)
[5,334]

8.232
(0.0332)
[1,776]

8.791
(0.0315)
[3,558]

-0.559 ***
(0.0458)

Operating return on assets (OROA)

0.065
(0.0020)
[5,334]

0.074
(0.0032)
[1,776]

0.061
(0.0025)
[3,558]

0.013 ***
(0.0041)

Net income to assets

0.033
(0.0019)
[5,334]

0.038
(0.0031)
[1,776]

0.031
(0.0024)
[3,558]

0.007 *
(0.0039)

Industry-adjusted OROA

-0.002
(0.0020)
[5,334]

0.007
(0.0032)
[1,776]

-0.006
(0.0025)
[3,558]

0.014 ***
(0.0041)

Firm Age

19.417
(0.3106)
[5,334]

19.826
(0.4840)
[1,776]

19.213
(0.3981)
[3,558]

0.613
(0.6267)

Notes:

a.
b.
c.

d.
e.

The table presents firm characteristics at the time of the chief executive officer (CEO) transition.
CEO successions are classified into two groups: family, when the entering CEO is related by blood or marriage to the
departing CEO, and unrelated otherwise.
Ln assets is the natural logarithm of the total book value of assets in Danish Kroner. OROA is the operating income (Primært
resultat) to book value of assets. Net income to assets is the ratio of net income (Årets resultat) to book value of assets.
Industry-adjusted OROA is the difference between OROA and the average of its four-digit NACE (European industry
classification system) benchmark. Firm age is the difference between the year of CEO transition and the oldest of: the year of
establishment, the year of registration, or the year of firms’ bylaws.
Firm characteristics are from the Købmandsstandens Oplysningsbureau's (KOB) dataset, which is based on firms’ annual
reports to the Danish Ministry of Economic and Business Affairs.
Standard errors are in parentheses and the numbers of observations are in square brackets. ***, **, and * denote significance at
the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

37

TABLE II. FIRM SUCCESSIONS AND FAMILY CHARACTERISTICS OF DEPARTING CEOS
Type of Succession
Description

Number of

Family

Unrelated

Family: Children

Family: Others

Successions

Number

Share

Number

Share

Number

Share

Number

Share

(I)

(II)

(III)

(IV)

(V)

(VI)

(VII)

(VIII)

(IX)

5,334

1,776

0.333

3,558

0.667

All

863

0.162

913

0.171

A. Number of spouses:
0

434

79

0.182

355

0.818

5

0.012

74

0.171

1

4,282

1,541

0.360

2,741

0.640

802

0.187

739

0.173

618

156

0.252

462

0.748

56

0.091

100

2 or more

Difference (2 or more) minus (1)

-0.107 ***
(0.020)

-0.097 ***
(0.013)

0.162
-0.011
(0.016)

B. Number of children:
0

642

159

0.248

483

0.752

0.000

159

1

807

235

0.291

572

0.709

96

0.119

139

0.172

2

2,397

770

0.321

1,627

0.679

389

0.162

381

0.159

3

1,152

476

0.413

676

0.587

296

0.257

180

0.156

336

136

0.405

200

0.595

82

0.244

54

0.161

4 or more

-

0.248

Difference (1) minus (0)

0.044 *
(0.023)

0.119 ***
(0.011)

-0.075 ***
(0.022)

Difference (3) minus (1)

0.122 ***
(0.022)

0.138 ***
(0.017)

-0.016
(0.017)

C. By gender ratio (male/children):
< 50 percent

1,511

437

0.289

1,074

0.711

161

0.107

276

0.183

= 50 percent

1,345

451

0.335

894

0.665

248

0.184

203

0.151

> 50 percent

1,836

729

0.397

1,107

0.603

454

0.247

275

Difference (>50%) minus (< 50%)

0.108 ***
(0.016)

0.141 ***
(0.013)

0.150
-0.033 **
(0.013)

D. By gender of first born child:
Female

2,216

652

0.294

1,564

0.706

281

0.127

371

0.167

Male

2,476

965

0.390

1,511

0.610

582

0.235

383

0.155

Difference male minus female

0.096 ***
(0.014)

0.108 ***
(0.011)

-0.013
(0.011)

Notes:
a.
b.

c.

d.
e.

The table presents family characteristics at the time of the chief executive officer (CEO) transition.
CEO successions are classified into two groups: family, when the entering CEO is related by blood or marriage to the departing
CEO, and unrelated otherwise. Family successions are further classified as family—children successions, when the entering CEO
is the child of the departing executive, and family—others otherwise.
In Panels (A) to (D), the share of family and unrelated successions are presented by alternative family characteristics of the
departing CEOs: (A) the number of spouses, (B) the number of children, (C) the ratio of sons to the total number of children, and
(D) the gender of the firstborn child.
CEO successions data are from Købmandsstandens Oplysningsbureau's (KOB) dataset. Family characteristics data are from the
Danish Civil Registration System.
Standard errors are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

38

TABLE III. FIRM AND FAMILY CHARACTERISTICS BY THE GENDER OF THE FIRST CHILD OF
DEPARTING CEOS
Gender of First Child
Variable

All
(I)

Male

Female

(II)

(III)

Difference
(IV)

Ln assets

8.638
(0.0255)
[4,692]

8.617
(0.0352)
[2,476]

8.662
(0.0369)
[2,216]

-0.045
(0.0510)

Operating return on assets (OROA)

0.067
(0.0022)
[4,692]

0.066
(0.0030)
[2,476]

0.069
(0.0031)
[2,216]

-0.003
(0.0043)

Net income to assets

0.035
(0.0020)
[4,692]

0.033
(0.0028)
[2,476]

0.037
(0.0029)
[2,216]

-0.004
(0.0040)

Industry-adjusted OROA

-0.0003
(0.0021)
[4,692]

-0.0028
(0.0030)
[2,476]

0.0024
(0.0031)
[2,216]

-0.0052
(0.0043)

Firm Age

19.247
(0.3175)
[4,692]

19.307
(0.4370)
[2,476]

19.180
(0.4621)
[2,216]

0.127
(0.6361)

Number of children of
departing CEO

2.236
(0.0127)
[4,692]

2.240
(0.0175)
[2,476]

2.231
(0.0184)
[2,216]

0.009
(0.0253)

Departing CEO marital
status is divorced

0.067
(0.0037)
[4,692]

0.067
(0.0050)
[2,476]

0.067
(0.0053)
[2,216]

0.000
(0.0073)

Number of spouses of
departing CEO

1.100
(0.0063)
[4,692]

1.109
(0.0089)
[2,476]

1.091
(0.0087)
[2,216]

0.018
(0.0125)

Notes:
a.
b.
c.

d.

The table presents firm and family characteristics at the time of the chief executive officer (CEO) transition.
CEO successions are classified by the gender of the first child born to the departing CEO: male when the firstborn child is male and
female when she is female. Firms where the departing CEO had no children are omitted.
Ln assets is the natural logarithm of the total book value of assets in Danish Kroner. OROA is the operating income (Primært
resultat) to book value of assets. Net income to assets is the ratio of net income (Årets resultat) to book value of assets. Industryadjusted OROA is the difference between OROA and the average of its four-digit NACE (European industry classification system)
benchmark. Firm age is the difference between the year of CEO transition and the oldest of: the year of establishment, the year of
registration, or the year of firms’ bylaws. Number of children of departing CEO is the number of children registered in the Danish
Civil Registration System. Departing CEO marital status is divorced is an indicator variable equal to one when the marital status of
the departing CEO at the time of the transition is divorced, zero otherwise. Number of spouses of departing CEO is the number of
different spouses registered in the Danish Civil Registration System that the departing CEO had had at the time of the CEO
transition.
Standard errors are in parentheses and the numbers of observations are in square brackets. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1, 5,
and 10 percent levels, respectively.

39

TABLE IV. CEO SUCCESSION DECISIONS
TRANSITIONS

AND

FIRM PERFORMANCE AROUND CEO

Panel A. Dependent Variable: Industry-Adjusted Operating Return on Assets (OROA)
Type of Succession
All

Family

(I)

(II)

Before

-0.0032
(0.0016)
[5,334]

0.0077
(0.0024)
[1,776]

-0.0085
(0.0020)
[3,558]

0.0162 ***
(0.0031)

After

0.0053
(0.0016)
[5,334]

0.0067
(0.0026)
[1,776]

0.0046
(0.0020)
[3,558]

0.0021
(0.0033)

0.0084 ***
(0.0018)

-0.0010
(0.0028)

0.0132 ***
(0.0023)

-0.0141 ***
(0.0036)

Difference

Unrelated
(III)

Difference
(IV)

Panel B. Alternative Dependent Variables (Difference-in-Differences (DD) analysis)
Type of Transition
Differences in

Family

Unrelated

(I)

(II)

Mean Differencein-Differences
(III)

Median DD
(IV)

Operating return on assets (OROA)

-0.0120 ***
(0.0028)

0.0035
(0.0023)

-0.0154 ***
(0.0036)

-0.0082 ***
(0.0027)

Industry-adjusted OROA

-0.0010
(0.0028)

0.0132 ***
(0.0023)

-0.0141 ***
(0.0036)

-0.0071 ***
(0.0027)

Industry-and-performance-adjusted
OROA

0.0009
(0.0027)

0.0107 ***
(0.0021)

-0.0098 ***
(0.0034)

-0.0066 ***
(0.0025)

Industry-adjusted net income
to assets

-0.0056 *
(0.0029)

0.0064 ***
(0.0022)

-0.0120 ***
(0.0036)

-0.0060 ***
(0.0023)

Ln assets

0.0092 ***
(0.0022)

0.0300 ***
(0.0019)

-0.0208 ***
(0.0029)

-0.0050 ***
(0.0019)

Ln sales

0.0003
(0.0059)

0.0216 ***
(0.0038)

-0.0213 ***
(0.0070)

-0.0057 **
(0.0025)

Notes:
a.
b.

c.

d.

Chief executive officer (CEO) successions are classified into two groups: family, when the entering CEO is related by blood
or marriage to the departing CEO, and unrelated otherwise.
Panel A reports average industry-adjusted OROA before (three-year average) and after (three-year average) successions, and
differences in these measures around CEO transitions. Panel B presents differences (differences-in-differences (DD)) around
CEO transitions (and across succession groups) for the three-year averages of the following variables (I) OROA, (II)
industry-adjusted OROA, (III) industry-and-performance–adjusted OROA, (IV) industry-adjusted net income to assets, (IV)
ln assets, and (VI) ln sales. In all cases, the year of succession is omitted.
OROA, industry-adjusted OROA, industry-adjusted net income to assets and Ln assets are defined in Table III. Ln sales is the
natural logarithm of sales in Danish Kroner. Industry-and-performance-adjusted OROA is the difference between OROA and
the average of the firms in the same decile grouping of industry-adjusted OROA the year prior to succession.
Standard errors are in parentheses and the numbers of observations are in square brackets. ***, **, and * denote significance at the
1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

40

TABLE V. GENDER OF THE FIRSTBORN CHILD, FAMILY SUCCESSIONS AND PERFORMANCE
Dependent Variable: Family CEO

Panel A. First Stage

(V)

(VI)

(VII)

0.0955 ***
(0.0136)

0.0927 ***
(0.0135)

0.0936 ***
(0.0135)

-0.0448 ***
(0.0034)

-0.0515 ***
(0.0036)

-0.0508 ***
(0.0037)

Firm age

0.0016 ***
(0.0003)

0.0015 ***
(0.0003)

Industry-adjusted OROA
t=-1

0.2446 ***
(0.0445)

Gender of the first born child
is male

(I)

(II)

0.0955 ***
(0.0138)

0.0404 **
(0.0171)

Male child indicator variable

(III)

(IV)

0.1162 ***
(0.0191)

Number of male children

0.0737 ***
(0.0077)

Ratio male to total children

0.1436 ***
(0.0186)

Ln assets

Industry-and-performance-adjusted
OROA, t=-1
Year controls

0.3374 ***
(0.0792)
No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

F-statistic

48.058

46.566

91.768

59.494

25.590

26.506

24.662

Number of CEO transitions

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

Panel B. Reduced Form

Dependent Variable: Differences in Operating Profitability around CEO Successions
(three-year average post succession) - (three-year average pre-transition)
(V)

(VI)

(VII)

-0.0121 ***
(0.0038)

-0.0086 **
(0.0035)

-0.0083 **
(0.0034)

-0.0040 ***
(0.0010)

-0.0027 ***
(0.0010)

-0.0029 ***
(0.0010)

Firm age

-0.0000
(0.0001)

0.0000
(0.0001)

Industry-adjusted OROA, t=-1

-0.3737 ***
(0.0163)

Gender of the first born child
is male

(I)

(II)

-0.0120 ***
(0.0038)

-0.0123 ***
(0.0045)

Male child indicator variable

(III)

(IV)

0.0006
(0.0054)

Number of male children

-0.0045 **
(0.0022)

Ratio male to total children

-0.0116 **
(0.0053)

Ln assets

Industry-and-performance-adjusted
OROA, t=-1
Year controls
Number of CEO transitions

-0.4219 ***
(0.0311)
No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

Notes:
a.

b.

c.

d.

In Panel A, the dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the incoming chief executive officer (CEO) is related by
blood or marriage to the departing CEO, zero otherwise. In Panel B, the dependent variable is the change in firm profitability around
CEO transitions.
In Panel B Columns (I)–(VI), firm profitability is defined as the industry-adjusted OROA. In Panel B Column (VII), firm profitability
is defined as industry-and-performance-adjusted OROA. Changes in profitability are computed as the difference between the
average, three-year post-succession profitability minus the three-year average before transition. The year of succession is omitted.
Gender of the firstborn child is male is an indicator variable equal to one if the firstborn child of the departing CEO is male, zero if
she is female. Male child indicator variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the departing CEO has at least one male child, zero
otherwise. Number of male children is the number of departing CEO’s male children registered at the time of transition. Ratio of
male to total children is the ratio of the number of departing CEO’s sons to total number of children. Ln assets, firm age, and
industry-adjusted OROA are defined in Table III. Industry-and-performance-adjusted OROA is defined in Table IV.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

41

TABLE VI. FIRM PERFORMANCE AND FAMILY SUCCESSIONS: OLS AND INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES
Dependent Variable: Differences in Operating Profitability around CEO Successions
(three-year average post succession) - (three-year average pre-transition)
OLS

Family CEO

IV-2SLS

(I)

(II)

(III)

(IV)

(V)

(VI)

(VII)

(VIII)

-0.0142 ***
(0.0038)

-0.0079 **
(0.0036)

-0.1260 ***
(0.0429)

-0.0722 **
(0.0317)

-0.0606 **
(0.0298)

-0.0808 **
(0.0383)

-0.0928 **
(0.0393)

-0.0886 **
(0.0384)

Ln assets

-0.0030 ***
(0.0010)

-0.0074 ***
(0.0023)

-0.0074 ***
(0.0022)

Firm age

0.0000
(0.0001)

0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0002
(0.0001)

Industry-adjusted OROA, t=-1

-0.3727 ***
(0.0164)

-0.3510 ***
(0.0198)

Industry-and-performance-adjusted
OROA, t=-1
Year controls
Number of CEO transitions

-0.3920 ***
(0.0350)
No

Yes

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

4,692

√

√

√

√

Instrumental variables
Gender of the first child
Male child indicator variable
Number of male children
Ratio male to total children
Notes:
a.
b.
c.

d.

√
√
√

Estimated coefficients in Columns (I) and (II) are from least squares regressions. Estimated coefficients in Columns (III)–(VIII) are from IV-2SLS regressions.
In Columns (I)–(VII) the dependent variable is the change in industry-adjusted OROA around CEO successions as defined in Table V. In Column (VIII) the dependent variable is the change
in industry-and-performance-adjusted OROA around CEO successions as defined in table V.
Family CEO, the instrumented variable, is defined in Table V. Depending on the specification, as indicated above, the instrumental variables are: gender of the firstborn child of a departing
CEO (1 = male, 0 = female), male child indicator variable (1 = departing CEO has at least one son at the time of succession, 0 = otherwise), number of male children of the departing CEO,
and ratio of male to total number of children of the departing CEO. Other control variables are defined in Tables III and IV.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

42

TABLE VII. ALTERNATIVE WINDOWS OF ANALYSIS AND SUBSAMPLES BASED ON INDIVIDUAL CHARACTERISTICS
Dependent variable:
Differences in Industry-and-Performance-Adjusted Operating Profitability
(three-year average post succession) - (three-year average pre-transition)
Windows

Family CEO

Sub-samples

Pre-transition
differences in
performance

Differences in
performance
around CEO
transitions

Post-transition
differences in
performance

Departing
CEO's age
(55,70)

Departing
CEO's age other
than
(55,70)

Full sample

CEO transition and
departing CEO
death occur in the
same year

(I)

(II)

(III)

(IV)

(V)

(VI)

(VII)

0.0325
(0.0420)

-0.0886 **
(0.0384)

-0.0435
(0.0608)

-0.0836 **
(0.0382)

-0.0962
(0.0926)

-0.0372 ***
(0.0141)

-0.1475
(0.1411)

Year controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2,480

4,692

1,511

2,159

2,533

5,334

447

√

√

√

√

√

Number of CEO transitions
Instrumental variables
Gender of the first child
Death of CEO \around transition

√
√

Notes:
a.
b.

c.

d.

e.
f.

All results are from IV-2SLS regressions.
Profitability is defined as industry-and-performance-adjusted OROA. Pre-transition change in profitability in Column (I) is computed as the difference between the average three-year
profitability after year t = -3 minus the three-year average before, where the year t = -3 is omitted. Transition changes in profitability in Columns (II) and (IV)–(VII) are computed as the
difference between the average, three-year post-succession profitability minus the three-year average before transition, where the year of succession is omitted. Post-transition change in
profitability in Column (III) is computed as the difference between the average three-year profitability after year t = +3 minus the three-year average before, where the year t = +3 is omitted.
Family CEO (chief executive officer), the instrumented variable, is defined in Table V. The instrumental variable in Columns (I)–(V) and in Column (VII) is the gender of the firstborn child
of the departing CEO (1 = male, 0 = female). The instrumental variable in Column (VI) is death of the departing CEO around transition (1 = outgoing CEO dies in the year of the succession,
0 = otherwise).
The number of successions in Columns (I)–(III) reflects the number of firms with available data for the relevant analysis. Column (IV) reports results for firms where the departing CEO was
between 55 and 70 years of age at the time of transition. Column (V) reports results for firms where the departing CEO’s age was either below 55 or above 70 at the time of transition.
Column (VI) shows results for the full sample. Finally, Column (VII) uses observations where the departing CEO died at the time of transition.
All specifications include controls for (estimated coefficients are not reported): Ln assets, firm age, and industry-and-performance-adjusted OROA the year prior to succession. These
variables are defined in Tables III and IV.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

43

TABLE VIII. OTHER SUBSAMPLES BASED ON FIRM AND INDUSTRY CHARACTERISTICS
Dependent variable:
Differences in Industry-and-Performance-Adjusted Operating Profitability
(three-year average post succession) - (three-year average pre-transition)
Firm characteristics

Industry characteristics

Firms with
assets
≥ median

Firms with
formal
board of
directors

Firms with family
members in board
post- succession

High share
of family
CEO

High
growth

Reports
R&D
spending

High
per worker
wages

High labor
force
schooling
levels

High
import
penetration

High
output
volatility

(I)

(II)

(III)

(IV)

(V)

(VI)

(VII)

(VIII)

(IX)

(X)

-0.1414 **
(0.0668)

-0.1568 **
(0.0656)

-0.0970 *
(0.0527)

-0.1330 **
(0.0636)

Family CEO

-0.1140 **
(0.0478)

-0.0934 **
(0.0470)

Year controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2,397

3,239

1,533

2,022

2,312

2,012

2,045

1,882

2,174

2,015

Number of CEO
transitions

-0.0901 *
(0.0518)

-0.0507
(0.0406)

-0.1211 **
(0.0606)

-0.1191
(0.0760)

Notes:
a.
b.

c.

d.
e.

f.

All results are from IV-2SLS regressions.
The dependent variable is the difference in industry-and-performance-adjusted OROA around chief executive officer (CEO) successions as defined in Table V. Family CEO, the instrumented
variable, is defined in Table V. The instrumental variable is the gender of the firstborn child of the departing CEO (1 = male, 0 = female).
Columns (I)–(III) present results for subsamples of firms based on firm characteristics. Column (I) presents results for firms with book value of assets above the median of the sample at the
time of succession. Column (II) presents results for firms with a formal board of directors at the time of transition. Column (III) presents results for firms in which there was at least one
family member of the departing CEO in the board after succession. Columns (IV)–(X) present results for subsamples of firms based on industry characteristics. Column (IV) present results
for firms in industries that are above the median in terms of prevalence of family CEO transitions. Column (V) present results for firms in industries with above-median production growth
during the sample period. Column (VI) presents data for firms in industries with positive research and development (R&D) spending. Columns (VII)–(X) present data for firms in industries
with higher than the sample median levels of (i) per worker wages, (ii) educational attainment, (iii) import penetration, and (iv) output volatility. Variables in Columns (V)–(IX) are
constructed using industry-level data for 1990 to 2002. Output volatility was estimated using the volatility of output growth between 1966 and 2002.
Data on production growth, labor compensation, import penetration, and output volatility at the industry-level are from Statistics Denmark’s public website. Average schooling levels by
industry were constructed by the authors using confidential data from Statistics Denmark. Data on industry-level R&D spending are from the OECD STAN database.
All specifications include controls for (estimated coefficients are not reported): Ln assets, firm age, and industry-and-performance-adjusted OROA the year prior to succession. These
variables are defined in Tables III and IV.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

44

TABLE IX. ALTERNATIVE DEPENDENT VARIABLES

Family CEO

Net Income to
Assets

Return on
Capital
Employed

Log of Assets

Bankruptcy /
Liquidation

Bankruptcy /
Liquidation

(I)

(II)

(III)

(IV)

(V)

-0.0688 **
(0.0345)

-0.1172 **
(0.0455)

-0.3059
(0.2387)

0.0588
(0.0553)

0.1715 *
(0.1020)

Year controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

4,692

2,553

4,692

4,568

2,258

Number of CEO transitions

Notes:
a.
b.

c.
d.
e.

f.

All results are from IV-2SLS regressions.
The dependent variables in Columns (I)–(III) are the difference between the three-year, post-succession performance
measures minus the three-year average before transition. Net income to assets is the industry-adjusted ratio of net income
to total assets. Return on capital employed is the ratio of operating income to the sum of the book value of equity plus the
book value of debt. Log of assets is the natural logarithm of total assets in 2000 Danish Kroner. The dependent variable in
Columns (IV) and (V) is bankruptcy/liquidation, an indicator variable equal to one if the firm is under a bankruptcy or
liquidation procedure in the three years post-transition, zero otherwise. Bankruptcy/liquidation is reported for (a) all firms
with matching bankruptcy/liquidation status (Column (IV)) and for (b) firms with matching bankruptcy/liquidation status
in the bottom 50 percent of the sample in terms of profitability (Column (V)).
Family CEO (chief executive officer), the instrumented variable, is defined in Table V. The instrumental variable is the
gender of the firstborn child of the departing CEO (1 = male, 0 = female).
Data on bankruptcy and liquidation procedures are from Danish Commerce and Companies Agency (Erhvervs- og
Selskabsstyrelsen), at the Ministry of Economic and Business Affairs.
All specifications include controls for (estimated coefficients are not reported): Ln assets, firm age, and mean industryadjusted net income to assets prior to succession. These variables are defined in Table III. Columns (IV) and (V) also
include industry-indicator variables at the one-digit NACE level.
Standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

TABLE X. CEO CHARACTERISTICS BY TYPE OF TRANSITION
Type of CEO Transition

A. By gender of the first child:

(I)

(II)

(III)

(IV)

(V)

All

First-child male

First-child female

Difference

IV-2SLS

CEO previously held a CEO position

0.2417
(0.0059)

0.2278
(0.0084)

0.2509
(0.0092)

-0.023 *
(0.0125)

CEO previously held a board position

0.2887
(0.0062)

0.2892
(0.0091)

0.2938
(0.0097)

-0.005
(0.0133)

Number of years of schooling by CEO

13.333
(0.0388)

13.2482
(0.0561)

13.4476
(0.0601)

-0.199 **
(0.0822)

CEO attended college or a graduate
program

0.3928
(0.0068)

0.3809
(0.0099)

0.4115
(0.0106)

-0.031 **
(0.0145)

Unrelated

Difference

IV-2SLS

B. By family links:

Family

CEO previously held a CEO position

0.1543
(0.0086)

0.2853
(0.0076)

-0.131 ***
(0.0114)

-0.242 *
(0.130)

CEO previously held a board position

0.2410
(0.0102)

0.3125
(0.0078)

-0.072 ***
(0.0128)

-0.048
(0.139)

Number of years of schooling by CEO

12.659
(0.0595)

13.677
(0.0491)

-1.018 ***
(0.0771)

-1.992 **
(0.818)

CEO attended college or a graduate
program

0.2787
(0.0107)

0.4511
(0.0085)

-0.172 ***
(0.0137)

-0.306 **
(0.144)

C. Family transitions only:

Firstborn male CEO

Other family CEO

Difference

CEO previously held a CEO position

0.1407
(0.0173)

0.1583
(0.0099)

0.018
(0.0199)

CEO previously held a board position

0.2247
(0.0208)

0.2458
(0.0116)

0.021
(0.0238)

Number of years of schooling by CEO

12.774
(0.1092)

12.625
(0.0700)

-0.149
(0.1297)

CEO attended college or a graduate
program

0.2730
(0.0222)

0.2804
(0.0123)

0.007
(0.0254)

Notes:
a.

b.

c.

d.
e.

f.

Chief executive officer (CEO) successions are classified by: (A) the gender of the first firstborn child of the departing
CEO: male or female; (B) family ties: family, when the entering CEO is related by blood or marriage to the departing CEO,
and unrelated otherwise; (C) firstborn male status: one when the incoming family CEO is a firstborn male, zero otherwise.
Incoming CEO characteristics include: (i) CEO previously held a CEO position, is indicator variable equal to one when the
incoming CEO worked as CEO in another corporation in the three years prior to appointment, (ii) CEO previously held a
board position, is indicator variable equal to one when the incoming CEO was identified as member of the board of
director in another corporation in the three years prior to appointment, (iii) number of years of schooling by CEO, is
calculated using educational attainment records from elementary, middle high-school, high-school, vocational, college, and
postgraduate programs, (iv) CEO attended college or a graduate program, is an indicator variable equal to one when the
incoming CEO attended college or a postgraduate program.
CEO previously held a CEO position and CEO previously held a board position are constructed using data from
Købmandsstandens Oplysningsbureau (KOB). Number of years of schooling by CEO and CEO attended college or a
graduate program are constructed using confidential data on individual schooling from Statistics Denmark.
Column (IV) reports differences of means between Column (III) and Column (II).
Column (V) in Panel B reports the IV-2SLS estimated differences for family successions, relative to unrelated successions.
Family CEO, the instrumented variable, is defined in Table V. The instrumental variable is the gender of the firstborn child
of the departing CEO (1 = male, 0 = female).
Standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

46

