                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  OPTIMAL TRADE AND INDUSTRIAL
                     POLICY UNDER OLIGOPOLY


                         Jonathan Eaton

                        Gene M. Grossman



                     Working Paper No. 1236




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         November 1983




Financial support for this research was provided by the National
Science Foundation under grants SES 82O163 and PRA 82119140 and by
the International Labor Affairs Bureau, U.S. Department of Labor
under contract J9K30006. We are grateful to Jim Brander and
Avinash Dixit for helpful discussions. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies and
project in Productivity (World Economy). Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #1236
                                                  November 1983




            Optimal Trade and Industrial Policy Under Oligopoly



                                   ABSTRACT



        In this paper we provide an integrative treatment of the welfare

 effects of trade and industrial policy under oligopoly, and characterize

 qualitatively the form that optimal intervention takes under a variety of

 assumptions about the number of firms, their conjectures about the response

 of their rivals to their actions, the substitutability of their products

 and the markets in which they are sold. We find that when no domestic

 consumption occurs optimal policy under duopoly with a single home firm

 depends on the difference between firms' actual responses to their rivals

and the response that their rivals' conjecture. If conjectures are con-

sistent ,   free   trade is optimal. A tax or subsidy is indicated depending

on the sign of the difference between the conjectured and the actual reponse.

With more than one home firm but still no domestic consumption, an export

tax is indicated if conjectures are consistent. Production subsidies and

export tax—cum—subsidjes can raise national welfare in the presence of

domestic consumption, because these policies can mitigate the extent of

the consumption distortion implicit in the deviation of price from marginal

cost.




Jonathan Eaton                                      Gene M. Grossman
Economic Growth Center                              Woodrow Wilson School
Yale University                                     Princeton University
Box 1987 Yale Station                               Princeton, NJ 08544
New Haven, CT 06520                                 (609) 452-4823
(203) 436—8414
I.   Introduction

     Implicit in many arguments for interventionist trade or industrial

policy that have been advanced in the political realm appears to be an

assumption that international markets are oligopolistic. It can be argued

that international competition among firms in many industries is in fact

imperfectly competitive, either because the number of firms is few, because

products are differentiated, or because governments themselves have car—

telized the national firms engaged in competition. They may do so implic-

itly through tax policy, or explicitly through marketing arrangements.

      Government policies that affect the competitiveness of their firms in

international markets, as well as the welfare of their consumers, involve

not only traditional trade policy (trade taxes and subsidies) but policies

that affect other aspects of firms' costs, such as output tax and sub-

sidies. We refer to intervention of this sort as industrial policy.

      Until recently the theory of commercial policy has considered the

implications of intervention under conditions of perfect competition or,

more rarely, pure monopoly. As a consequence, this literature cannot respond

to many of the arguments that have been advanced in favor of activist govern-

ment policies. The only argument for departing from laissez faire is the

traditional optimal tariff argument. If (i) individual firms and consumers

behave atomistically, (ii) the amount of trade that the economy engages in

is sufficient to affect world prices, and (iii) the country's government

can act as a Stackelberg leader in setting a trade tax before firms set

prices or quantities, then a departure from free trade is optimal from the

national perspective. From a world welfare perspective, however, free

trade remains optimal. Our purpose in this paper is to extend the theory
                                —2—


of nationally optimal policy to situations in which individual firms

exercise market power in world markets.

     The primary implications of oligopoly for the design of trade policy

are (i) that economic profits are not driven to zero, and (ii) that a price

equal to marginal cost does not generally obtain. The first of these

means that government policies that shift the industry equilibrium to the

advantage of domestic firms may be socially beneficial from a national

perspective. The second feature of oligopolistic competition suggests

that trade policy may be a substitute for antitrust policy in an open—

economy setting, if policies can be devised that effectively shrink the

wedge between opportunity cost in production and marginal valuation to

consumers.

     A number of recent papers have focused on the profit—shifting motive

for trade policy under oligopoly. Brander and Spencer (1982a) develop a

model in which one home firm and one foreign firm produce perfectly sub-

stitutable goods, and compete in a third—country market. They consider a

Cournot—Nash equilibrium, and find that if the home country's government

can credibly pre—commit itself to pursue a particular trade po1Jcv before

firms make production decisions (and if demand is not very convex), then

an export subsidy is optimal.1 Dixit (1984) has extended the Brander—

Spencer result to cases with more than two firms, and establishes that an

export subsidy in a Cournot oligopoly equilibrium is optimal as long as

the number of domestic firms is not too large. Finally, Krugman (1983)

shows that under increasing returns to scale, protection of a local firm

in one market (e.g., by an import tariff) can shift the equilibrium to

that firm's advantage in other markets by lowering its marginal cost of

production.
                                 —3—

     These papers all provide examples in which interventionist trade

policy can raise national welfare in imperfectly competitive environments.

Yet each makes special assumptions about the form of oligopolistic com-

petition, the substitutability of the goods produced and the markets in

which they are sold.   It is difficult to extract general principles for

trade policy from this analysis. Our purpose here is to provide an

integrative treatment of the welfare effects of trade and industrial policy

under oligopoly, and to characterize the form that optimal intervention

takes under a variety of assumptions about the number of firms, their

assumptions about rivals' responses to their actions (their conjectural

variations), the substitutability of their products and the countries where

they are sold.

     The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we consider

a general conjectural variations model of a duopoly in which one home firm

competes with one foreign firm either in the foreign firm's local market

or in a third—country market. We find that the sign of the optimal trade

or industrial policy (i.e. whether a tax or subsidy is optimal) depends

on the relationship between the home firm's conjectural variations and the

actual equilibrium reactions of the foreign firm. We note the form that

optimal policy takes in Cournot and Bertrand equilibria and in what Bresnahan

and Perry have called "consistent" conjectures equilibrium. When conjectures

are consistent a policy of free trade is optimal.

     In Section III we extend the analysis by expanding the number of firms

while maintaining the assumption of no domestic consumption. Here we show

that free trade is optimal under consistent conjectures if there is only

one home firm, regardless of the number of foreign competitors. If two or

more domestic firms compete in the foreign market, the optimal intervention

in a symmetric consistent conjectures equilibrium is always to tax production
                                 —4—



or   exports.

       Finally, in Section IV, we return to the duopoly case, and introduce

domestic consumption. In the special case of perfectly substitutable

products and consistent conjectural variations on the part of the home

country firm, the introduction of a small production subsidy by the home

country government raises national welfare. It does so by reducing the

price for the commodity faced by domestic consumers, thereby reducing the

difference between the marginal utility of consumption of the product and

the cost of production, which is necessarily positive under oligopolistic

competition. If, instead, trade intervention is considered, then either

an export tax or a subsidy may be indicated.

       The main findings of the paper are summarized in a concluding section.



II. Optimal Trade Policy and the Role of Conjectural Variatio:The

       Case of Duopoly

       In this and subsequent sections we characterize optimal government

policy in the presence of oligopolistic competition among domestic and

foreign firms in international markets. Each firm produces a single pro-

duct which may be a perfect or imperfect substitute for the output of its

rivals. We specify competition among firms as Nash in output quantities

with arbitrary conjectural variations.2 The domestic government can tax

 (or subsidize) the output of domestic firms, tax (or subsidize) the exports

of these firms, and tax (or subsidize) the imports from the foreign rivals

 of domestic firms. Its objective is to maximize national welfare.

        The government acts as a Stackelberg leader vis—a—vis both domestic

 and foreign firms in setting ad valorem tax (subsidy) rates   .   Thus firms

 set outputs taking tax and subsidy rates as given.    In other words, the
                                      —5—

government can pre—commit itself to a specific policy intervention that

will not be altered even if it is sub—optimal ex post, once firms' outputs

are determined. For simplicitly we assume the absence of government policy

in other countries, although this assumption has no qualitative implicotions

for our results.

     In this section we consider optimal government policy when oligopolistic

competition takes its simplest possible form: a single domestic firm com-

petes with a single foreign firm in a foreign market. In the absence of

domestic consumption government trade policy (export taxes and subsidies)

is equivalent to government industrial policy (output taxes and subsidies).

     We assume that the government's objective function places equal

weight on the home—firm's profit and government tax revenue. Its objective

is therefore one of maximizing national product.

     Denote the output (and exports) of the home firm by x and let c(x)

be its total production cost, c'(x) >       0.   Upper case letters denote

corresponding magnitudes for the foreign firm, with C'(X) >        0.   Pretax

revenue of the home and foreign firms are given by the functions r(x, X)

and R(x, X) respectively. These satisfy the conditions that



                        'r(x, X) < 0
                   X)




                        R(x,
          R (x, x) -
           1               x — X)   < 0




These conditions state that an increase in the output of the competing pro-

duct lowers the total revenue of each firm. They are implied by the assump-

tion that the products are substitutes in consumption. Total after—tax
                                              —6—


profits of the home and foreign firms are given by:



             Tr =   (1 —     t)   r(x, X) —   c(x)
and

             II =   R(x,     X) — C(X)




respectively. Here t denotes the ad valorem output (or export) tax. The

domestic firm's conjecture about the foreign firm's output response to

changes in its own output is given by the parameter y. The foreign firm's

corresponding conjectural variation is F.

      The Nash equilibrium quantities, given the level of home country

policy intervention, are determined by the first—order conditions



      (1 —
             t)[r1(x,        X) + yr2(x, X)] —        c'(x)   = 0                      (1)




      R2(x, X) + FR1(x, X) —             C'(X)       0                                 (2)




We assume that the second—order conditions for profit maximization are

satisfied.

      We now demonstrate:

Theorem 1: A positive (negative) output or export tax can yield higher

national welfare than laissez—faire (t = 0) if the home firm conjectures a

foreign change in output in response to an increase in its own output that

is smaller (larger) than the actual response.

Proof: National welfare generated by the home firm                  is   given by w where



             w =    (1   —   t)r(x,   X) —    c(x)   + tr(x, X)

                =   r(x,     X) -   c(x)                                               (3)
                                          —7—


The change in welfare resulting from a small change in the tax (or subsidy)

rate t is
         .4


              dw =                           dx                dX
                     [r(x, X) — c (x)]---         +
                                                      r2(x, X)----


Substituting     the irst—order condition, (1), into (4), we obtain5



              dw =                  tc'    dx           dx
                      [— yr2
                                —               +
                                     —                r2()


      Expression (2) implicitly defines the output of the foreign firm, X, as

a function of domestic output x. Denote this function :(x). The tax rate

t does not appear directly as an argument of this function, since t does not

appear in expression (2). Therefore dX/dt'(x)(dx/dt). Define

g =   (dX/dt)/(dx/dt)       =   lp'(x);   the term g measures the slope of the foreign

firm's actual reaction to x. A first—order condition for maximizing national

welfare obtains when dw/dt                0, or, incorporating the definition o g into

equation (5)



              -r2(g -      ) tc'/(l - t)                                                  (6)


Since r2 < 0, the left—hand and right—hand sides of expression (6) are of the
same sign if         i >   t >0     and g > y,        or t   < 0     and g   .   The   term

g — y is the difference between the actual response of X to a change in

x (i.e., '(x)) and the home firm's conjectural varation. When                             a tax

can yield more income than laissez—faire, conversely when g

Q.E.D.
                                        —8—

      We now turn to some specific conjectural variations that are commonly

assumed in models of oligopolistic competition.


A. Cournot Conjectures

      Under Cournot behavior, each firm conjectures that when it chan2es

its output the other firm will hold its output fixed. Thus, y== ()

in   this case, and (6) becomes



              —
                  gr2tc/(i —     t)                                           (7)




Totally differentiating the equilibrium conditions (1) and (2) to solve For

g this expression may be written:



                r2R21 = tc'
              R22 — C"  1 —    t                                              ()


The second—order condition for the foreign firm's profit maximization

ensures that the left—hand side of this expression has the sign of R71.

Letting t denote the optimal export tax (or subsidy, if negative), we bav?

established

Proposition 1: In a Cournot duopoly with no home consumption, sgn t = sgn V.



        In   the case of Cournot duopoly R21 is the slope of the foreign firm's

reaction curve.       If R21 <     0, then an increase in home output causes the
foreign firm to reduce its output. Linear demand necessarily implies

R21 <    0, and many, but not all, specifications of demand imply this sign as
well.

        Proposition 1 constitutes a slight generalization of the Brander—

 Spencer (1982a) argument for an export subsidy to situations in which the
                                   —9--



competing firms produce imperfect substitutes: an export subsidy raises

domestic welfare in a Cournot equilibrium by transfering industry profit

to the domestic firm. Graphically, the tax shifts the domestic reaction

curve so that it intersects the foreign curve at the point that the home

firm would have chosen had the home firm been a Stackelberg leader.

     In the case of Cournot conjectures the home firm's conjecture that the

foreign firm will not lower its output in response to its own quantity

increase is an overly pessimistic one. When                <   Q, the foreign firm's

actual reaction to such a deviation is to reduce output. The home govern-

ment, with its ability to pre—commit itself to a tax on output before firms

determine their output levels, can take advantage of the difference between

the firm's conjecture and the true response.



B. Bertrand Conjectures

     In a Bertrand equilibrium, each firm conjectures that its rival will

hold its price fixed in response to any changes in it own price.             Define

the direct demand functions for the output of the home and foreign firms as

d(p, P) and D(p, P) respectively. The total profits of the two firms are

therefore



            r(p, P) = (1 -t)pd(p, P) -      c(d(p,   P))




            H(p,   P) = PD(p, P) — C(D(p,    F))




Each firm sets its price to maximize its profit taking the other firm's

price as constant. First—order conditions for a maximum imply
                                                — 10 —




                       (1 —   t)(d   +
                                         pd1)
                                                —
                                                    c'd1
                                                           = 0                             (9a)




                                                                                           (9b)




      While    the     home firm conjectures that the foreign firm will not change

its price in response to a change in p, the true response is given, from

differentiating (9b), by



                   —
                                           + (P—C')D21—C"D1D2
               p        22     —           ÷ (P —        —
                                    [2D2          C')D22   C"(D2)   I




       The second—order condition for the foreign firm's profit maximization

implies that the sign of expresssion (10) is the same as that of                            If

the two products are substitutes (i.e. d2 > 0 and P1 > 0) and returns to

scale are non—increasing (c" >                  0, C" > 0) a positive response will emerge
unless an increase in its rival's price has a significantly negative effect

on the             of the demand curve facing the home firm.              In the special

cases of either perfect substitutes or linear demands a positive response

necessarily obtains. There is consequently a presumption in the

case of competition between producers of goods that are substitutes that

the Bertrand conjecture on the part of a firm that is cutting its price

to expand its sales is overly optimistic.

       The actual and conjectured price responses can be translated into

quantity responses by totally differentiating the demand functions to

obtain



              dx       =       d1     d2            dp

              dx                                    DP
                                      D2
                              [D1
                                                 — 11 —



The Bertrand conjecture on the part of the home firm implies a conjectured

quantity response given by


                 dX              dx
            I = (—
                  p /
                                                   = D1/d1                             (11)
                                 p dP=O

The actual response is



                   dx       dx        D1 -     D221/22
             g =
                   dp
                        /   dp        d1
                                           -
                                               d2Tr21/T22
                                                                                       (12)


The term g — y is positive as long as 2l >                   0 (the foreign firm responds

to a price cut by cutting its price). Applying theorem 1 we conclude:

Proposition 2: In a Bertrand duopoly with no home consumption sgn t =

sgn   2l

      Presumption regarding the sign of the optimal trade intervention

when duopolistic behavior is Bertrand is exactly the opposite of that in

the Cournot case; that is, an export tax is generally required. The intui-

tion for this result is instructive. When a firm holds a Bertrand conjecture

its belief about its rival's reaction to its own output expansion is

typically overly optimistic. It conjectures that the competitor will

respond to its own price cut (output expansion) by maintaining a constant

price, whereas for most demand and cost structures (including the cases

of perfect substitutes and of linear demands) the equilibrium response of

the competitior is to lower its price. (Note the contrast with the Cournot

case.) Thus, the government can shift industry profit to the home firm

by forcing it to be less aggressive so as to take into account the true

slope of the foreign response curve, that is by taxing sales.
                                   — 12 —

C.   Consistent Conjectures

      The final special case we consider is one in which duopolistic

behavior is characterized by consistent conjectures. A consistent con-

jectures equilibrium (CCE), as defined and analyzed by Bresnahan (1981)

and Perry (1982), among others, is one in which each firm's conjectural

variations are equal to the actual equilibrium responses of its rivals

that would result if that firm actually were to change its output by a

small amount. Bresnahan (1981, P. 942) argues that consistency of con-

jectures is a reasonable restriction to place on oligopolistic behavior

if exogenous changes in the market environment are frequent enough to

allow firms to learn their rival's true responses. In our case, for

example, changes in trade policy or in factor prices in one country would

shift a single firm's reaction curve, and the locus of new equilibria

would provide the firm with information about the slope of its rival's

reaction curve.

     The slope of the foreign reaction curve in our model is given by

(dX/dt)/(dx/dt) =   g.    Thus, a consistent conjectures equilibrium is

defined by y = g.        The following proposition follows immediately from

expression (6):6

Proposition 3: In a duopoly with consistent conjectures and no home

consumption, t = 0.



     The optimality of free trade under consistent conjectures emerges

because there exists no shift of the home firm's reaction curve that can

transfer industry profit to that firm, given the response of its rival.



     The duopoly example with no home consumption highlights the profit—

shifting motive for trade policy intervention in an imperfectly competitive
                                           — 13 —




market.   We have endowed the home government with a strategically advan-

tageous position in relation to firms by assigning it the role of a

Stackelberg leader in setting policy. In such circumstances the home

government can raise national product by shifting the duopoly equilibrium

to exploit any deviation of the home firm's conjectures from the actual

equilibrium response of the foreign firm.           If the home firm is overly

pessimistic in its conjecture about the reaction to an increase in its

own output an export subsidy raises income, while if its conjecture is

too optimistic an export tax raises income. When conjectures are actually

"correct," as they are in a consistent conjectures equilibrium, then no

scope remains for shifting profit to the home firm by shifting its reac-

tion function, and free trade is optimal from the national perspective.



III. Optimal Trade Policy: The Case of Multi—Firm Oligopoly and
      Consistent Conjectures

     In this section we extend our analysis by introducing more than two

firms. For analytical convenience we confine our attention to symmetric

configurations. We continue to assume throughout this section that there

is no home country consumption of the outputs of the oligopolistic industry.

     Suppose there are n home firms and m foreign firms in the industry.

The profit of home firm i is



              =   (1   —
                           t1)r1(xl,            n n+l,       ,   Xn+m) -   c1(x1).


while a foreign firm earns



                  R1 (x1, ..
                                       n
                                           n+       n+m) —   j ()
                                                    — 14 —



where t1 denotes the output tax imposed on firm i. The conjecture of

firm i about the response of the jth firm's output to a change in its

own output is denoted 1J                                  =                n+m

     The home country national product derived from this industry is


                  n
          w=            r—c1
                 1=1



First—order conditions for profit maximizi-inn r:


                                                              n+m
          (1 —    t1)r      -   c1       + (1 —       t1)              ry1 = 0;    (i= 1, ..., n)   (13a)



                            n+m
                                                              j=1
                                                              j   i
                                    RF
                            i
          R — C         +                       =    0;       (j
                                                                      = n+1, ..., n+m)              (13b)
                                     •
                            i=1
                                j


     Imposing the symmetry assumption and totally differentiating (13a)
and (13b) at t1 = 0 (1 = 1,               ...   , n),we           obtain


                                      (n)
          A(n+m)rthdl - 1dt
                      1dX            (m)



where A(r) is an rxr matrix with diagonal elements : and off—diagonal

elements 3, dx is an n—dimensional column vector with elements dx1, dX

is an rn—dimensional column vector with elements dX, dt is an n—dimen-

sional column vector with elements dt1 and 0(m) is an m—dimensional column

vector of Ots         We have defined:7




                 r - cl"            + (n+m-1)42
                                              — 15 —



                3 =
                       r        1
                           + r22y   +             1
                                        (n+m—2)r32y


                           +
                               (n+m—1)ry


and yyij.         In   considering an export tax we set t =
                                                                i
                                                                     t, i =      1,   ...   , n.
Differentiating home country national product with respect to the vector

t   at   t   = 0
                 yields:



                           = nr{(n-l)     -    (n+m-l)y](dx2/dt) +   rnm(dX/dt)
                                                               n+l
                                                                   /dt -
                           =
                               nr(dx2/dt1)((n-l)(l-y)+     m[dX 2           yj                     (15)
                                                              dx /dt


         In this section we focus on the case in which firms form conjectures

consistently. As we showed in section II, when there is a single domestic

firm and a single foreign firm and conjectures are consistent, national

welfare is maximized under laissez—faire. More generally, the direction

of departure from laissez—faire depends upon the                      of   the difference

between the actual and the conjectured response of the foreign firm. By

considering the case of consistent conjectures we can isolate the effect

of increasing the number of firms on optimal policy.

         Using (15), we are able to demonstrate:

Proposition 4: In a symmetric, oligopolistic, consistent conjectures

equilibrium with n home firms, m foreign firms, and no home consumption,

the optimal production (export) tax is zero if n=l and positive if n>l.



         The proof of this proposition is provided in the appendix.                    It can

be understood intuitively by noting that when conjectures are consistent,
                                  — 16 —




the   profit—shifting motive for government intervention disappears. What

remains is the standard optimal—tariff prescription. Whenever there is

more than a single home country firm, each home firm ignores the pecuniary

externality it imposes on other domestic firms when it raises its output.

Private incentives lead to socially excessive outputs, since home income

includes all home firm profits. The government can enforce the cooperative

equilibrium in which home firms act as a group to maximize the home

country's total profit by taxing exports or sales. This externality does

not arise when there is only one home firm; consequently, free trade is

optimal in that case.

       If home firms conjecture that their rivals react less agressivelv

than they actually do, as is often the case in Bertrand equilibrium,

then the desirability of an output or export tax is enhanced. Conversely,

when domestic firms conjecture responses that are more aggressive than

the actual ones, then either a tax or a subsidy may raise national oroduct,

depending upon whether the national—market—power effect or the profit—

shifting effect of the policy dominates.



IV.   Trade   and Industrial Policy in the Presence of Domestic Consumption

      Thus far we have ruled out domestic consumption of the outputs of

the oligopolistic industry under consideration. This has allowed us to

focus on the profit—shifting motive for trade policy. However, by making

this assumption, we have neglected a second way in which interventionist

trade or industrial policy might yield welfare gains when markets are

imperfectly competitive. Since oligopolistic markets are generally

characterized by a difference between the price and marginal cost of a

product, there is a potential second—best role for trade and industrial
                                         — 17 —




policy   (in the absence of first—best antitrust policy) to reduce this

distortion.

      When domestic consumption is positive, production taxes or subsidies

and export taxes or subsidies are no longer identical. In this section

we will consider the welfare effects of both types of policies in the

duopoly model of Section II, recognizing that when there is more than

one domestic firm, the national—market—power motive for taxation of

output or exports is always present. In addition, in order to focus on

the considerations for trade and industrial policy introduced by the pre-

sence of domestic consumption, we shall examine only the consistent—

conjectures duopoly. Recall that in this case free trade is optimal when

there is no domestic consumption.

      To make our point as simply as possible, we assume that the duopolistic

competitors produce a single, homogeneous good. We also assume perfect

arbitrage with zero transport costs, so that under a production tax or

subsidy consumers at home and abroad face the same price for the product.

In other words, firms cannot price discriminate by setting different prices

in different countries.



A. Production Tax or Subsidy

      Let p(x+X) be the inverse world demand function and let home country

direct demand be h(p). The corresponding foreign demand is H(p).            If


a production tax at rate t         is   imposed the profit of the domestic firm is

  =   (1 -   t)p(x   + X)x -   c(x).    Consumer surplus at home is    h(q) dq.8

Domestic tax revenue is tpx. Summing these gives total home country

welfare from producing, consuming and taxing the product:
                                                    — 18 —




            w =       px - c +               h(q) dq
                                       .Jp




     The change in home welfare resulting from a small change in the

output tax is



            dw
                       (p+xp                  ,dx       ,dX
            ----=
                                   ,


                                        _c)+xp_hdt

Substituting the first—order condition for the home—firm's profit maximization,

this becomes:



                  =    {xp'(g     -     y) + t{p +     xp'(l   +   y)]}       -
                                                                                  h-              (16)




Evaluating (16) at t =                 0, and imposing the condition that conjectures are
consistent (g =        y),       we find dw/dt = —hdp/dt.                 The choice between a pro-

duction tax and a production subsidy hinges on which policy would lower

the price faced by domestic consumers, thereby reducing the consumption

distortion associated with imperfect competition.

        It is easy to calculate dp/dt =                  p'(dx     +   dX)/dt.    Applying Cramer's

rule to the total differentials of the two firms' first—order conditions,

we have



                             =           {(C'   — p)X — C"]                                       (17)




where     is the determinant of the 2x2 Jacobian matrix, which is assumed

to be positive for stability. If returns to scale are decreasing (C" >                                0),
then p >   C',    and the right hand side of (17) is unambiguously negative.
                                             — 19 —




A production subsidy raises world output, and hence lowers world price.

If c" = 0 and C" =          0, then the consistent conjectures equilibrium is the
Bertrand equilibrium (see Bresnahan, 1981), so that p = C' and

d(x + X)/dt =      0.   Finally, if the two firms have the same increasing

returns cost functions (c(x) = C(X) and c" < 0) and demand is linear

(p = 0) then d(x+X) < 0, so that an output subsidy, again, lowers the
               dt
world price. Thus we have established


Propsition 5: In a homogenous product duopoly with consistent conjectures

and non—zero domestic consumption,

       (i) jf c"        0 and C" =       0, then t =        0

       (ii) if C" > 0, then t < 0

   (iii) if c(x) = C(X), c" < 0, and p" = 0, then t < 0



B. Export Tax or Subsidy

       Finally, we consider the welfare effects of a small export tax

at rate i. Under this policy domestic consumers pay a price p(l—T)

for the good, and home government revenue is pT(x —                      h).     The world

inverse demand function is now written as p(x + X, ), where

p1 =   l/{H' (p)   + (1 -    T)h'   [p(l -   T)]}     and       p2 =   ph'   {p(l -   ) Ip.
Proceeding as before, we find

            dw          =      d(x + X) + p2(x —
                            hp1     dT
                                                 h)
                   T0

In this case, however, it is no longer possible to sign unambiguously

the effect of a small tax or subsidy on total world output.                           In addi-

tion, there is a second termthat now enters the expression for dw/dT,
                                 — 20 —




which at T =   0 is unambiguously positive or negative depending upon

whether the home country is a net exporter or importer of the product.

Given total output, an export tax raises the world price of the export

good since it subsidizes domestic consumption. This standard terms—of—

trade effect favors an export tax or import tariff, just as it does when

the market is competitive.

     To recapitulate the argument of this section, either an export tax

or an export subsidy may raise domestic welfare in a duopolistic market

with domestic consumption. When conjectures are consistent, any profit—

shifting motive for policy intervention is eliminated. What remains is a

standard terms—of—trade effect, and what might be termed a "consumption—

distortion effect," arising from the gap between price and marginal cost.

The former always indicates an export tax or import tariff, while the latter

may favor either a tax or a subsidy, depending on the precise forms of

the demand and cost functions.



V. Conclusions

     We have analyzed the welfare effects of trade policy and industrial

policy (production taxes and subsidies) for a range of specifications of an

oligopolistic industry. A number of general propositions for optimal

policy emerge. First, either trade policy or industrial policy may raise

domestic welfare if oligopolistic profits can be shifted to home country

firms. Policies that achieve this profit shifting can work only if the

government is able to set its policy in advance of firms' production

decisions, and if government policy commitments are credible. Further-

more, in the duopoly case profits can be shifted only if firms' conlecutral

variations differ from the true equilibrium responses that would result if
                                — 21 —




they were to alter their output levels. The choice between a tax and a
subsid,r in this case depends on whether firms' conjectures about their

rival's response are overly optimistic or overly pessimistic.

     Second, whenever there is more than one domestic firm, competition

among them is detrimental to home country social welfare,   In

other words, there exists a pecuniary externality since each domestic

firm does not take into account the effect of its own actions on the profits

of other domestic competitors. A production or export tax will lead

domestic firms to restrict their outputs, shifting them closer to the

level that would result with collusion. In this familiar way a production

or export tax enables the home country to exploit its monopoly power in

trade fully.

     Finally, when there is domestic consumption of the output of the

oligopolistic industry, there are two further motives for policy inter-

vention. First, consumers' marginal valuation of the product will   generally
differ from domestic marginal cost of production due to the collective

exertion of monopoly power by firms in the industry. A welfare improving

policy for this reason should increase domestic consumption. When industrial

policy is used, a production subsidy will achieve this result, whereas the

appropriate trade policy instrument may be either an export (or import)

tax or an export (or import) subsidy. Second, there is the usual

externality caused by the multiplicity of small domestic consumers, who

do not take into account the effect of their demands on world prices.

Industrial policy cannot be used to overcome this externality, but if the

country is a net exporter (importer) an export (import) tax will have a

favorable impact on the country's terms of trade. The formulation of

optimal trade or industry policy requires the weighting of these various

influences.
                                                     — 22 —




                                                Appendix


       In this appendix we prove Proposition 4.                               To do so, we first prove

the   following lemma:
Lemma: Let A(r) be an rxr matrix with diagonal elements c                                 and other

elements    .    Let B(r) be the matrix formed                            by deleting the first row and
second column of A+. Then


                         (
                                 -       )r1[    + B(r -            1)]


                     =               -


Proof:   The proof is by induction. The formulae hold trivially for

r = 1, since                 =            and                   =

      Now suppose




                         =   (cij - )r_2[             +    (r   -    2)],     r > 2                   (Al)

and

                         =                 )r_2           r > 2                                       (A2)




Expanding                along its first row, we have



                     =       A(r            -    (r   -
                                                           l)IB(rl)I                                  (A3)




Similarly expanding                       along its first row yields



                B(r) =       A(rl)          -   (r   -1)B                                             ('4)
                                                -      -


Substituting   (Al) and (A2) into (A3), we have



                   =       (       -   )r 2{ + (r - 2)]             -   2(r -l)( )r2
                   =   (       -       )r2[     + (r 2) - (r                     -   l)2]
                   = (                 )rl[ + (r- l)]


A similar substitution into (A4) yields



                   =   (c -            d)r_2[       + (r -   2)]    -    (r l)2(c )r2

                                   -   )r2[         + (r -   2)    -    (r   -       l)1
                                   -


                                                                                               Q.E.D.


     We are now able to prove Proposition 1+, which we restate here

for convenience.

Proposition4       In a symmetric, oligopolistic, consistent conjectures

equilibrium with n home firms, m foreign firms, and no home consumption,

the optimal production (export) tax is zero if n=l and positive if n                                           1.


Proof

        In the case of consistent conjectures firm i anticipates a response

on the part of firm j to an exogenous change in its own output that

corresponds to its actual general equilibrium response. To generate
                        1               -
an exogenous change in x consider the etfect of variation in the tax

t1 on the output of firm i.                Such a variation affects only firm f's

first—order condition for profit maximization, given output of i1I

other firms. The total resonse in the output of aim                                    other   firm to   the
                                                            — 24 —




variation          in t1        derives         solely from the variation it induces in x'.

Therefore, the consistent conjecture of firm i about firm j's response

to a change in its own output is given



                                     (dx/dt1)/(dx1/dt1)          for j = 1,   ...,    n   j    i
                   SY=
                                     (dX/dt1)/(dx /dt1)
                                                       i         for j =   n+l,    ..., n+m

where

                            =   IAm-1)I,A(m)I               I

                   dt1




                                  =                  = _B(n+m_l)!,A(n+m)          for j=l, ...,      n;   ji
                   dt                     dt
                                                =o                                and k =     n+l,   ..., m.




Consistency of conjectures thus implies that



                        =   —




From (14):



                   dX°                                           (n+m)
                    d
                                 t =0
                                           =-nB (n+m—l)
                   d1                 =
                                               [A÷m_l)     - (n - 1)
                                t0

Substituting these expressions into (15), and rearranging terms, gives



dw                 n(n-l)rX [A(m_l) -                      (n+m-l)     B+m1)}[iA(m1) +
               -
     I


         t=0                                               A(n)        IAm
                                                                                                           (A5)
                                                  — 25 —




Applying      the lemma proved above to expression (A5) yields:




                      t=O
                                =
                                    n(n-l)r ( - )n+m2/IA(n+m1)l           .                                (A6)




        Stability of the market equilibrium requires that the principle

minors of A+m) alternate in sign, the first one negative.9 Therefore,

c. <   0,   and
                  2   —
                            2
                                    > 0,   which implies     > f, and   hence              - 3        0.


Therefore (c —            f)(n+m2)          is positive if n+m is even and is negative

otheise. Similarly, A(n+ml) is the n+m—l principle minor of

which is positive if n+m is odd and negative otheise. Since 4 < 0

and, from the first—order condition (l3a),                      =   /(l       —   t)   >

we conclude that the right—hand side of (A6) is positive for n                                   1.


                                                                                           Q.E.D.
                                 — 26 —




                               Footnotes


1.    In Spencer and Brander (1982), the authors study a two—stage game

      in which a capac.ity or R&D investment is made at a stage prior to

      production. In such a setting, export subsidies and R&D subsidies

      are each welfare improving if implemented separately, but an optimal

      policy package involves an export subsidy and an R&D tax.   Brander

      and Spencer (l982b) extend the basic argument for intervention to

      situations in which duopolistic competition takes place in the home

      market. In such cases an import tariff is often beneficial.

2.    Restricting attention to output rivalry entails no loss of generality,

      however. Kamien and Schwartz (1983) demonstrate that any conjectural

      variations equilibrium (CVE) in quantities has a corresponding CVE

      in prices.

3.    Analysis of government policy in international markets is typically

      based on this assumption. See, e.g., Spencer and Brander (1982).

      It may be justified by specifying the political process of establish-

      ing policy as time—consuming and costly, or by endowing the govern-

      ment with a reputation for adhering to announced policy.

4.    The second—order condition for a maximum is satisfied locally as long

       as (i) the home firm's first and second order conditions for profit

      maximization are satisfied and (ii) the foreign firm's actual

       response to a change in x does not differ significantly from the

       response conjectured by the home firm.

 5.    We henceforth drop the arguments of the revenue and cost functions

       and their partial derivatives whenever no confusion is created by

       doing so. The revenue functions and their partial derivatives

       are understood to be evaluated at the equilibrium value of
                                        —27 —



     (x,   x),   while   the cost functions and their derivatives are evaluated

     at x or X, whichever is appropriate.

6.   The second—order condition for a social optimum is satisifed at

     the free—trade equilibrium if the product—market equilibrium is

     stable.

7.   In a syimnetric, free—trade equilibrium all firms produce the same

     output, and all revenue and cost function are symmetric, so that,

     for example, r1 =       r1,   i = 1, ...   , n.   For notational simplicity

     and with no loss of generality the following analysis is expressed

     in terms of the output, revenue, and cost functions of the first

     home firm and n+ltst foreign firm.

8.   We assume that this integral is bounded.

9.   For a discussion of the stability conditions for conjectural variations

     models of oligopoly, see Seade (1980).
                                   — 28 —




                                 References



Brander, J.A. and Spencer, B.J. (l982a), "Export Subsidies and Inter-

    national Market Share Rivalry," mimeographed.

Brander, J.A. and Spencer, B.J. (1982b), "Tariff Protection and Imperfect

     Competition," in H. Kierzkowski (ed.), Monopolistic Competition in

     International Trade (Oxford: Oxford University Press), forthcoming.

Bresnahan, T.F. (1981), "Duopoly Models with Consistent Conjectures,"

     American Economic Review 71(5), pp.934—945.

Dixit, A.K. (1984), "International Trade Policy for Oligopolistic

     Industries," Economic Journal Conference Papers, forthcoming.

Kamien, M.I. and Schwartz, N.L. (1983), "Conjectural Variations,"

     Canadian Journal of Economics 16(2), pp. 191—211.

Krugman, P.R. (1983), "Import Protection as Export Promotion: International

     Competition in the Presence of Oligopoly and Economies of Scale,T'

     in H. Kierzkowski (ed.), Monopolistic Competition in International

     Trade (Oxford: Oxford University Press), forthcoming.

Perry, M.K. (1982), "Oligopoly and Consistent Conjectural Variations,"

     Bell   Journal   of Economics 13(1), pp. 197—205.

Seade, J.K. (1980), "On the Effects of Entry," Econometrica 48(2),

     pp. 479—489.

Spencer, B.J. and Brander, J.A. (1982), "International R& D Rivalry and

     Industrial Strategy" Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
