                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         NURSING HOME QUALITY AS PUBLIC GOOD

                                          David C. Grabowski
                                           Jonathan Gruber
                                          Joseph J. Angelelli

                                         Working Paper 12361
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12361


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




Corresponding author. Tel: 617-432-3369; Fax: 617-432-3435; Email: grabowski@med.harvard.edu;
Address: Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School 180 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA
02115-5899, USA. This research was supported by the National Institute on Aging (K01 AG024403), the
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), and the National Bureau of Economic Research and data
were analyzed under CMS data use agreement number 15989. We thank Lee Howard and Xinzhi Zhang for
excellent research assistance on this project and Tom McGuire, Neeraj Sood and Aaron Yelowitz for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by David C. Grabowski, Jonathan Gruber and Joseph J. Angelelli. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Nursing Home Quality as a Public Good
David C. Grabowski, Jonathan Gruber and Joseph J. Angelelli
NBER Working Paper No. 12361
July 2006
JEL No. I11, I18

                                           ABSTRACT

There has been much debate among economists about whether nursing home quality is a public good
across Medicaid and private-pay patients within a common facility. However, there has been only
limited empirical work addressing this issue. Using a unique individual level panel of residents of
nursing homes from seven states, we exploit both within-facility and within-patient variation in payer
source and quality to examine this issue. We also test the robustness of these results across states
with different Medicaid and private-pay rate differentials. Across our various identification
strategies, the results generally support the idea that quality is a public good within nursing homes.
That is, within a common nursing home, there is very little evidence to suggest that Medicaid-funded
residents receive consistently lower quality care relative to their private-paying counterparts.


Jonathan Gruber
MIT Department of Economics
E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
       A principal goal of the Medicare-Medicaid legislation passed by Congress in 1965 was

the incorporation of the elderly and poor into “mainstream” medical care. Despite this objective,

there have been a series of studies and reports documenting poor quality for Medicaid residents

within nursing homes over the last three decades (e.g., U.S. Senate, 1974; Institute of Medicine,

2001). In assessing the impact of payer source on nursing home treatment quality, researchers

have basically assumed that poor quality for Medicaid recipients is a cross-facility phenomenon.

The research community has ignored the idea that there may be within-facility variation by

assuming that nursing home quality is a public good enjoyed by all residents within a facility,

regardless of payer type.

       There are legal, behavioral and economic arguments underlying this assumption. From a

legal perspective, nursing homes certified to accept Medicaid or Medicare residents are required

by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) to provide equal quality to all

residents, regardless of payer type. However, monitoring and enforcing this uniform quality

constraint is quite difficult. Towards that end, the U.S. General Accounting Office (1990) has

received reports of the segregation of Medicaid and private-pay residents within a nursing home.

From a behavioral perspective, there is a long-standing notion that professional norms matter in

health care (Arrow, 1963). Behavioral constructs such as trust, fairness and regret may explain

why providers put a value on treating all patients according to the same criteria (Frank, 2004).

Finally, from an economic perspective, certain nursing home services such as dietary services are

produced jointly for both payer types and may exhibit economies of joint production (Gertler and

Waldman, 1992). However, the majority of direct care nursing home services would not exhibit




                                                 2
economies of joint production. Moreover, there is substantial evidence from the physician and

hospital settings that patients with different payer sources are treated differently (Gruber, 2000).

       If quality is a public good across payer types, then there is the potential for state

Medicaid programs to “free ride” on higher paying private residents. In order for this to occur,

state Medicaid programs must ensure the joint care of Medicaid and private-pay residents in a

common facility. Historically, most states have used certificate of need (CON) and construction

moratorium laws to constrain the growth of nursing home beds. The stated rationale of these

programs was to conserve Medicaid spending by limiting Medicaid bed slots, but a secondary

goal was to limit the ability of private-paying residents to segregate themselves in facilities

without Medicaid patients.

       Given the joint care of private-pay and Medicaid patients in many facilities, early

economic analyses of the nursing home industry routinely assumed uniform quality across payer

types. Building from this assumption, an influential literature has argued that—in the context of a

binding CON law—an increase in Medicaid payment rates should increase the share of Medicaid

patients and thereby lower quality for all patients (Nyman, 1988b; Gertler, 1989). More recent

work has argued that this finding does not generalize to today’s nursing home market

(Grabowski 2001). One unresolved issue that may explain the different results across these

studies is the validity of the uniform quality assumption. Somewhat surprisingly, however, there

has been virtually no empirical work examining whether nursing home quality is a public good.

       This lack of previous work on this topic likely reflects the nursing home data previously

available to researchers. Broadly, two alternative types of nursing home data were available:

facility-level administrative databases and nationally representative surveys of nursing home

residents. With the former, because the data are collected at the facility-level, there is no means




                                                  3
by which to parse out within-facility quality differences by payer type. With the latter, the data

are collected at the resident-level, but there are rarely a sufficient number of residents sampled

from any one facility to make meaningful within-facility comparisons. Thus, neither of these

data sources can address the research question of whether nursing home quality is a public good.

       We provide the first careful exploration of this question using a valuable new source of

nursing home data. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 (OBRA 87) mandated that

each state collect a quarterly assessment for all residents in certified nursing homes. In the fourth

quarter of 1998, CMS established a national repository of these data. We have identified seven

states from this national repository with accurate quarterly payer source information over time.

We have access to twelve process and outcome based indicators of nursing home quality over

time, allowing for a comprehensive analysis of quality of care.

       With this unique individual level panel of nursing home data, we consider several

alternative models of the relationship between payer source and quality. We begin with a cross-

sectional model relating quality to payer source. Such a model suffers from two-sided selection,

however: homes with more Medicaid patients may be of different quality for unobserved

reasons; and patients who are on Medicaid may be differentially sick for unobserved reasons.

We attempt to address both of these concerns by including fixed effects for both nursing homes,

and then also for individuals. This latter model is therefore identified by the “spend down” from

private-pay to Medicaid status for individual residents, and compares the change in quality over

time for private-pay residents who qualify for Medicaid relative to the change in quality over

time for residents who remain private payers.

       Ultimately, across all three models, we find strong support for the public good

assumption: quality of care is no lower for Medicaid patients within nursing homes. We assess




                                                  4
the sensitivity of our findings to a variety of specification tests, including the use of differences

in Medicaid rate differentials across states to control for selection, and find them quite robust.

Thus, nursing home care does in fact appear to be a public good.



I. Background

Nursing Home Sector

         Nursing home residents requiring custodial care generally either pay for care privately or

by qualifying for a Medicaid-financed stay. Medicaid is the dominant purchaser of nursing home

services accounting for roughly 50% of all nursing home expenditures and 70% of all bed days.

In practice, nursing homes have a great deal of discretion as to which patients they choose to

accept for admission. The only constraint is that a facility must be certified in order to accept

Medicaid and Medicare residents (and certification is almost universal among homes with

approximately 96% certified) (Strahan, 1997). In contrast, homes are quite restricted in their

ability to discharge residents (regardless of payer type) once they have been admitted.1

         Private-paying residents are charged the price chosen by the home subject to market

competition while Medicaid residents are paid for by various methods via state-run programs.

States have considerable flexibility to design their Medicaid nursing home payment systems and

set payment rates. Medicaid programs generally pay below the private price. Not surprisingly,

the majority of empirical evidence supports the assertion that Medicaid residents have more

restricted access to nursing homes (e.g., Ettner 1993). Medicaid eligibility is determined on a

1
  The facility may not transfer or discharge the resident unless: 1) The transfer or discharge is necessary to meet the
resident’s welfare and the resident’s welfare cannot be met in the facility; 2) The transfer or discharge is appropriate
because the resident’s health has improved sufficiently so the resident no longer needs the services provided by the
facility; 3) The safety of individuals in the facility is endangered; 4) The health of individuals in the facility would
otherwise be endangered; 5) The resident has failed, after reasonable and appropriate notice, to pay for a stay at the
facility (note that conversion from the private-pay price to payment at the Medicaid rate does not constitute non-
payment); or 6) The facility ceases to operate (Health Care Financing Administration 1995).



                                                           5
state-by-state basis by the resident’s level of income and assets. Some residents qualify for

Medicaid at the time of entry to the nursing home while others “spend-down” in order to qualify

for coverage. That is, these individuals do not meet the state Medicaid asset threshold at the time

of nursing home entry, but in the course of paying for their nursing home care, their assets

decline to the state threshold and they qualify for Medicaid-financed care. Studies have estimated

that only between 10 and 25% of all private-paying residents eventually spend-down to Medicaid

eligibility (Adams, Burwell and Meiners, 1993).

       Even though the Medicaid rate is below the private price in most cases, homes that are

certified to accept Medicaid residents are required by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid

Services (CMS) to provide a uniform level of quality to all residents, regardless of payer type.

The nursing home State Operations Manual published by CMS (formerly the Health Care

Financing Administration) states that “facilities must not distinguish between residents based on

their source of payment when providing services that are required to be provided under the law.

All nursing services, specialized rehabilitative services, social services, dietary services,

pharmaceutical services, or activities that are mandated by the law must be provided to residents

according to residents’ individual needs, as determined by assessments and care plans”

(Guideline 483.12(c), Health Care Financing Administration, 1995). If homes indeed provide

quality common to all residents, then Medicaid residents have the potential to “free ride” on

higher paying private residents. If homes can disregard this regulation, then homes can provide

different quality levels to residents from different payer types.

Existing Evidence on Variation in Nursing Home Quality by Payer Type

       Chandra and Skinner (2003) suggest that disparities in health care should be decomposed

into their proximate causes with respect to “across facility” variation (i.e., certain patients are




                                                   6
admitted to facilities with poorer care practices) and “within facility” variation (i.e., certain

patients are treated differently within a health care facility). Although Chandra and Skinner posit

that cross-facility variation likely dwarfs within-facility variation in many health applications,

there is evidence that within-facility variation matters in the hospital context (Gruber, 2000). For

example, Hadley and colleagues (1991) compared the treatment of insured and uninsured

patients in the hospital, and they found that fewer resources were used in the care of the

uninsured. Specifically, the uninsured were 29% to 75% less likely to undergo each of five high-

cost or high-discretion procedures. Currie and Gruber (2001) found that expansions in the

Medicaid program differentially affected the hospital treatment of privately insured and

Medicaid insured patients. Finally, Gruber, Kim and Mayzlin (1999) found that higher Medicaid

fee differentials for cesarean section delivery were associated with higher rates of cesarean

delivery among Medicaid patients. They estimated that as much as one-half of the sizable

difference in cesarean rates across Medicaid and private-pay patients was due to differential

payment rates.

       Both within-facility and cross-facility variation can lead to poorer outcomes for certain

payer groups, but the difference lies in the policy implications. In the case of across-facility

disparities in care, policymakers may wish to consider initiatives that improve the patient’s

choice set, address broader geographic disparities in resources, guard against discriminatory

admission practices, and prevent the segregation of payer types across homes. For example,

states can adopt wait list laws that require nursing homes to admit applicants on a first-come,

first-served basis or census requirements that involve admissions on a first-come, first-served

basis until a specified census of Medicaid residents is achieved (U.S. General Accounting Office,

1990). Within-facility variation involves the internal workings of specific health care facilities,




                                                   7
and financial barriers, preferences of patients, and provider behaviors may underlie disparities

across payer groups. Policymakers may wish to consider stricter enforcement of the uniform

quality standard, or rate equalization laws such as those found in Minnesota and North Dakota

that prohibit homes from charging rates for private-payers above the Medicaid payment level.

       There is a substantial literature examining across-facility variation in nursing home

quality by payer mix. A number of studies have shown that a higher proportion of Medicaid

residents within a nursing home is negatively related to expenditures by the facility (e.g.,

Birnbaum et al., 1981; Nyman, 1988a; Schlenker and Shaughnessy, 1984). Gottesman (1974)

found that frequency of care by staff members diminished with higher numbers of public-pay

residents. In contrast, Nyman (1988c) found no significant relationship between the proportion of

Medicaid residents and the ratings of patient care or dietary plans. The use of outcome measures

in this literature is scant. Nyman (1988c) revealed no Medicaid-quality relationship with respect

to resident care or quality-of-life measures. In related work however, Nyman (1988b) did find

that regulatory violations occur with greater frequency in high Medicaid homes. Part of the

explanation for the mixed results may be the failure of these studies to address the potential

endogeneity of facility-level payer mix and quality.

       There is scant research examining within-facility variation in nursing home quality. A

consumer advocacy group in New York reported to the U.S. General Accounting Office (1990)

that, “many nursing homes were…segregating Medicaid and private-pay residents within the

nursing home” (page 18). However, there is very little work that has empirically tested this issue.

Using 1983 Texas Medicaid cost report data, McKay (1989) found that the mix of Medicaid and

private-pay residents did not affect a facility’s marginal, average or total costs, which provides

some very limited evidence that private-pay and Medicaid residents receive a uniform level of




                                                 8
care. However, expenditures are a very indirect (and highly criticized) measure of quality.

Greater expenditures can mean higher quality or they can mean increased inefficiency on the part

of the facility.

        Since beginning our work on this topic, a paper was published addressing cross-facility

and within-facility variation in nursing home mortality. Troyer (2004) found large cross-facility

differences in mortality for Medicaid and private-paying residents in Florida for the period 1986

through 1997. However, when facility fixed-effects were included, these mortality differences

largely fell away, suggesting that there is not within-facility variation across Medicaid and

private paying residents. Among the papers in the literature, the Troyer study most closely

approximates our own approach. However, there are some significant limitations of this paper

that merit mention. Because mortality is an extreme outcome that may not be responsive to

quality differences, it has not been included as a potential quality indicator in the recent

validation efforts by CMS (Morris et al., 2003). In fact, CMS excluded those residents “near

death” from the denominator in calculating other quality indicators. Part of the problem with

using mortality as an indicator of quality is measurement error in that private-pay patients may

disproportionately return home prior to death while Medicaid patients may be disproportionately

hospitalized prior to death (Freiman and Murtaugh, 1993; Weissert and Scanlon, 1985). In this

paper, we employ a range of validated quality indicators to test the public good hypothesis. It is

also important to note that the Troyer paper does not employ individual fixed effects, and

because it is a single-state study, it cannot exploit variation in Medicaid policy across states. Our

study is able to employ both nursing home and individual fixed effects and exploit cross-state

variation in the Medicaid rate-private pay fee differentials.




                                                  9
Model of the Nursing Home Industry

       From the Handbook of Health Economics chapter on long-term care (Norton, 2000), the

canonical model of the nursing home assumes that private-pay and Medicaid residents receive a

uniform level of quality (q). In this model, state-level certificate-of-need (CON) and construction

moratorium laws act as a barrier to entry by constraining the number of allowable beds in the

marketplace (Scanlon, 1980). Because state Medicaid programs pay below the private-pay price,

a facility will first accept higher-paying private-pay residents and then fill the remaining beds

with Medicaid residents. Thus, private-pay demand is still satisfied under a binding bed

constraint, but some potential Medicaid residents may not gain nursing home placement creating

an excess Medicaid demand equilibrium.

       Under this excess demand model, private-pay demand (x) is assumed to be a function of

private price (p) and quality, but Medicaid demand is not assumed to be a function of quality.

After private-pay demand is met, it is assumed that the home can always fill any remaining beds

with Medicaid recipients, regardless of the quality provided. In essence, a home need not

consider the preferences of Medicaid residents in solving its profit-maximization problem. Thus,

Medicaid usage can be modeled as the number of beds remaining after private-pay demand has

been satisfied, or, [ x − x( p, q ) ] where x is some target level of filled beds for the home (here

assumed to be capacity). Additionally, because it is assumed that this bed constraint is binding,

the home will always reach this target occupancy, and the cost function can be evaluated at x .

Thus, the nursing home takes the Medicaid payment rate (r) and its own bed supply ( x ) as

givens, and chooses the private price and a uniform level of quality to maximize profits:

                             max π = px( p, q ) + r ( x − x( p, q)) − c(q | x ).                       (1)
                              p ,q




                                                    10
In this model, it is assumed that x p < 0 , xq > 0 , and cq > 0 . The first-order conditions with

respect to price and uniform quality are:

                                        π p = ( p − r ) x p + x = 0,                                (2)

                                        π q = ( p − r ) xq − cq = 0.                                (3)

The first-order conditions provide the standard implication that the nursing home sets the

marginal revenue from a change in either private price or quality of care to be equal to the

marginal cost.

        A number of papers have used this general framework to derive testable implications

regarding the effect of the Medicaid reimbursement on nursing home quality (e.g., Gertler, 1989;

Nyman, 1985). Nursing homes are assumed to compete for private patients on the basis of

quality and price, but because of the excess demand assumption, homes do not need to compete

for Medicaid patients on the basis of quality. As state Medicaid programs raise their

reimbursement levels, homes on the margin will want more Medicaid patients, which entails

fewer private-pay patients due to the binding bed constraint. Because quality is a public good, an

increase in Medicaid payment lowers overall facility-level quality. The early research in this area

found empirical support for this hypothesis using cross-sectional data in a single state from the

late 1970s and early 1980s. The quality measures used in this literature included staffing and

nursing home violations. However, recent empirical work has argued that the earlier finding does

not generalize to national data, more recent data, longitudinal data or outcome quality measures

(Grabowski, 2001; 2004).

        Moreover, because the early work in this area used facility-level staffing and violations, it

was impossible to test the uniform quality assumption. Indeed, one explanation for the different




                                                    11
findings in the Medicaid payment-quality literature is the public good assumption, the key

assumption of the early literature.

       Given the potential quality improvement for Medicaid recipients when integrated in a

common nursing home with private-paying residents, Norton (2000) argued that the payer mix

itself may be a policy instrument towards addressing low nursing home quality. For

mathematical ease, Norton assumes that the policy variable is the number of Medicaid residents

(not the proportion). If we suppose that a binding rule on the number of Medicaid residents (m)

is relaxed slightly but there is still excess demand, then the number of private-pay residents is the

total number of beds less the number of Medicaid residents. The nursing home will offset the

increase in Medicaid residents one-for-one with a decrease in private-pay residents. If the

constraint is binding, Norton shows that it is not necessary to solve a system of equations to find

the effect of a change in the number of Medicaid residents on private-pay price and quality:

                                           dp    dp
                                              =−    > 0,                                          (4)
                                           dm    dx

                                           dq    dq
                                              =−    < 0.                                          (5)
                                           dm    dx

Thus, if a binding constraint on the number (or proportion) of Medicaid residents is relaxed, the

private-pay price increases and the quality of care decreases. By limiting the proportion of

Medicaid residents a facility can admit (and thus effectively exposing Medicaid residents to

more private-pay residents), we would theoretically see an improvement in the provision of

quality for Medicaid residents. However, this result assumes that quality is uniform across

Medicaid and private-pay residents. If we were to relax the uniform quality assumption across

payer types, then the gains of placing Medicaid recipients in a home with private-paying




                                                 12
residents would be attenuated. Thus, for policy analysis, it is central to evaluate the validity of

the common quality assumption that drives these types of conclusions.



II. Data and Empirical Strategy

Data

       Our data are a census of all nursing home residents from seven states obtained from the

Minimum Data Set (MDS) for nursing homes. Based on a federal requirement, the MDS

instrument collects over 350 discrete data elements including socio-demographic information,

numerous clinical items ranging from degree of functional dependence to cognitive functioning,

and a checklist for staff to indicate the presence of the most common geriatric diagnoses (MDS

Training Manual, 1995; Morris et al., 1994). Typically, the MDS form is filled out a by a

registered nurse (RN) working at the facility. Assessments are performed on admission, upon

significant change, and at least quarterly, so that there is a panel of assessments for the same

individual over time. When there were multiple assessments within a quarter, we used the

assessment closest to the mid-point of the quarter.

       We have access to the MDS beginning in 4th quarter of 1998 through the 4th quarter of

2002 (see Table 1 for descriptive statistics). As such, our data are a combination of existing

residents (those admitted prior to 4th quarter 1998) and new admissions (those admitted 4th

quarter of 1998 or later). We alternatively estimate models below containing the full sample

(N=1,626,628) and only those new admissions (N=872,667).

                               INSERT TABLE 1 HERE

       The analysis was restricted to seven states because accurate payer source information was

not available for the other states. Payer source on admission was nearly always recorded on the




                                                 13
MDS form, but in many instances, the payer source field was not updated in subsequent MDS

assessments. Thus, we were not able to obtain accurate payer source information over time for

the majority of states. Based on a series of checks, the seven states with accurate payer source

information used within this study were Kansas, Maine, Mississippi, North Dakota, Ohio, South

Dakota and Washington.2

        Payer status is coded on each quarterly MDS assessment based on ten categories

measuring nursing home payment via (i) a Medicaid per diem, (ii) Medicare per diem, (iii)

Medicare ancillary part A, (iv) Medicare ancillary part B, (v) CHAMPUS per diem, (vi) VA per

diem, (vii) self or family pays full per diem, (viii) Medicaid resident liability or Medicare co-

payment, (ix) private insurance per diem (including co-payment), and (x) other per diem.

Importantly, these categories are not mutually exclusive. For example, in order to qualify for the

Medicaid per diem payment (category i), some individuals face a co-payment (category viii) for

any income they have above the state Medicaid income threshold. In an effort to create three

payment categories, we used a series of decision rules in placing residents into the Medicaid,

private-pay, and other payer groups. First, because we are interested in the primary payer within

this study, we did not use ancillary Medicare payments (categories iii and iv) in the assignment

to payer groups. Second, because we are interested in chronic (and not rehabilitative) nursing

home care, we excluded those Medicare assessments from the analysis. That is, any assessment

coded in category (ii) was dropped from our dataset. Third, any individual in category (vii) or

category (ix) was considered private-pay. Fourth, we categorized all individuals from group (i)

as Medicaid, regardless of whether they faced some co-payment (viii). Finally, we created an

2
  We used three separate checks to ensure the quality of the payer source field within the MDS. First, we examined
whether patients that entered under Medicare converted to another payer type at the 100-day Medicare limit.
Second, we compared the aggregate facility-level payer mix from the MDS with the aggregate payer mix from the
Federal government’s Online, Survey Certification and Reporting System. Finally, we compared spend-down rates
from private-pay to Medicaid status in the MDS with published estimates from other data sources.


                                                        14
other payer group for individuals in CHAMPUS (category v), VA (category vi) and other

(category x).

       There is no single preferred measure of nursing home quality in the MDS data, so we

have formed 12 indicators of quality based on the available information (U.S. General

Accounting Office, 2002). By examining patterns for all 12 indicators, we hope to assess most

generally whether quality is a common good.

       Our quality measures consist of five “process” based measures and seven “outcome”

based measures of quality. The process based measures are:

•      The presence of a physical restraint: immobility resulting from the use of physical

       restraints may increase the risk of pressure ulcers, depression, mental and physical

       deterioration, and mortality (Zinn, 1993).

•      Use of an indwelling catheter: urethral catheterization places the resident at greater risk

       for urinary tract infection; other long-term complications include bladder and renal

       stones, abcesses, and renal failure.

•      Bedfast: although many residents are bedfast due to medical conditions, bedfast residents

       are at a higher risk of developing pressure ulcers and other complications.

•      Use of a feeding tube: feeding tubes can result in complications including self-extubation,

       infections, aspiration, unintended misplacement of the tube, and pain.

•      The use of anti-psychotics; overuse of anti-psychotics may result in mental and physical

       deterioration (Harrington et al, 1992).

The outcome based measures are:

•      Pressure ulcers: pressure ulcers are areas of the skin and underlying tissues that erode as

       a result of pressure or friction and/or lack of blood supply.



                                                 15
•      The presence of daily pain: pain is a common condition related to numerous age

       associated diseases such as cancer, arthritis, and diabetic neuropathy. However, pain can

       be moderated, and the management of pain in the nursing home setting is often

       substandard (Ferrell, 1995).

•      Bowel or bladder incontinence: although some decline in bladder or bowel continence

       may not be reversible or manageable in the latter stages of disease (e.g., dementia,

       terminal illness), it is thought to be preventable and reversible in the nursing home

       population (Schnelle and Leung, 2004).

•      Urinary tract infections and wound infections: infections occur frequently among nursing

       home residents with the potential for significant morbidity and mortality (Nicolle, 2000).

•      Presence of a fall over the 30 days prior to the assessment: falls are a major source of

       morbidity and mortality among nursing home residents. Although falls have been shown

       to be preventable in the nursing home environment, approximately half of all patients fall

       each year, and 9% sustain serious injury (Ray et al., 1997).

•      Depression: major depression is associated with increased functional dependence, health

       care utilization, and mortality (Simmons et al., 2004).

       A number of patient-level covariates were available from the MDS. In order to capture

the need for services, an activities of daily living (ADL) score was created for each resident

assessment. The ADL score is based on the individual’s need for help with bathing, bed mobility,

dressing, eating, toileting, and transferring. For each of these six areas, the individual is scored as

a zero (independent), one (supervised), two (limited assistance), three (extensive assistance) or

four (total dependence). Thus, the total ADL score ranges between zero and twenty-four. For the

analyses, we included 24 dummy variables in our regressions. In order to capture cognitive



                                                  16
performance, we also included seven dummy variables, ranging from zero to six in value, from

the Cognitive Performance Scale (CPS) developed by Morris and colleagues (1994).

       We also include a set of dummy variables measuring length-of-stay. With these dummy

variables in our regressions, it is important to note that we are not simply identifying length of

stay effects, but true transition effects. Specifically, we created a dummy variable to approximate

length of stay for each quarter up through 10 years in the nursing home. The final dummy

variable measures length of stay greater than 10 years. Thus, we have 40 dummy variables to

model length of stay. Finally, we also included a number of demographic variables including

age, gender, race, education, and marital status.

       The MDS assessments from these seven states were merged with two other facility-level

data sources. First, the MDS is a resident-level instrument that does not contain facility-level

information. Thus, ownership status and other institutional information on nursing homes are

obtained from the On-Line Survey, Certification, and Reporting (OSCAR) system. The OSCAR

system contains information from state surveys of all federally certified Medicaid (nursing

facilities) and Medicare (skilled nursing care) homes in the United States. Certified homes

represent almost 96% of all facilities nationwide (Strahan, 1997). Collected and maintained by

the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Systems (CMS), the OSCAR data are used to determine

whether homes are in compliance with federal regulatory requirements. Every facility is required

to have an initial survey to verify compliance. Thereafter, states are required to survey each

facility no less often than every 15 months, and the average is about 12 months (Harrington et

al., 1999). From the OSCAR, we included measures of bed size, ownership status, and chain

ownership.




                                                    17
             Second, we obtained nursing home cost report information from each state’s Medicaid

office. These annual cost reports provided data on the private-pay and Medicaid payment rates

for each facility. Table 2 provides the average payment rates for each state and year contained in

our study. Without adjusting for resident acuity, the Medicaid payment rate ranges from 76% to

108% of the private-pay price. North Dakota is the only state with a higher (unadjusted)

Medicaid rate relative to the private-pay rate across all years.3 As discussed above, North Dakota

has a rate equalization law under which all residents – regardless of payer type – are grouped

into one of thirty-five payment levels based on their acuity. Thus, the higher aggregate Medicaid

payment rate reflects the fact that Medicaid patients are less healthy relative to their private-pay

counterparts.

                                      INSERT TABLE 2 HERE

Empirical Strategy

             We pursue a variety of empirical specifications designed to determine whether Medicaid

patients are treated in a systematically different fashion than non-Medicaid patients. We begin

by estimating cross-sectional models of the form:

             Yint =   +   1OTHERint    +   2MEDICAIDint        + Xint + Znt +     t   +   int        (6)

where i indexes individuals, n indexes nursing homes, and t indexes time periods, Y is the

outcome variable, OTHER and MEDICAID are dummies for other payer and Medicaid (relative

to private-pay), X is a set of individual characteristics, Z is a set of nursing home characteristics,

    t are   time (quarter) fixed effects, and    int   is the randomly distributed error term. The quarter

dummies control for national trends in nursing home quality that may be correlated with shifts in

the mix of Medicaid and private-pay residents.



3
    The results presented in this paper are robust to excluding the North Dakota assessments from the analyses.


                                                            18
         As noted in the introduction, models such as (6) will be biased due to both unobserved

facility and individual characteristics. Our second specification deals with the first of these

problems by including nursing home fixed effects ( n):

         Yint =    +    1OTHERint     +   2MEDICAIDint        + Xint + Znt +        t   +   n   +   int           (7)

The nursing home fixed effects control for any fixed facility-specific omitted variables correlated

with the quality of care such as the facility’s management philosophy or facility culture. Thus,

Equation (7) deals with the first type of selection identified above, that homes with a higher

share of Medicaid may be ones that treat their patients worse for other reasons.

         Although this fixed-effects specification eliminates time-invariant heterogeneity at the

level of the facility, it may still suffer from bias due to unobserved heterogeneity at the level of

the patient. For example, even though we control for detailed case-mix information in the model

above, there may still exist unobserved health characteristics that influence both nursing home

choice and outcomes. Thus, we next estimate models of the following form:

         Yint =    +    1OTHERint     +   2MEDICAIDint        + Xint + Znt +        t   +   i   +   int           (8)

where the model specification is identical to equation 1 above except the facility fixed effects are

replaced with patient fixed effects i. In this model, the basic identification strategy purges the

unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity by relying on spend-down from private-pay to Medicaid

status over time.4 That is, this model controls for fixed but unobservable characteristics of both

nursing homes and patients, allowing us to ask: does treatment quality change when patients

change payer source?

         There are two potential problems with this empirical framework, however. The first is

the potential endogeneity of payer status and quality. There may exist unobserved, time-varying

4
  Person fixed effects will subsume home fixed effects for patients who do not move between homes. However, the
overall transfer rate per year at risk has been estimated at 3.3% (Hirth et al, 2003), so this is not a large issue. If we
include home fixed effects as well as the patient fixed effects in these models, the results are unchanged.


                                                            19
factors that are correlated with both payer status and quality, for example if somehow negative

health shocks lead individuals to switch to Medicaid. We address this concern in two ways

below. First, we explicitly model observable patient health as a function of payer status, to see if

there is a correlation with a measurable source of selection. We find that, once patient fixed

effects are included, such correlation is quite small. Second, we provide estimates that exploit

cross-state variation in the difference between Medicaid payment rates and private-pay prices

(see Table 2). In both the facility (eq. 7) and individual (eq. 8) fixed effects models, we

incorporate both a fee ratio, which is the average state Medicaid payment rate divided by the

average state private-pay price, and an interaction term between this fee ratio and Medicaid

status. If Medicaid residents receive lower quality than their private-pay counterparts, this effect

should be largest in states with the greatest difference between the private-pay price and the

Medicaid payment rate; where this fee differential is zero, there should be no quality difference.

This model is free of selection as long as any bias from time-varying unobserved variables is

equally important in high and low differential homes/states.

       The other problem with equation (8) is that it captures a specific type of payer source

change, the spend-down from private pay to Medicaid. It is possible that patients who are

admitted from the start as Medicaid are treated worse than those who are private pay, but that

when private pay patients transition to Medicaid their treatment does not change (for example

because the nursing home has already established a treatment regime). That is, by identifying

our models from transitions, we may miss important elements of nursing home discrimination

that apply only to those admitted under different payer statuses, not those who transition across

payer status.

       There is no way to both address this problem and control for unobserved patient




                                                 20
characteristics. However, we can determine the magnitude this problem by focusing solely on

new nursing home admissions (i.e., individuals admitted in the 4th quarter of 1998 or later), and

estimating the model as a function of payer status at admission. We present results from this

approach below.

        Given the size of our dataset, least squares models estimations of linear probability

regression models are presented. Although this approach does not recognize the binary nature of

the quality measures, it facilitates the tractable estimation of these models, which are based on a

large number of observations and an expansive set of regression controls. In the results tables

presented below, only the Medicaid coefficients and the absolute value of the t-statistics are

included. Because we have multiple observations on each individual, standard errors are

clustered at the level of the individual.



III. Basic Results

        The first set of regression results includes both the existing residents when our MDS

panel started and residents admitted in that and subsequent quarters (see Table 3). Importantly,

all twelve outcomes are negative indicators of quality; thus, a positive Medicaid coefficient

translates into lower quality for this payer group. Moreover, given our huge sample size, it

should be noted that we have a great deal of precision in our estimates. Thus, nearly every

coefficient estimate presented in Table 3 is statistically significant at the conventional level, even

when our standard errors are corrected for individual-level correlation across quarters.

                                INSERT TABLE 3 HERE

        The first column of results excludes fixed-effects and is identified solely by cross-

sectional variation in payer source and quality. The first five rows present the process-based




                                                 21
quality measures; the next seven rows show the outcome-based quality measures.

           The results from this cross-sectional model are surprisingly mixed: contrary to

expectations, we do not find clear evidence of lower quality for Medicaid patients, even without

controlling for home or person fixed effects. For the process measures, three are positive,

indicating worse quality for Medicaid patients (restraints, anti-psychotics, and feeding tubes),

although only one (anti-psychotics) is significant; two are negative, indicating better quality for

Medicaid patients (catheters, bedfast), and both are significant. For the outcome measures, three

are positive, indicating worse quality for Medicaid patients (pain, incontinence, and depression),

while four are negative, indicating better quality for Medicaid patients (pressure ulcers, urinary

infection, wound infection, and falls); all are significant. These mixed findings are surprising

given the general presumption that Medicaid patients are treated worse in nursing homes.

           The effects, however, are uniformly very small. The only effects that amount to more

than 10% of the baseline means in Table 1 are catheters (-11%), wound infections (-20%), and

falls (-14%). Given this pattern, the weight of the evidence actually appears to point towards

better quality for Medicaid patients. But the overall pattern is one of small and inconsistent

effects.

           The second column presents results from a model that includes nursing home fixed

effects. This model is identified by within-facility variation in payer status and nursing home

quality, so that we are comparing the treatment of Medicaid and non-Medicaid patients within

the same facility. The results are remarkably similar to those without home fixed effects.

Indeed, if anything, there is even more evidence of a positive treatment of Medicaid patients in

this model, as the two process measures which were insignificant and positive (restraints and

feeding tubes) are now negative and (at least marginally) significant. But the results remain




                                                   22
small overall, and once again mixed, with positive coefficients (negative quality) on important

measures such as pain, incontinence, and depression.

         The third column presents results from a model including patient-level fixed effects,

which is identified by within-patient variation (i.e., spend-down to Medicaid). These results

have shifted slightly from the results including home fixed effects, but they present a similar

story: mixed evidence that, if anything, suggests higher quality for Medicaid patients. Once

again, the results remain small in magnitude. The estimates that amounted to more than 10% of

their baseline values were catheters (-15%), feeding tubes (-10%), pressure ulcers (-12%),

urinary infections (-14%), wound infections (-20%) and falls (-12%). Put alternatively, the

estimated coefficients in column 3 were each less than 6% of a standard deviation of the

dependent variable means.

         In sum, the fixed effects specifications provide inconsistent results as to whether nursing

home quality is a public good. Some measures indicated worse quality for Medicaid recipients

while others indicated better quality. In general, the magnitude of the coefficients was quite

small.



   IV.      Addressing Selection and Locality of Treatment Effects.

         The inclusion of both nursing home and patient-level fixed effects in our models should,

in principle, address selection problems. However, it remains possible that patients are

becoming unobservably sicker, or even healthier, around the time of transition to Medicaid. This

could bias our results in the direction of finding negative, or positive, effects of Medicaid on

quality. In addition, as discussed earlier, our models with patient fixed effects are identified only

from transitions, and it is possible that there is differential treatment of Medicaid patients upon




                                                  23
arrival that is not present when they transition. This is the problem of “local average treatment

effects”, whereby our estimates reflect the true answer for a particular population but not for

others.

          We address these two issues in this section of the paper. First, we assess whether

selection appears to be a problem by examining observable indicators of health to see if they are

correlated with transitions to Medicaid payer status. We then turn to using rate differentials

across states to add extra identification to the model. Finally, we consider models that focus just

on payer status at admission to assess whether there is differential treatment based on initial

payer.



Selection on Observables

          The inclusion of fixed effects in our models is designed to capture home and individual-

based selection that might bias our quality estimates. Whether these strategies are successful is

unknowable, but we can get some perspective on this issue by looking at observable correlates of

selection. As argued formally by Altonji and Taber (2000), if observables are sufficiently

predictable of unobservables, then assessing the correlation of the variable of interest with

observables can provide some indicator of the potential bias from omitting unobservables. In our

context, the unobservable of most interest is health, and we have an excellent observable

indicator of health: measures of activities of daily living.

          We therefore reestimate each of our models where the dependent variable, quality, is

replaced with the ADL index described earlier, which takes on values of 0-24. Obviously, in

these models we exclude the 24 ADL index dummies from the regression. We then assess




                                                  24
whether our Medicaid indicator is correlated with the ADL index in each of our specifications,

and whether the correlation is substantively large enough to likely bias our estimates.

        The results of this exercise are shown in Table 4. For models without home/person fixed

effects, there is a very large and significant negative correlation between Medicaid status and

observed health: Medicaid patients are in worse health. The results show that being on Medicaid

is associated with a reduction in ADL score of 0.384, relative to a mean score of 14.4. This

suggests that, if anything, our results without home/person fixed effects are biased in favor of

finding low quality for Medicaid patients, making the mixed results in that model even more

striking.

        When we include home fixed effects in the second column, the coefficient does not

change much: there remains a strong negative correlation with the ADL score (actually even

stronger than in the first column). The results change significantly in the third column. However,

when person fixed effects are included: there is now a small positive correlation with Medicaid.

That is, this model indicates that individuals are, along observable dimensions, becoming

healthier when they transition to Medicaid. This is indicative of selection which biases in our

favor, even in the patient fixed effects models. The effect is very small, however, and amounts

to only 0.5% of the sample mean; it is only significant because of the enormous size of our

sample.

        We can confirm this point by assessing how large any selection effects are relative to our

earlier estimates. We do this by (a) running regressions of each quality measure on the ADL

score, (b) multiplying the coefficients from this regression times the 0.065 coefficient from this

home/person fixed effects regression, and (c) dividing the resulting product by the Medicaid

coefficient reported in Table 3. That is, this exercise asks: given how much health matters for




                                                25
quality, and given the selection effects we see for health, how large a bias does that cause for the

quality measures?

       Not surprisingly given the small selection coefficient in the person fixed effects model,

we get relatively little predicted bias from this exercise. Over all our quality measures, the

predicted bias is less than 5%, and for only one measure (incontinence) does it exceed 10%.

Thus, the selection effects based on observables are quantitatively small. This does not rule out

selection on unobservables, but it does suggest such selection might be small.



Rate Differential Results

       As noted in Table 2, there is some variation across states in the Medicaid rate-private pay

price differential. Given potential concerns with the endogeneity of payer status and quality, we

used the payment differential as an exogenous source of variation across states. Thus, we tested

whether quality differences between private-pay and Medicaid residents were greatest in those

states with the largest differential between the private-pay price and Medicaid rate. The key

coefficient of interest is the interaction of a state’s Medicaid-to-private rate ratio with an

individual’s Medicaid status. If lower Medicaid reimbursement is leading to worse treatment of

Medicaid patients, then as the rate differential increases towards one (i.e., equal payment for

private-pay and Medicaid), we would expect less difference in quality across Medicaid and

private-pay patients (thus, negative coefficient estimates).

       Table 5 presents the coefficients of interest from this specification for our patient fixed

effects model. There is very little support for the idea that quality is worse in those states with a

greater payment differential. In fact, most of the estimated coefficients indicate the opposite

effect. Only four of the fee interaction coefficients are negative, and only those for restraints,




                                                  26
incontinence and depression are significant. Strikingly, these are the same outcomes for which

the main effects on Medicaid status are positive: that is, for these outcomes, quality worsens

when individuals transition to Medicaid, and less so when the Medicaid payment differential is

smaller. So it is possible that there is some effect of higher Medicaid rates in improving

outcomes in these areas. Overall, however, the pattern does not indicate that increased Medicaid

rates lead to better outcomes, consistent with our earlier findings. Given the range of different

outcomes examined in this table, this evidence is fairly weak in support of quality as a private

good.



Local Treatment Effects

        The other major concern discussed earlier was that, although including person fixed

effects deals with selection problems in these regressions, it captures only a particular source of

the variation in treatment, that due only to treatment changes as individuals transition to

Medicaid. It is possible that there could be no change in treatment when individuals make such a

transition, while still being discriminatory in the treatment of patients who arrive as Medicaid.

That is, the local treatment effect we estimate from this group of switchers may not represent the

true effects of Medicaid status on treatment.

        To address this concern, we replace our measure of payer status with a measure based on

initial payer status on admission (see Table 6). That is, we are not comparing those who changed

status in these models, but rather comparing individuals based on what they were labeled when

they entered the home. Obviously, in this case, we cannot include person-specific fixed effects,

so Table 6 shows only models with no fixed effects and home-specific fixed effects.




                                                 27
       In fact, the results are strikingly similar to our earlier findings: by and large positive

association between Medicaid and quality (negative coefficients), with some negative effects

(positive coefficients) for incontinence, anti-psychotics, and depression. Once again, all of the

coefficients are very small, suggesting no effect in aggregate even the model is identified based

on those who switch payer status.



V. Conclusions

       Using a variety of identification strategies, the results in this paper confirm the common

presumption that nursing home quality is a public good. Specifically, we employed models

identified by within-facility and within-person variation in payer status and quality; we showed

that selection on observable dimensions is small; we exploited cross-state variation in the

Medicaid and private-pay rate differential as an additional source of variation; and we considered

individuals solely based on payer status at admission. In every case, there was no consistent

finding of differential quality for Medicaid patients, and the coefficients of either sign were

universally quite small. Overall, our results are consistent with the assumption of uniform

quality across Medicaid and private-paying residents within facilities.

       This result has both research and policy implications. From a research perspective, this

study provides support for the long-standing practice of using facility-level data to evaluate

Medicaid policy effects in the nursing home literature (e.g., Gertler, 1989). Although the MDS

and other individual-level data are now becoming available to researchers, aggregate facility-

level measures can still serve as a potential complement to the individual-level measures.

Although there is evidence that quality is often a private good in the physician and hospital




                                                 28
sectors, researchers have also found support for the public good assumption across Medicaid and

non-Medicaid patients in hospitals (Dranove and White, 1998).

       From a policy perspective, these results point towards the potential for free-ridership on

the part of state Medicaid programs. If quality is a public good enjoyed equally by all payer

types, then state Medicaid programs can potentially free ride on higher paying private residents.

However, although state Medicaid administrators have historically used certificate-of-need laws

to help keep private-paying residents in joint care settings, two recent trends potentially

undermine the value of private-paying patients to state Medicaid nursing home programs. First,

assisted living and other nursing home substitutes have siphoned off some private-paying

residents. In many instances, individuals exhaust their private resources in the assisted living

sector before transitioning to Medicaid-financed nursing home care. Second, the nursing home

industry has become more segregated across facilities over the last several years (Mor et al.,

2004). That is, there are more facilities caring for predominantly Medicaid (or private-pay)

residents, implying less potential for cross-subsidization across payer types. Thus, although

quality may be uniform within facilities, market-based trends point towards fewer private-paying

residents going to homes with Medicaid patients.




                                                 29
Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                   All assessments                       Observed from admission
                                 Mean              SD                    Mean              SD
Physical Restraints              0.09             0.28                    0.07             0.26
Catheters                        0.08             0.26                    0.09             0.29
Bedfast                          0.06             0.23                    0.05             0.22
Feeding Tubes                    0.07             0.25                    0.06             0.24
Anti-psychotics                  0.19             0.39                    0.21             0.41
Pressure Ulcers                  0.08             0.27                    0.09             0.28
Pain                             0.13             0.34                    0.14             0.35
Incontinence                     0.54             0.50                    0.46             0.50
Urinary infection                0.09             0.29                    0.11             0.31
Wound infection                  0.02             0.13                    0.02             0.15
Fall                             0.16             0.37                    0.20             0.40
Depression                       0.43             0.50                    0.42             0.49

Medicaid                          0.65              0.48                  0.55                0.50
Private-payer                     0.32              0.47                  0.40                0.49
Other payer                       0.04              0.19                  0.04                0.20

Female                            0.71              0.46                  0.68                0.47
Age                              80.48             12.86                 79.37               13.11
Length of stay                   850.23           1,146.30               289.96              307.57
African American                   0.09             0.29                  0.09                0.29
Caucasian                          0.90             0.30                  0.90                0.30
Other Race                         0.01             0.11                  0.01                0.12
No High School                     0.18             0.38                  0.16                0.37
High School                        0.17             0.37                  0.18                0.38
Some College                       0.06             0.24                  0.07                0.25
College                            0.03             0.18                  0.04                0.19
Education Missing                  0.56             0.50                  0.56                0.50
Married                            0.19             0.39                  0.23                0.42
Never Married                      0.13             0.34                  0.12                0.32
Widowed                            0.57             0.49                  0.55                0.50
Divorced/Separated                 0.11             0.31                  0.11                0.31
ADL Score                         14.04             6.73                  13.15               6.41
CPS Score                          2.92             1.79                   2.61               1.73
Beds                             130.02            76.94                 130.43               81.92
For-profit                         0.69             0.46                   0.69                0.46
Nonprofit                          0.28             0.45                   0.28                0.45
Government                         0.03             0.16                   0.02                0.15
Chain Facility                     0.62             0.49                   0.63                0.48
Kansas                             0.08             0.27                   0.07                0.25
Maine                              0.07             0.25                   0.07                0.25
Mississippi                        0.05             0.21                   0.04                0.21
North Dakota                       0.06             0.23                   0.05                0.22
Ohio                               0.59             0.49                   0.58                0.49
South Dakota                       0.03             0.16                   0.02                0.15
Washington                         0.14             0.35                   0.17                0.37

N                                        1,626,628                                   872,667
Notes: There are missing data for certain variables. ADL=activities of daily living; CPS=cognitive performance
scale.




                                                        30
Table 2: Average Medicaid and private-pay rates per day of nursing home care (1998-
2002)
                                              Medicaid       Private-      Medicaid rate/      Adjusted
State                Year        Facilities     Rate         Pay Rate     private pay rate      Ratio
Kansas               1998          357          78.94          84.82            0.93             0.93
                     1999          356          85.55          92.48            0.93             0.93
                     2000          349          92.78          99.48            0.93             0.93
                     2001          344          98.02         106.71            0.92             0.92
                     2002          325         101.10         109.00            0.93             0.93

Maine                1998           133         107.88        142.55             0.76             0.75
                     1999           131         112.53        148.22             0.76             0.75
                     2000           124         117.68        155.59             0.76             0.75
                     2001           117         127.63        162.86             0.78             0.76
                     2002           118         131.73        169.30             0.78             0.76

Mississippi          1998           183          85.82         86.89             0.99             0.99
                     1999           184          90.32         93.69             0.96             0.96
                     2000           182          99.26        100.98             0.98             0.98
                     2001           193         108.32        100.75             1.08             1.08
                     2002           185         112.91        108.30             1.04             1.04

North Dakota       1998-1999         81         104.28        102.22             1.02             1.01
                   1999-2000         79         109.49        106.84             1.02             1.01
                   2000-2001         79         127.03        123.67             1.03             1.02
                   2001-2002         79         134.34        130.81             1.03             1.02
                   2002-2003         78         132.39        128.69             1.03             1.01

Ohio                 1998           719         114.95        135.25             0.85             0.85
                     1999           671         117.71        140.48             0.84             0.84
                     2000           731         123.34        143.05             0.86             0.86
                     2001           836         134.43        150.54             0.89             0.89
                     2002           811         149.36        156.06             0.96             0.96

South Dakota       1998-1999        106          79.42         99.61             0.80             0.80
                   1999-2000        106          81.46        103.85             0.78             0.78
                   2000-2001        106          85.53        106.67             0.80             0.80
                   2001-2002        108          96.63        123.07             0.79             0.79
                   2002-2003        110         100.60        129.46             0.78             0.78

Washington            1998           264        118.16          145.74            0.81             0.81
                      1999           262        125.40          147.96            0.85             0.85
                      2000           256        137.43          160.67            0.86             0.86
                      2001           260        142.86          171.84            0.83             0.83
                      2002           258        149.01          178.79            0.83             0.83
Notes: The rates are weighted by the total number of payer type days within each facility. For Kansas,
Maine and South Dakota, total private days were not available so all non-Medicaid days were used to
weight the private-pay rates. North Dakota and South Dakota report their rates from July to June. The
“adjusted ratio” column accounts for resident acuity across private-pay and Medicaid resident.




                                                   31
Table 3: Medicaid and Nursing Home Quality: Total Sample
                                           With Nursing Home                 With Person Fixed
                       No Fixed Effects       Fixed Effects                       Effects
Outcomes                      (1)                   (2)                              (3)
Physical Restraints        0.0001                 -0.003                           0.006
(N=1,564,820)               (0.14)                (2.60)                           (3.85)

Catheters                       -0.009                   -0.008                    -0.012
(N=1,564,836)                  (10.85)                   (8.83)                    (11.81)

Bedfast                        -0.001                    -0.001                    -0.005
(N=1,564,841)                  (2.17)                    (1.46)                    (5.33)

Feeding Tubes                  0.0001                    -0.002                    -0.007
(N=1,564,833)                  (0.13)                    (1.80)                    (9.18)

Anti-psychotics                 0.014                    0.009                     0.004
(N=892,578)                     (7.13)                   (4.23)                    (1.85)

Pressure Ulcers                -0.006                    -0.005                    -0.010
(N=1,380,289)                  (7.94)                    (6.89)                    (6.80)

Pain                            0.008                    0.007                     -0.009
(N=1,380,127)                   (6.86)                   (5.91)                    (4.92)

Incontinence                    0.018                     0.018                    0.013
(N=1,422,656)                  (12.13)                   (12.67)                   (6.33)

Urinary Infections             -0.006                    -0.005                    -0.012
(N=1,564,825)                  (8.07)                    (6.70)                    (8.33)

Wound Infections                -0.004                   -0.003                    -0.004
(N=1,564,825)                  (12.27)                   (10.18)                   (6.27)

Falls                           -0.022                   -0.021                    -0.019
(N=1,564,786)                  (24.40)                   (21.96)                   (9.95)

Depression                         0.039                  0.032                      0.022
(N=1,563,566)                     (17.98)                (14.64)                    (11.23)
All models include the covariates listed in Table 1 along with time fixed effects. Absolute values
of the t-statistics are presented in parentheses.




                                                32
Table 4: Selection on Observables: Total Sample
                                              With Nursing Home              With Person Fixed
                         No Fixed Effects        Fixed Effects                    Effects
Outcome                         (1)                   (2)                           (3)

ADL Index                        -0.384                   -0.445                    0.065
(N=1,565,017)                    (13.51)                  (15.6)                    (2.85)

All models include the covariates listed in Table 1 along with time fixed effects. Absolute values
of the t-statistics are presented in parentheses.




                                                33
Table 5: Effect of rate differential on nursing home quality: Total Sample
                                                                Medicaid × Rate
Outcomes                     Medicaid       Rate Differential     Differential
Physical Restraints           0.044              0.147               -0.044
(N=1,545,271)                 (2.77)             (6.60)              (2.47)

Catheters                     -0.059                 -0.013             0.053
(N=1,545,285)                 (5.48)                 (0.90)             (4.40)

Bedfast                       -0.008                 0.037              0.004
(N=1,545,290)                 (0.89)                 (2.87)             (0.39)

Feeding tubes                 -0.075                 0.070               0.076
(N=1,545,284)                 (9.09)                 (6.21)              (8.32)

Anti-psychotics               0.018                  0.068              -0.016
(N=886,339)                   (0.64)                 (1.60)             (0.49)

Pressure ulcers               -0.035                 -0.018             0.029
(N=1,366,262)                 (2.40)                 (0.93)             (1.76)

Pain                          -0.032                 0.090              0.026
(N=1,366,104)                 (1.73)                 (3.63)             (1.28)

Incontinence                  0.096                  0.109              -0.095
(N=1,405,839)                 (4.45)                 (3.70)             (3.91)

Urinary infections            -0.053                 0.008              0.046
(N=1,545,278)                 (3.51)                 (0.42)             (2.71)

Wound infections              -0.019                 -0.011             0.017
(N=1,545,278)                 (3.05)                 (1.32)             (2.44)

Falls                         -0.176                 -0.052             0.178
(N=1,545,236)                 (8.78)                 (1.96)             (7.89)

Depression                      0.082                0.150              -0.068
(N=1,544,080)                   (3.73)               (4.92)             (2.75)
All models include the covariates listed in Table 1 along with person and time fixed effects.
Absolute values of the t-statistics are presented in parentheses




                                                34
Table 6: Payer Source at Time of Admission and Quality
                                            With Nursing
                       No Fixed Effects Home Fixed Effects
Outcomes                      (1)                (2)
Physical Restraints         -0.002             -0.004
(N=837,037)                  (1.39)             (3.03)

Catheters                      -0.018                -0.014
(N=837,040)                    (14.94)               (10.69)

Bedfast                        -0.005                -0.005
(N=837,048)                     (6.66)                (5.83)

Feeding tubes                  -0.018                -0.017
(N=837,045)                    (15.40)               (13.84)

Anti-psychotics                0.030                  0.020
(N=375,414)                    (9.22)                 (6.30)

Pressure ulcers                -0.017                -0.016
(N=654,646)                    (15.02)               (14.45)

Pain                           -0.006                -0.005
(N=654,613)                     (3.60)                (2.99)

Incontinence                   0.019                  0.020
(N=750,918)                    (9.33)                 (9.77)

Urinary infections             -0.011                -0.010
(N=837,030)                    (11.43)                (9.96)

Wound infections               -0.005                -0.050
(N=837,030)                    (12.12)               (10.37)

Falls                          -0.017                -0.016
(N=836,992)                    (13.16)               (12.01)

Depression                      0.024                  0.021
(N=836,186)                     (8.21)                 (7.06)
The coefficient estimates reported are the interaction of the case-mix adjusted rate differential
(Medicaid divided by private-pay) and Medicaid status. All models include the covariates listed
in Table 1 along time fixed effects. Absolute values of the t-statistics are presented in
parentheses




                                                35
References

Adams, E. Kathleen, Mark R. Meiners, and Brian O. Burwell (1993) “Asset Spend-Down in

       Nursing Homes. Methods and Insights,” Medical Care, 31(1): 1-23.

Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder and Christopher R. Taber (2000), “Selection on Observed and

       Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools,” National

       Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper No. 7831.

Arrow, Kenneth J. (1963), “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care” American

       Economic Review 53(5): 941-973.

Chandra, Amitabh and Jonathan Skinner. (2003) Geography and Racial Health Disparities.

       National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper No. 9513.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber (2001). “Public Health Insurance and Medical Treatment:

       The Equalizing Impact of the Medicaid Expansions,” Journal of Public Economics,

       82(1), 63-89.

Dranove, David and William D. White (1998) Medicaid-dependent hospitals and their patients:

       how have they fared? Health Services Research 33(2 Pt 1):163-185.

Frank, Richard G. (2004), Behavioral Economics and Health Economics. (2004) National

       Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper No. 10881.

Freiman, Marc P. and Christopher M. Murtaugh. (1993) The determinants of the hospitalization

       of nursing home residents. Journal of Health Economics 12(3): 349-359.

Gertler, Paul J. (1989). Subsidies, quality, and the regulation of nursing homes. Journal of Public

       Economics, 38(1), 33-52.




                                                36
Gertler Paul J. and Donald M. Waldman. (1992). Quality-Adjusted Cost Functions and Policy

       Evaluation in the Nursing Home Industry. Journal of Political Economy 100(6): 1232-

       1256.

Grabowski, David C. (2001). “Medicaid Reimbursement and the Quality of Nursing Home

       Care,” Journal of Health Economics 20(4): 549-569.

Grabowski, David C. (2004), “A Longitudinal Study of Medicaid Payment, Private-Pay Price

       and Nursing Home Quality,” International Journal of Health Care Finance and

       Economics 4(1): 5-26.

Gruber, Jonathan (2000) Medicaid. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.

       7829.

Gruber, Jonathan, John Kim, and Dina Mayzlin, (1999), “Physician fees and procedure intensity:

       the case of cesarean delivery,” Journal of Health Economics 18(4): 473-490.

Hadley, Jack, Earl P. Steinberg and Judith Feder, (1991), “Comparison of uninsured and

       privately insured hospital patients. Condition on admission, resource use, and outcome,”

       JAMA 265(3):374-379.

Health Care Financing Administration, State Operations Manual: Provider Certification.

       Department of Health and Human Services, HCFA Pub. 7, Transmittal No. 274 (June

       1995).

Hirth, Richard A., Jane C. Banaszak-Holl, Brant E. Fries, and Marc N. Turenne. (2003). “Does

       quality influence consumer choice of nursing homes? Evidence from nursing home to

       nursing home transfers.” Inquiry 40(4):343-61.

Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. Lalonde and Daniel G. Sullivan, (1993) Earnings Losses of

       Displaced Workers. American Economic Review 83(4): 685-709.




                                              37
McKay, Nicole L. (1989). Quality Choice in Medicaid Markets: The Case of Nursing Homes.

       Quarterly Review of Economics and Business 29: 27-40.

Mor, Vincent, Jacqueline Zinn, Joseph Angelelli, Joan M. Teno, and Susan C. Miller. (2004).

       Driven to tiers: socioeconomic and racial disparities in the quality of nursing home care.

       Milbank Quarterly 82(2): 227-256.

Morris, John N, Brant E. Fries, David R. Mehr, Catherine Hawes, Charles Phillips, Vincent Mor,

       and Lewis A. Lipsitz (1994) MDS Cognitive Performance Scale. Journal of Gerontology.

       49(4):M174-M182.

Morris, John N., Terry Moore, Rich Jones, Vincent Mor, Joseph Angelelli, Katherine Berg

       Catherine Hale, Shirley Morris, Katharine M. Murphy, and Melissa Rennison (2003)

       Validation of Long-Term and Post-Acute Quality Indicators. Baltimore, MD: Centers for

       Medicare and Medicaid Services.

Nicolle, Lindsay E. (2000) Infection Control in Long-term Care Facilities. Clinical Infectious

       Diseases 31(3): 752-756.

Norton, Edward C. (2000). Long-term Care. In A. J. Cuyler & J. P. Newhouse (Eds.), Handbook

       of Health Economics (pp. 955-994). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Nyman, John A. (1988a). The effect of competition on nursing home expenditures under

       prospective reimbursement. Health Services Research, 23(4), 555-574.

Nyman, John A. (1988b). Excess demand, the percentage of Medicaid patients, and the quality of

       nursing home care. Journal of Human Resources, 23(1), 76-92.

Nyman, John A. (1988c). Improving the quality of nursing home outcomes. Are adequacy- or

       incentive-oriented policies more effective? Medical Care, 26(12), 1158-1171.




                                               38
Ray, Wayne A, Jo A. Taylor, Keith G. Meador, Purushottam B. Thapa, Anne K. Brown, Henry

       K. Kajihara, Claudia Davis, Patricia Gideon and Marie R. Griffin (1997) A Randomized

       Trial of a Consultation Service to Reduce Falls in Nursing Homes. JAMA 278(7): 557-

       562.

Scanlon, William J. (1980). A theory of the nursing home market. Inquiry, 17(1), 25-41.

Schnelle John F. and Felix W. Leung. (2004). Urinary and fecal incontinence in nursing homes.

       Gastroenterology. 126(1 Suppl 1):S41-S47.

Simmons, S.F., M.P. Cadogan, G.R. Cabrera N.R. Al-Samarrai, J.S. Jorge, L. Levy-Storms, D.

       Osterwei and J.F. Schnelle. (2004) The minimum data set depression quality indicator:

       does it reflect differences in care processes? Gerontologist 44(4): 554-64.

Troyer, Jennifer L. (2004) Examining differences in death rates for Medicaid and non-Medicaid

       nursing home residents. Medical Care, 42(10), 985-91.

U.S. General Accounting Office. (1990) Nursing Homes: Admission Problems for Medicaid

       Recipients and Attempts to Solve Them. Pub. No. HRD-90-135. Washington, D.C.

U.S. General Accounting Office. (2002) Nursing Homes: Public Reporting of Quality Indicators

       Has Merit, but National Implementation Is Premature. Pub. No. GAO-03-187

       Washington, D.C.

Weissert, Willaim C and William J. Scanlon (1985) Determinants of nursing home discharge

       status. Medical Care 23(4):333-43.




                                               39
