NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DETERMINANTS AND CONSEQUENCES OF
BARGAINING POWER IN HOUSEHOLDS
Leora Friedberg
Anthony Webb
Working Paper 12367
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12367
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2006

We would like to thank Federico Ciliberto, Maxim Engers, John Pepper, and especially Steven Stern;
participants of workshops at the University of Virginia, the Society of Labor Economics, Harvard University,
and UNC-Greensboro for their extremely helpful comments; and Francesca Golub-Sass, Stella Lee, and
especially Jonathan King for excellent research assistance. Any remaining errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2006 by Leora Friedberg and Anthony Webb. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Determinants and Consequences of Bargaining Power in Households
Leora Friedberg and Anthony Webb
NBER Working Paper No. 12367
July 2006
JEL No. D13, D14, D91, G11, J12
ABSTRACT
A growing literature offers indirect evidence that the distribution of bargaining power within
a household influences decisions made by the household. The indirect evidence links household
outcomes to variables that are assumed to influence the distribution of power within the household.
In this paper, we have data on whether a husband or wife in the Health and Retirement Study “has
the final say” when making major decisions in a household. We use this variable to analyze
determinants and some consequences of bargaining power. Our analysis overcomes endogeneity
problems arising in many earlier studies and constitutes a missing link confirming the importance
of household bargaining models.
We find that decision-making power depends on plausible individual variables and also
influences important household outcomes, with the second set of results much stronger than the first
set. Current and lifetime earnings have significant but moderate effects on decision-making power.
On the other hand, decision-making power has important effects on financial decisions like stock
market investment and total wealth accumulation and may help explain, for example, the relatively
high poverty rate among widows.
Leora Friedberg
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
lfriedberg@virginia.edu
Anthony Webb
Center for Retirement Research
Boston College
258 Hammond Street
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3808
webbaa@bc.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
A growing literature offers indirect evidence that the distribution of bargaining power
within a household influences decisions made by the household. Yet, earlier papers were not
able to measure actual bargaining power. We use information from a unique question in the
Health and Retirement Study to analyze the determinants and some consequences of bargaining
power.
Models of household bargaining have two important implications for understanding
individual outcomes. First, the welfare of household members depends on the distribution of
bargaining power. Second, household decisions are not the outcome of a single individual
maximizing utility. Indirect evidence against “unitary” decision-making links household
outcomes to variables that are assumed to influence the distribution of bargaining power within
the household. Such outcomes include the amount and allocation of leisure time, spending (on
women’s and children’s clothes versus men’s clothes, on alcohol and tobacco, on food) and
domestic violence (including female suicide rates).
However, none of those studies directly show how individual preferences affect
household decisions. In this paper, we analyze data from the HRS reporting whether a husband
or wife has “the final say” when making major decisions. We interpret the answers as revealing
whose preferences are reflected to a greater degree in household choices. By directly observing
decision-making power, our analysis overcomes endogeneity problems arising in many earlier
studies and constitutes the missing link that confirms the importance of household bargaining.
To undertake this analysis, we develop an econometric framework and pose a set of
intuitive identification assumptions to make use of multiple subjective reports. We find that
decision-making power depends on plausible variables within the household and also influences
important household outcomes. Moreover, the second set of results is much stronger than the
first set. Current and lifetime earnings have a significant but only moderate influence on
decision-making power. On the other hand, decision-making power has important effects on a
sample of financial decisions that we examine.
In the first set of results, we analyze determinants of whether the husband or wife has
more decision-making power. We find that decision-making power depends significantly on
relative household earnings, and more so on average lifetime earnings than on current earnings.
However, the magnitudes of these estimated effects are only moderate for this older sample –
switching average lifetime earnings of husbands and wives reduces the predicted percentage of
1

men reported to have the final say by their wives from 31.1% to 21.6%. These estimates control
for human capital variables that may be correlated with both labor supply and a comparative
advantage in making important decisions. They also show that cultural factors like race,
religion, and immigrant status affect decision-making power.
Next, we show that we can use this data to investigate outcomes that are both novel in the
household bargaining literature and important. As an example, we investigate two financial
outcomes that are well-recorded in the HRS. When husbands have greater decision-making
power, we find that the household invests significantly and substantially more in equities,
controlling for important factors like household wealth and stated risk preferences. This shows
some practical consequences of evidence found by others that men are less risk averse. We also
find an intriguing twist on the standard life cycle model. When husbands have the final say, we
find that household wealth is significantly and substantially higher the older is the husband but
not the wife, and when wives have the final say, household wealth is higher the older is the wife.
Thus, life cycle planning motives appear driven in part by the interests of the spouse in charge.
Thus, our conclusions are twofold. Our results show that household bargaining can have
important effects on the welfare of household members. For example, the relatively high rate of
poverty among widows may result not only from aggregate longevity shocks, insurance market
failures, and/or poor planning, but also from the nature of household bargaining earlier in life.1
This, in turn, has implications for the design of dependent and survivor benefits available
through Social Security and for the impact of the shift from annuitized defined benefit pensions
to lump-sum defined contribution accounts. Our results also make it clear that more research is
needed into the determination of bargaining power, as even important variables like earnings
explain relatively little about the distribution of bargaining power.
II. PAST EVIDENCE ON HOUSEHOLD BARGAINING
A. Past empirical literature
While most consumption and wealth data is collected at the household level, many
studies have raised doubts that households can be treated as unitary decision makers.2
Theoretical work that began with McElroy and Horney (1981) and Manser and Brown (1981)
assumed instead that spouses engage in cooperative bargaining. The resulting Nash-bargained
1

18.0% of widows aged 65 and over lived in poverty in 1997, compared to 13.1% of all elderly women and 13.3%
of the total population (National Economic Council 1998).
2
See recent surveys by Bergstrom (1995), Behrman (1995), Bergstrom (1996), and Lundberg and Pollack (1996).

2

equilibrium allocates marital surplus according to each spouse’s bargaining power. Bargaining
power depends in turn on spouses’ threat points, assumed most often to be their utility from
divorce.
Direct tests of such models are hampered by the unobservability of bargaining, threat
points, and the allocation of marital surplus. Consequently, the empirical literature has employed
indirect tests of implications of unitary decision-making models. Many of these tests rely on
similar identification strategies, which we discuss in the next section, that test the “income
pooling” hypothesis. Under unitary models, the distribution of resources within the family
should not influence outcomes like expenditures. Empirical papers have shown, to the contrary,
that variables which are plausibly related to threat points – like spouses’ wages, earnings, or
unearned income – alter household outcomes over which spouses might have different
preferences – like time spent by spouses on leisure and chores (Friedberg and Webb 2005);
spending on men’s, women’s, and children’s clothing (Phipps and Burton 1998; Lundberg,
Pollak and Wales 1997; Ward-Batts 2003), on alcohol and tobacco (Phipps and Burton;
Hoddinot and Haddad 1995; Ward-Batts), and on food (Lundberg, Starz, and Stillman 2003;
Duflo and Udry 2004; Ward-Batts); and child outcomes like health and education (Schultz 1990;
Thomas 1990, 1994; Haddad and Hoddinott 1994; Rose 1999; Duflo 2003; Duflo and Udry).3
B. Comparison to our empirical strategy
Our approach offers three related advantages over recent studies. First, we have actual
measures of decision-making power. Since earlier studies lacked such measures, they had to
assume that the variables they studied influenced the distribution of bargaining power and were
influenced by it. We do not have to assume any indirect relationships. Thus, our results
constitute strong new evidence in favor of household bargaining models and about the specific
nature of bargaining.
Second, because we have a measure of bargaining power, we are not constrained as
earlier studies were in choosing outcomes to analyze. The studies mentioned above jointly test
not only income pooling but also that spouses’ preferences differ over the outcomes being
studied. This is a key reason to study spending on men’s and women’s clothing, for example
3

In addition, bargaining is an explanation for rejections of standard implications of individual preference axioms
using household-level data (McElroy 1981). Examples include negative price elasticities and violations of Slutsky
symmetry. Proceeding from that, Browning et al (1994) and Browning and Chiappori (1999) found that testable
analogs of non-unitary models that assume Pareto efficient allocations within the household were not rejected.

3

(notwithstanding possible public good aspects of clothing choices!). It is less obvious, though,
that men and women have different preferences for alcohol and tobacco, food at home versus
away, and children’s well-being. In contrast, we can directly test which outcomes depend on our
measure of bargaining power. While we lack data on many potentially interesting outcomes, and
we must condition on appropriate variables as other studies must, we can examine outcomes like
financial behavior which less obviously reflect the preferences of a particular spouse.
Third, many of the variables which earlier studies used to explain the distribution of
bargaining power were arguably endogenous. To give an extreme but relevant example, it would
be difficult to believe that omitted factors played no role in explaining a correlation between
religion and spending on clothing, unless we can show (as we do later) that religion directly
influences bargaining power. More importantly, the earnings variation used in many tests of
income pooling is not plausibly separable from the outcomes being explained. If spouses earn
more because they work more, that reduces time that is available for home production and may
alter spending on clothing, food, children, etc. Variation in unearned income is similarly
problematic for reasons described by Lundberg and Pollak (1996). The cleanest evidence, then,
comes from quasi-experiments, but those are limited to particular settings and mostly involve
poor populations (Lundberg, Pollak, and Wales; Duflo; Duflo and Udry).
III. DATA
A. The HRS
We use data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a longitudinal survey of over
7,600 households with a member aged 50-60 in 1991. The HRS began in 1992 and collected
new data every two years. The HRS reports unprecedented detail about household
characteristics, labor supply, finances, health, and so on. We use data from the first wave in
1992.4
Each spouse was asked the following question about decision-making power:
“When it comes to making major family decisions, who has the final say – you or
your (husband/ wife/ partner)? By ‘major family decisions’ we mean things like when to
retire, where to live, or how much money to spend on a major purchase.”
4

The question about decision-making was asked again in 1994, and 2/3 of individuals gave the same answer. After
that, it was only asked of new entrants to the HRS, a considerably smaller group. We do not attempt to analyze
changes in bargaining power, which would require not only a theory of dynamic bargaining, but also an approach to
distinguishing measurement error from true shifts in either bargaining power or reporting bias.

4

Individuals could answer that they themselves had the final say, that their spouses did, or that the
division of responsibility was “about equal”.5
Because the age range in the HRS is limited, the results are not representative of all
households. In particular, since they are older and some unhappy marriages will already have
ended, the households that we are observing are more harmonious than average.6 On the other
hand, the greater marital stability of the sample offers an advantage. We can view the observed
outcomes as the steady state of a repeated game, and cooperative bargaining is more likely to be
sustained than in a one-shot game.7
B. The distribution of the “final say” in the sample
We took the following steps in selecting our sample from the HRS:
• the HRS interviewed 7,607 households in 1992
• we selected couples, yielding a sample of 5,090
• we eliminated couples with no financial information, yielding a sample of 5,036
• we eliminated couples who were cohabiting, yielding a sample of 4,815
• we eliminated couples in which at least one spouse did not answer the bargaining question,
yielding a final sample of 4,237.
Table 1 shows the distribution of decision making power in our sample, and Table 2
shows other sample statistics. In Table 1, both spouses report that husbands have more
bargaining power, on average. When husbands answered the first question above (as shown
across the bottom of the upper panel), 30.6% reported having the final say, 57.6% said it was
about equal, and 11.8% reported that the wife had the final say. When the 30.6% of husbands
with the final say answered the second question above (as shown in the lower panel), roughly

5

People were asked a follow-up question if they did not answer “about equal”: either, “Do you have a lot more say
than your (husband/ wife/ partner), somewhat more, or only a little more?”, or, vice versa. The answers to this
second question did not provide us with significant additional information. In ordered probits, the estimated
threshold values are not significantly different from each other when we try to explain answers to the second
question, but they are when we try to explain answers to the first question in the estimates we report later.
6
While the value of observed marriages in the HRS should be higher than the value of a representative marriage
and thus disagreement should be less likely, this does not have clear-cut implications about the observed distribution
of bargaining power relative to the underlying distribution for all couples. We find that controlling for the duration
of marriage has no impact on the other coefficient estimates. Interestingly, we find smaller estimated effects of
earnings on bargaining power in second marriages, perhaps because people enter a second marriage with more
information about the likely distribution of bargaining power.
7
Because we find significant effects later on, we believe that these answers are informative. Thus, it seems
unlikely that one spouse has more power but delegates decision-making to the other spouse, knowing that the
decisions will reflect their own preferences.

5

one-quarter reported having a lot more say, and the rest reported having somewhat or a little
more say.
The marginal distribution of wives’ answers to the first question is similar to husbands’.
16.0% of wives reporting that they themselves have the final say, 52.7% answering that it was
about equal, and 31.3% reporting that their husbands have the final say.
Disagreements are apparent in the off-diagonal cells in the upper panel of Table 1. Spouses
agreed on the answer 63.3% of the time. 84.2% of the disagreements occurred in adjacent cells,
while the rest involved one spouse answering the wife and the other answering the husband.
About 2/3 of these adjacent disagreements leaned toward the husband, with one spouse
attributing more power to the husband and the other reporting equal power. It was also a little
more common for disagreeing spouses to attribute extra power to themselves relative to the other
spouse’s opinion (adding together cells in the lower left) than it was for them to attribute extra
power to the other spouse (cells in the upper right).
IV. EMPIRICAL APPROACH
We interpret answers to the question about decision-making power as revealing which
spouse’s preferences are reflected to a greater degree in household decisions.8 However, we treat
the answers as noisy measures of true decision-making power, both because the answers are
discrete and because of the disagreements revealed in Table 1. Moreover, disagreements are
correlated with some of our important explanatory variables in the results we present later.
In this section, we offer an econometric framework that suggests intuitive identification
assumptions to disentangle these features. We first present a framework to deal with noisy,
continuous measures of bargaining power, and then noisy, discrete measures. While the
identification assumptions influence the interpretation of the reported coefficient estimates, they
are not actually imposed in the process of estimation, so uninterested readers can proceed
directly to the next section for the estimation results.
A. Estimating the determinants of noisy continuous measures of true bargaining power
8

Household theory has emphasized the generalized Nash model of cooperative bargaining, in which the allocation
of resources (Uh, Uw) maximizes (Uh-Rh)θ(Uw-Rw)1-θ, where Rj are reservation values and 0<θ<1 is h’s relative
bargaining weight. The equilibrium allocation Uj will depend on R and θ, and we view our measure of decisionmaking power (which we also refer to on occasion as “bargaining power”) as an amalgam of Rh, Rw, and θ. In
comparison, empirical tests of income pooling seek to determine whether components of R influence components of
U. A natural extension of our work would be to incorporate additional information and estimate the full Nashbargaining model, as several papers have done in labor market settings (cf. Flinn forthcoming).

6

We assume for the moment that spouses report continuous (rather than discrete) measures
of bargaining power. We will focus first on determining how bargaining power, measured
continuously, depends on household characteristics and then how it influences household
outcomes. We will denote true bargaining power of a husband relative to his wife in household i
by yi*. We will treat true bargaining power yi* as a function of observables X and an
uncorrelated homoscedastic error term:
(1)

yi* = Xiα + ui .

We do not observe yi* but rather the belief yji* about true bargaining power that each spouse j =
{h,w} in household i reports. We write these beliefs as
(2a)

ywi* = yi* + Xiβw + uwi

(2b)

yhi* = yi* + Xiβh + uhi ,

so j’s report about the husband’s relative bargaining power depends on his true bargaining power
but also on some reporting bias Xiβj and another uncorrelated homoscedastic error term.
Before proceeding with estimation issues, we will clarify some important identifying
assumptions that lie behind (1)-(2b). First, the model assumes that the “true” measure of
decision-making power yi*, rather than the reported measures yji*, influence household decisions.
Otherwise, we might have to consider a model of multi-dimensional bargaining in order to
reconcile conflicting reports that are both true.9 Second, the model assumes specific forms of
heterogeneity in how everyone reports yji*. Answers may disagree or not as a function of
observables and error terms, but it assumes that couples whose answers disagree or not do not
fundamentally differ in either how they answer the question or how they bargain.
To proceed, we can rewrite each spouse’s report of bargaining power in (2a) and (2b) as
ywi* = Xi (α+βw) + ui + uwi
yhi* = Xi (α+βh) + ui + uhi ,
but, of course, we can only estimate the empirical analogs
(3a) ywi* = Xi bw + u~
wi

(3b)

yhi* = Xi bh + u~hi .

Thus, we have an identification problem since bj = α + βj combines the “true effect” α of X on
y* and the “reporting bias” βj also engendered by X.

7

In order to identify the true effect α, we propose the following restriction:
(4)

βh + βw = 0 .

This condition requires that any disagreements between spouses about true bargaining power be
equal and opposite in sign, so that they balance out on average across the sample.
This restriction is an intuitive extension of the assumption that respondents provide
unbiased information. As an example, consider our result later that a wife’s (W’s) earnings
reduces her husband’s (H’s) bargaining power but by amounts that are disagreed on. Suppose
that higher W’s earnings reduce true yi by an average of 0.5. A symmetric disagreement arises if
higher W’s earnings lead Ws to claim a greater drop and Hs to claim a smaller drop. If instead
they disagreed in the same direction (e.g., Hs and Ws report average reductions of 0.6 and 0.7,
respectively), then we could not identify the true effect on bargaining power (which we would
infer lies between 0.6 and 0.7) from this systematic reporting bias. Instead, we infer that
anything that moves both spouses’ reports in the same direction is the truth. Similarly, if the
disagreement were opposite in direction but not symmetric (e.g., Hs and Ws report average
reductions of 0.4 and 0.7), then we would correctly infer that the truth lies in between 0.4 and
0.7, but we would incorrectly infer where.10 This assumption makes sense as long as, once
again, both spouses interpret the question in the same way, on average.11
Once we estimate (3a) and (3b) and then impose (4), we can recover the underlying
parameters of interest. Since bh = α + βh and bw = α + βw, it can be shown that
(5a)

α = (bh + bw)/2

(5b)

βj = bj - α = bj - (bh + bw)/2 .

9

In such a model, spouses might report different answers because they engage in distinct bargaining over different
decisions. Such models are theoretically intractable and would be difficult to identify using our data, since we
would not know what “sphere” of bargaining each spouse has in mind when answering the question.
10
We could generalize (4) by incorporating asymmetric effects of X on disagreement, such that βh+βw = β
∀ |βj| ≥ |β| . This allows βh and βw to differ in magnitude as long as they also differ in sign but does not yield point
identification of α and βj. If we suspected that an element of X had a greater effect on one spouse’s reporting bias
than on the other’s, then β > 0 and we would know that the estimate of α̂ was an upper bound on the true α. Also,
we could determine how large β (the asymmetry of disagreement) would have to be in order to undermine inference
about the true sign of α.
11
The HRS reported whether the other spouse was present and intervened much during an individual’s interview.
We find that wives are much more likely to be present for their husband’s interviews, and that a spouse’s presence is
not systematically related to reported bargaining power. The theoretical implication is ambiguous – a spouse with
more bargaining power may directly exercise control over the less powerful spouse’s answers or may be confident
of indirect control that makes intervention unnecessary. When we try controlling for the presence of the other
spouse in the estimation, there is little qualitative impact on the estimated effect of earnings, which is our primary
interest. It alters the estimated effect of some demographic and cultural variables (i.e., race, religion, children).

8

Thus, our estimate of the true effect α̂ equals the average of b̂h and b̂w , and our estimate of the
reporting bias β̂ j equals b̂ j minus α̂ . In cases where there is little disagreement, b̂w ≈ b̂h , so

b̂ j ≈ α̂ and β̂ j ≈ 0.12 A final issue is whether the errors in the reporting equations (2a)-(2b) and
hence the estimating equations (3a)-(3b) are correlated.13 We test this hypothesis later on and
find a large, positive, statistically significant correlation.
B. Estimating the consequences of noisy continuous measures of true bargaining power
Using noisy measures of bargaining power also affects how we interpret estimates of the
consequences of decision-making power on household outcomes. Suppose some outcome zi
depends on true continuous but unobserved bargaining power yi*, as defined in (1), and on X
(which affect true and reported bargaining power as well) and an uncorrelated homoscedastic
error term, so that
(6)

zi = γ yi* + Xiδ + vi .

We can substitute (2a) and (2b) to obtain

zi = γ ywi* + Xi (δ - γβw) + vi - γuwi
zi = γ yhi* + Xi (δ - γβh) + vi - γuhi
and then add these together to arrive at
(7)

yhi * + ywi *
γ
γ
) + Xi (δ - (βw + βh))+ vi - (uwi + uhi) .
2
2
2

zi = γ(

The empirical analog of (7) is
(8)

zi = c(

yhi * + ywi *
) + Xi d + ~
v.
2

If we estimate (8) and invoke the assumption in (4) that βh+βw = 0, then we can recover the true
parameters from (6), which are simply γ = c and δ = d The key point is that averaging yhi* and

ywi* in the estimation cancels out the disagreement effects βj.

In this framework, we cannot identify the true effect α by limiting the sample to couples who report the same
answers for y. It is not the case that such couples have no reporting bias, but rather that their reporting errors uji
happen to offset their reporting bias Xiβj, that they have systematically lower values of variables associated with
high reporting bias and vice versa, etc. With that in mind, we will mention the effect of limiting the sample when
we present the estimation results later.
13
We cannot identify a correlation between the disturbance in the true equation (1) and the reporting equations (2a)(2b) without making a further assumption, analogous to (4), about the nature of the correlation.
12

9

C. Estimating the causes and consequences of discrete measures of bargaining power
At this point, we will address the fact that our observed reports of bargaining power are
discrete rather than continuous. In order to estimate the determinants of bargaining power, we
continue to assume that (1)-(2b) hold, with yji* now being some underlying continuous measure
that we only observe discretely:
(9)

yji = {husband has final say, about equal, wife has final say} = {1, 0, -1}

Assuming further that u~ ji ~ N ( 0,σ 2 ) yields an ordered probit framework that is the discrete
choice analog to (3a) and (3b), where the contribution of each possible outcome of yji to the log
likelihood function is
(10)

P(yji = -1) = Φ(µ0 - Xibj)
P(yji = 0) = Φ(µ1 - Xibj) - Φ(µ0 - Xibj)
P(yji = 1) = 1 - Φ(µ1 - Xibj) ,

and µ0 and µ1 are threshold values to be estimated. Since the relationship bj = α + βj continues
to hold, then, after imposing (4), the same conditions (5a) and (5b) govern identification. Lastly,
we will estimate a bivariate ordered probit that allows the errors u~ to be correlated for spouses
ji

j within a household i. Such a correlation may be expected if spouses share important
characteristics that influence both bargaining and reports about bargaining and that are not
observed in the data.
When we consider estimating the consequences of our noisy, discrete measure of
bargaining power, the estimation strategy outlined in (8) becomes more complicated since we do
not observe the continuous variables yji*. We deal with this using three approaches.14
• We try a two-stage procedure: first, estimate the ordered probits that determine bargaining
power as laid out in (3a) and (3b) and obtain the predicted values ŷ ji * = X ib̂ j ; second,
substitute those into (8) and estimate the impact of bargaining power. The difficulty with this
approach is in determining how to adjust the standard errors in the second stage.15

14

Another approach which we will not use would be a joint estimation strategy that allows the error terms
determining yhi*, ywi*, and zi to be correlated. This approach would get rapidly more complicated as we analyze
additional outcomes z, though, so we limit the joint estimation to yhi* and ywi*.
15
Maddala (1983, Section 8.8) lays out estimators and, in some cases, covariance matrices for related examples in
which the first and/or second stages are specified discretely. None pertain directly to the situation here, and for the
most similar cases, he notes, “The derivation of the asymptotic covariance matrix of the two-stage estimates is very
complicated and will not be attempted here,” (pp.245, 246). We do not attempt it either.

10

• We also try a more efficient alternative with correct standard errors, derived from
Amemiya (1979) and described in detail in the Appendix: first, estimate the first-stage
relationship in (3a) and (3b) as described above; second, estimate the reduced form obtained
from substituting the determinants of yji*, as laid out in (3a) and (3b), into the second-stage
relationship in (8); third, estimate the structural parameters of the impact of bargaining power
based on the resulting parameter restrictions.
• Lastly, we try a non-structural alternative that controls for the raw answers on decisionmaking power. This approach does not rely on the functional form represented by (1)-(2b)
that we assumed in the first stage, but it revives the difficulty of extracting information from
the discrete and sometimes conflicting answers of spouses.
Using either of the structural approaches, we now face an additional constraint because
ŷ ji * is a linear function of the explanatory variables X which also appear linearly in (8).

Therefore, we must exclude one or more elements of X so that we can identify the impact γ of yi*
on z.16 To this end, we will argue that total household earnings should affect outcomes z that we
analyze, but that the split between husband’s and wife’s earnings should not, except through their
influence on bargaining power.
V. WHAT INFLUENCES BARGAINING POWER?
In this section, we analyze the empirical determinants of decision-making power. We
estimate bivariate ordered probits on both spouses’ answers yji about decision-making power,
coded as {1,0,-1} = {husband has final say, about equal, wife has final say}. We hypothesize
that labor market opportunities of each spouse affects threat points and in turn bargaining power.
To test this, we explore the impact of current and past earnings and other labor market
variables.17
The HRS offers a great deal of information to control for other factors that may affect
both threat points and decision making. For example, a spouse who is “savvier” than the other
may be more likely to work and make major decisions, inducing a spurious correlation. To deal
16

If we observed the continuous values yji*, then the variation in reported bargaining power that is uncorrelated
with X would identify the impact of y* on z.
17
Pollak (2005) laid out the case that the wage, rather than earnings, is the appropriate proxy for the bargaining
threat point, as hours of work may differ across bargaining equilibria. Measuring the marginal wage accurately for
this age group proved difficult, though, as salaried jobs are the norm. Moreover, total earnings might better proxy
the threat point in this case, since hours adjustments are difficult at this age; for example, a non-working spouse may
find it difficult at this age to exercise what earlier was a legitimate threat to earn a high wage by returning to work.

11

with this, we control for each spouse’s human capital as reflected by education, cognition, and
health.18 Cultural background and social norms may be correlated with both threat points and
decision-making power, so we control for numerous background variables – race, hispanic
ethnicity, immigrant status, religious background, and father and mother’s education. We find
that many of these variables have statistically significant effects on decision-making power,
although ethnic variables also have the strongest effects on disagreements.
A. The impact of husband’s and wife’s earnings
We show estimation results for various specifications of labor market variables
(including current earnings, earnings histories, and others) in bivariate ordered probits estimated
jointly on both spouses’ responses. Throughout these specifications, we obtain a positive,
significant correlation coefficient of around 0.45.19 Thus, conditioning on observables, both
spouses agree about who has decision-making power on average, but not perfectly.
After reviewing various specifications, we will decompose the parameter estimates from
some preferred specifications into the “true” and the “disagreement” or “bias” effects that result
from imposing (4). Then, we will discuss the magnitude of the estimated effects on the
distribution of decision-making power. In the meantime, recall that the estimated effect α̂ of a
variable on true decision-making power equals the average of its estimated effects b̂h and b̂w on
husbands’ and wives’ reports, which we discuss next. Also, the importance of any particular
variable can be gauged by comparing its coefficient to the estimated threshold values µ̂0 and µ̂1 ,
based on (10).
Current earnings (Table 3-A). We generally find that earnings have a significant effect
on decision-making power. In our first set of results, a wife’s current annual earnings
significantly lower both spouses’ reports of the husband’s decision-making power (with the
impact on her husband’s and her own report shown in columns (1) and (2), respectively). A
husband’s earnings also significantly raise his wife’s report of his decision-making power.
18

We use two of three measures of cognition reported in the HRS. The first, V5105, began, “Next, I'
ll read a set of
20 words and ask you to recall as many as you can. We have purposely made the list long so that it will be difficult
for anyone to recall all the words – most people recall just a few.” We use the number that was answered correctly.
We also used V5113, which adds together the number of fully or partially correct answers to a series of seven
questions. A third variable, V5126, had little explanatory power in our estimates. For missing observations on
cognition, we used hot-deck imputation with income and education as explanatory variables.
19
This exceeds the raw correlation coefficient of 0.36. We used univariate coefficient estimates as starting values,
and they consistently yielded a higher log likelihood than did many alternatives that we tried. Most parameter
estimates, including those on earnings, were very similar across the univariate and bivariate specifications.

12

Interestingly, a wife’s earnings matter several times more than a husband’s in explaining both
reports, while earnings of both spouses affect the wife’s report by about twice as much as the
husband’s.20
We can also attribute pension income to each spouse. Though the estimates are not
statistically significant, each spouse’s pension income from earlier jobs and pension participation
in a current job affect reported decision-making power with the same signs as earnings in almost
all cases. Once again a wife’s pension has a much greater effect than a husband’s.
Earnings histories (Table 3-B). The HRS provides restricted information about earnings
histories reported by the Social Security Administration for 1951 to 1991. We computed the
average annualized present value of past annual earnings over this period and substituted it in
place of current earnings on the right-hand side. We have this data for 77% of the couples in our
original estimation sample.21
We find that average past earnings in column (2) have a substantially greater impact on
decision-making power than current earnings in (1) do. The estimated effect of husbands’
earnings roughly doubles, though it is statistically insignificant, while the effect of wives’
earnings triples and is highly significant. In column (3), we seek to distinguish the effect of
current earnings and a measure of human capital, as indicated by average earnings over the ages
of 22-45. In this specification, wives’ current and average earnings affect her report, while
wives’ current earnings affects his report.
Other human capital variables (Table 3-A). There are two ways that skill- and workrelated variables might affect decision-making power. First, they may capture information about
threat points that is not reflected in current earnings, in which case we should consider the effects
of these variables alongside that of earnings. Second, these variables may reflect other
characteristics about the individual which are related to decision-making – for example,
assertiveness, that is also associated with self-employment. In that case, it would be important to
control for them in order to isolate the effect of earnings.

20

If we limit the sample only to couples whose reports agree (which involves a different set of identifying
assumptions, as we mentioned earlier), then the estimated earnings coefficients rise by about 1/3. The biggest gains
in parameter estimates occur in those categories – race, ethnicity, national origin – that cause the most disagreement.
21
We do not have data for respondents who refused to provide their Social Security number or who provided a
number that could not be matched. We imputed earnings that were topcoded at the Social Security payroll tax limit.
If we run the earlier specifications from Table 3-A on the limited sample from Table 3-B, the estimated effects of
current earnings are very similar.

13

In fact, in later specifications that omit work-related variables, we find very little change
in the earnings estimates, so neither possibility seems like a major concern. In the specification
in Table 3-A, we find that the effect of skill on bargaining power, as measured by occupation and
education, is sometimes statistically significant and generally monotonic, raising own and
reducing a spouse’s decision-making power. The differential effect of being in the highest
versus the lowest skilled occupation is similar in magnitude to the differential effect of having
attended college versus not having completed high school.
Being self-employed also has strong effects on one’s reported decision-making power. If
the husband is self-employed, it raises his reported power by over one-third more than the
difference between low and high skill does. It raises his wife’s report of his power, but by less.
A wife’s self-employment reduces the husband’s power, but the effects are considerably smaller.
Lastly, other human capital variables – cognition, health, parents’ education – have minor effects
on bargaining power.
Additional labor market variables (Table 3-C). We explored additional specifications
with different combinations of earnings and other work variables. These estimates reinforce our
results about the impact of earnings on bargaining power.
By including controls for weekly hours of work in column (1), the coefficients on
earnings can be thought of as isolating the effect of wages on decision-making power.22 The
estimated effects of a wife’s labor market activities are now split between hours of work and
earnings (which represents wages, when controlling for hours), and both are statistically
significant. Finding an effect of hours of work indicates that wives may “exercise” their threat to
some extent by working, which raises their decision-making power.
As we mentioned earlier, it is difficult to know how to interpret the occupation and selfemployment variables in the main specification – they may help measure threat points or they
may capture omitted characteristics correlated with decision-making power. Thus, it is
interesting to note that including simple work dummies in (2) instead of occupation and selfemployment had little effect on the earnings estimates. If we, instead, exclude all other human
capital and cultural variables and control only for work-related variables in (3), the estimated
effects of earnings are a little smaller. This reduces concerns that wives’ earnings are correlated
with cultural variables in ways that undermines conclusions about the effect of earnings.
22

As we noted earlier, measuring the marginal wage accurately for this age group is difficult, as salaried jobs are
the norm.

14

The last two specifications use transformations of the earnings variables, since we do not
know exactly how earnings affect threat points. Including the log instead of level of earnings in
(4) yields estimated magnitudes of the effects of earnings that are similar. The specification in
(5) indicates that relative as well as absolute earnings influence threat points. The ratio of
earnings is now significant, while the level of earnings remains statistically significant for the
wife’s reported power. These results show that shifting a wife from having 25% to 75% of total
earnings reduces husband’s reported bargaining power by as much as increasing the wife’s
earnings by $25,000.
B. Understanding the estimated effect of earnings
In this subsection, we discuss the magnitude of the estimated impact of earnings and
other work variables. First, in Table 4 we present estimates and standard errors (based on the
delta method) of the true effects of all of the covariates on decision-making power, as well as the
reporting bias induced by each covariates, based on our identifying assumption in (4).
In Table 3-A, the estimated coefficient of wives’ current earnings/10,000 was -0.0356
(0.0149) for husbands’ reports and -0.0753 (0.0149) for wives’ reports. The resulting estimate of
the true effect is the average, -0.0555 (0.0126), while the reporting bias is 0.0198 (0.0160) on
husbands’ reports (and -0.0198 on wives’ reports). Similarly, the true effect of wives’ average
past earnings (at the bottom of Table 4) is -0.01756 (0.0337) and the reporting bias on husbands’
reports is 0.0650 (0.0570).
Next, we analyze the magnitude of these estimated effects in Table 5. We do this by
simulating the effect on the distribution of decision-making power of altering husbands’ and
wives’ earnings and work status. We compare the results to a set of baseline predictions that use
the estimated coefficients together with everyone’s actual earnings, and another set that assigns
average earnings by gender to parallel the simulations. Because the interpretation of the
occupation and self-employment variables is ambiguous – it is unclear whether they reflect threat
points or individual characteristics – we use similar estimates in which a simple work dummy
substitutes for occupation and self-employment (as in column (2) of Table 3-C).23
For example, if we switch average current earnings of men and women, then the
predicted percentage of husbands having the final say falls from 31.0 to 28.2%, according to
23

In Table 5 we use the estimated coefficients rather than the estimated “true effects” to give a complete sense of
the data that does not rely on our identification assumption. If we used the estimated true effects, the predictions
would lie approximately in the middle of those based on the husbands’ and on the wives’ answers.

15

husbands’ reports, and from 32.3 to 26.6%, according to wives’ reports.24 If we do the same but
switch average past earnings, then the declines are double in magnitude – from 31.5% to 19.7%,
according to wives’ reports. If we compare all husbands and no wives working to all wives and
no husbands working (with the working spouse earning the conditional average by gender), then
the percentage of husbands having the final say, as reported by wives, swings from 37.5% to
27.3%, and the percentage of wives having the final say rises from 11.5% to 18.0%.
Overall, we characterize these effects as moderate. They show a clear, but not large,
effect of earnings on bargaining power that should be kept in mind when considering tests of
income pooling that are common in the literature. Moreover, further research may shed light on
the extent to which bargaining in the HRS cohort may differ from later cohorts that have
experienced major changes in divorce rates, fertility, women’s labor supply and earnings, etc.
C. The impact of other control variables
We included a large set of variables reflecting ethnic and cultural background.
Coefficient estimates appear in Table 3-A, and the decomposition into true effects and reporting
bias appear in Table 4. Some of these have significant effects on bargaining power, which is
interesting for three reasons. First, these background factors may be correlated with the labor
supply of each spouse. Second, cultural factors may affect threat points. For example, cultural
norms may influence the willingness of a spouse to consider divorce by reducing utility outside
of marriage. Alternatively, they may reflect the degree to which the community favors one
spouse over the other in the event of conflict. Third, some of the background variables lead to
considerable disagreement between the spouses’ reports about decision-making power.
Race, national origin, and ethnicity have some significant effects on reported decisionmaking power in Table 3-A in roughly descending order in terms of magnitude, although the
significance of the true effects is reduced in Table 4. If both spouses are black, it has little net
effect on the husband’s report of decision-making power, while reducing the wife’s report of the
husband’s power. Similar results, though somewhat smaller are found for foreign born
couples.25
Religion also has strong effects on reported decision-making power, and with much less
disagreement. In Protestant and especially fundamentalist or evangelical Protestant couples
24

Average earnings of husbands and wives in our sample are $38,348 and $11,897, including nonworkers.
As these variables generate considerable disagreement, we find substantial increases in their coefficient estimates
if we limit the sample only to couples whose reports agree.
25

16

husbands have significantly more decision-making power. In Catholic and non-religious couples
the effects are the reverse, though smaller, while couples reporting different religions have a
significant disagreement.26 Moreover, regular church attendance by either spouse significantly
raises husbands’ decision-making power.
It is interesting to find that having kids, especially if they are under the age of 18, reduces
a husband’s reported bargaining power considerably.27 While it has much less influence on
wives’ reports in the main specification, both effects are greater in specification 3-B (2) with
average past, rather than current, earnings. The true effect of having children under the age of 18
in this specification is negative and statistically significant at the 90% confidence level.
In addition, increased age of both spouses (or else cohort effects) reduces a husband’s
reported bargaining power a little. Lastly, we find little effect of controls for information about
individuals’ time horizon and risk preferences, which we include because they shape some of the
household decisions which we investigate later.
VI. WHAT DOES BARGAINING POWER INFLUENCE?
In this section, we demonstrate that decision-making power influences important
household decisions. As examples, we focus on two financial outcomes that are well-measured
in the HRS: total wealth accumulation and stock market investment. Both sets of estimated
effects are important in magnitude, though somewhat sensitive to the specification.
Our findings about wealth accumulation diverge in an interesting way from standard life
cycle predictions: household assets rise with the husband’s age when husbands are in charge and
with the wife’s age when wives are in charge. Thus, it appears that the spouse with the final say
may be making decisions based primarily on their own life-cycle prospects. We show that this
difference is only partly explained by our other main result: when husbands are in charge, the
household take on more risk by investing more of the household portfolio in equities. While we
do not elaborate on underlying life cycle models that may be associated with these patterns, they
suggest important directions for future research.

26

We define religious differences based on these broad categories, which are aggregated over many denominations.
In theory, kids might shift bargaining power in either direction (increasing the wife’s power if she has
disproportionate influence over kids’ emotional well-being or increasing the husband’s if he has disproportionate
influence over their material well-being). We cannot explain why perceptions about the impact of kids might differ
across spouses.
27

17

A. Estimation approach
We use three methods to estimate the impact of bargaining power. We maintain the
assumption throughout that total earnings in the household may be related to these financial
outcomes, but the split between spouses’ earnings is not, except through its influence on
bargaining power.28 As we noted earlier, this is necessary in the structural models because we do
not observe continuously measured bargaining power but instead use variables that influence
bargaining power to, in effect, impute a continuous measure.29 Besides that, we include all nonincome related control variables used earlier to explain decision-making power, and we add selfreported information on each spouse’s life expectancy, which influences their time horizons.
The first two methods that we use yield structural estimates of equation (6), relating the
impact of decision-making power γ to an outcome z. We will highlight the more efficient
approach, described in the Appendix and based on Amemiya (1979), which uses reduced form
and first-stage estimates to obtain the structural parameters of the second stage. We compare
that to a standard two-stage approach that substitutes into (6) an estimate of γ̂ obtained from our
earlier specifications. Here, we can control for the log rather than level of total household
earnings, but the estimates are less efficient and have incorrect standard errors. Controlling for
the log of income is preferred on a priori grounds (especially when utility is CRRA) and is
typical in regressions involving financial behavior. Typically, the estimated effect of decisionmaking power loses some explanatory power under the efficient estimation approach but remains
statistically significant.
With either structural method, the results are somewhat sensitive to the choice of which
first-stage estimates to use. We try the specifications with current earnings (from Table 3-A),
average past earnings (Table 3-B 2, for a smaller sample), and the ratio of earnings (Table 3-C
5). When we use the last specification, we can control for the log rather than level of total
household earnings in the first estimation approach for reasons that are detailed in the Appendix.

28

While earnings and other work-related variables may be endogenous, they are typically included in financial
regressions and play a major role in explaining the observed variation (Miniaci and Weber 2002). One motivation is
that, while wealth and portfolio allocations vary substantially by income, they also vary substantially within income
groups, and it is this variation that the other control variables seek to explain. This approach also addresses concerns
that omitting earnings might bias the estimated effect of predicted bargaining power. In any case, excluding income
and work-related variables typically has little impact on the estimated effect of bargaining power.
29
We were interested in analyzing life insurance holdings as well because of the potential link between bargaining
power during marriage and the poverty of widows, but the exclusion restriction was unreasonable in that case since
the decision to insure a spouse’s life should depend directly on that spouse’s earnings. Another difficulty is that the
HRS does not report whose life is insured, but rather which spouse owns the policies.

18

Lastly, we find similar effects of decision-making power in our third approach, which is a
non-structural alternative to (6) that controls for the discrete answers about decision-making
power. This approach does not rely on the functional form represented by (1)-(2b) that we
assumed in the first stage, but it revives the original difficulty of extracting information from the
discrete and sometimes conflicting answers of spouses. On the other hand, it allows us to control
for the log rather than level of household earnings and even to include spouses’ earnings
separately, which has little effect on the estimated results.
B. Wealth and age
Background. As long as households expect to retire at some point, then life cycle
models predict that wealth will rise with age until retirement. Moreover, households appear to
do most of their life cycle saving in their 40s and 50s (Gourinchas and Parker 2002), which
coincides well with the HRS. However, bargaining within the household may be particularly
salient here since husbands, with shorter lifespans and younger wives on average, should have
shorter time horizons than their wives (Browning 2000). Wives should prefer to accumulate
more life cycle saving than husbands, yet widows have higher poverty rates than the population
average.
Our results about the role of bargaining power can help resolve this puzzle. We find that,
when men are in charge, households with older husbands have significantly higher wealth and
households with older wives have significantly lower wealth; and when wives are in charge, the
results are reversed. Thus, it appears that the spouse with the final say makes decisions based on
their own life-cycle prospects.
We regressed log household wealth on decision-making power and interacted it with each
spouse’s age, and also included total household earnings, other controls used in our earlier
regressions, and the subjective life expectancy of each spouse. We show a small subset of
coefficient estimates in Table 6, the key ones being the interaction of decision-making power
with each spouse’s age. The top panel shows the efficient estimation approach, the middle panel
shows the standard two-stage approach, and the bottom panel shows the non-structural approach
with the raw answers on decision-making power.
It is worth noting at the outset that the coefficients estimated for the main age effects are
quite similar in size to those estimated for the decision-making/age interactions. The age

19

coefficients generally range between 0.02 and 0.04, indicating an annual percentage increase in
wealth of 2-4% as each spouse ages.
The additional impact on wealth of the decision-making/age interactions depends on the
magnitude of the decision-making power variable. For this purpose, consider the estimated
threshold values µ̂0 and µ̂1 reported in Table 3-A. They indicate the values at which the latent
continuous variable γ is predicted to shift, first, from the wife having the final say to power being
about equal and, next, from being about equal to the husband having the final say. The estimated
difference between these values – typically about 1.7 – crosses the full range over which
decision-making power is “about equal”, and we will use that to gauge the magnitude of the
effects in which we are interested.
Two-stage estimation. As a baseline, the middle panel of Table 6 reports the two-stage
estimates from each of three different first-stage specifications, with incorrect standard errors but
with the log rather than level of household earnings as a covariate. The estimated effects of
decision-making power when it is interacted with each spouse’s age is stable across the three sets
of results, taking values around 0.045 for the husband’s age and -0.040 for the wife’s age.
Efficient estimation. When we use the efficient estimation approach in the top panel, the
bargaining power-age interaction effects are smaller. We will focus on the specification with the
first-stage estimates that use the ratio of earnings, which worked well in Table 3-C 5 and allows
us to control for the log of earnings; and we focus on the log of average past earnings, since it
explains more of the variation in wealth than do current earnings. The resulting pair of estimated
coefficients on the bargaining power-age interaction lies in the middle of the range in this set of
results, at 0.0253 for the husbands’ age and -0.0319 for the wife’s age. The first coefficient falls
just short of 90% significance and the second coefficient exceeds 95% significance.
Now, we will consider the implications of these estimates. Recall that if decision-making
power shifts from the threshold of the wife to the husband having the final say, then the latent
continuous variable γ changes by about 1.7. If such a shift occurs, then household wealth will be
4.20% higher (the estimated coefficient 0.0253 times the estimated difference in threshold values
1.6593) than it would have been otherwise for each year that the husband is older. Additionally,
with such a shift in decision-making power towards the husband, wealth is 5.29% lower
(-0.0319*1.6593) for each year that the wife is older. If the reverse takes place, with the
household shifting from the threshold of the husband to the wife having the final say, then the

20

effects are reversed: wealth is 5.29% higher for each year that the wife is older and 4.20% lower
for each year that the husband is older.
To understand the nature of this cross-sectional comparative static, consider a household
in which decision-making power is split equally (taking a value of zero). Wealth will be about
the same whether the husband is 65 and the wife is 55, or the ages are reversed and the wife is 65
and the husband is 55. That does not hold when decision-making power is unequal. When the
husband just barely has the final say, then the first household (husband 65, wife 55) will have
accumulated 50.8% more wealth (1.042010-1) than it would have if the wife just barely had the
final say. Moreover, the second household (wife 65, husband 55) will have accumulated 67.5%

less wealth (1.052910-1) than if the wife had the final say.
Non-structural estimation. Table 6 also shows alternative estimates that include the raw
responses about decision-making power as dummy variables. The age-related patterns are
similar, while highlighting the difficulties in interpretation of moving away from the framework
laid out in Section III.
When husbands report that they have the final say, household wealth is 4.07% higher for
each year that the husband is older and 3.00% lower for each year that the wife is older,
compared to when husbands report that wives have the final say. These results are statistically
significant. When husbands report “about equal”, the results are significantly smaller, at 3.18%
higher and 1.39% lower, respectively, and the first result is statistically significant. The values
are similar when we use wives’ instead of husbands’ reports. Lastly, in estimates that are not
shown, we do not reject equality of the coefficients on each spouse’s earnings included
separately, and doing so has little effect on the other results.
C. The riskiness of the household portfolio.
Background. Men in the HRS report somewhat greater risk tolerance than women
(Barsky et al 1997). Moreover, other research suggests that men are willing to take on more risk,
with single men investing a greater share of their wealth in the stock market than single women
(Jianakoplos and Bernasek 1996), men purchasing auto insurance policies that provide less
coverage (Cohen and Einav 2004) and men even taking more risks in mundane choices involving
seat belt use and preventative dental care (Hersch 1996).
Results in Table 7 reveal the impact of these apparent differences in risk preferences on
some important household decisions. We find that, as husbands’ power rises, households invest
21

more in the stock market, and this effect is significant in many of the specifications. We
estimated probits on whether households invest in the stock market at all (which 32% in our
sample do) and tobits on the share of financial assets invested in the stock market (which is 17%
on average).30 As in the previous section, we controlled for total household earnings, other
controls used in our earlier regressions, and subjective life expectancy. The coefficient of
interest is the one on the decision-making power and “final say” variables.
Two-stage estimation. As a baseline, the middle panel of Table 7 reports estimates from
the two-stage approach with incorrect standard errors, but with the log rather than level of
household earnings as a control. When we use the current earnings specification from 3-A in the
first stage, the marginal effect of the husband’s predicted bargaining power on stock market
participation in the probit is 0.1811, and the effect on the desired share of financial assets
invested in the stock market in the tobit is 0.2755. The estimated effects are reduced by about
one-third when we use the average past earnings specification from 3-B 2 in the first-stage and
increased by about one-third when we use the ratio of earnings specification from 3-C 5, whether
controlling for the log of current or average past earnings.
Efficient estimation. When we use the efficient estimation approach in the top panel, the
estimated effect is smaller for the specifications that control for current earnings (3-A and the
first 3-C 5 result) and considerably larger for the specifications that control for average past
earnings (3-B 2 and the second 3-C 5 result). Since it is preferable, once again, to control for the
log of average past earnings, we will focus on the last specification – though it should be kept in
mind that the resulting estimates lie at the high end of the range.
In the preferred specification, the estimated marginal effect of a small change in decisionmaking power is 0.4262 for the probit, and the estimated coefficient is 0.6874 for the tobit, both
of which are highly significant. If decision-making power in a household shifts, as before, from
the threshold of the wife having the final say to the husband having the final say, then the
probability that the household invests in the stock market rises by a very substantial 50.9
percentage points. The same shift in decision-making power raises the predicted share of
30

A caveat is that the HRS does not report the investment allocation of Individual Retirement Accounts or of those
defined contribution pensions (including 401(k) plans) that do not offer an investment choice. 45% of our sample
have IRAs, which we omit entirely from the analysis. 35% have defined contribution pensions, 60% of which can
be identified as offering investment choices; for the latter, the HRS reports whether the account was invested mostly
in stocks, mostly in bonds, or “split”. This information is vague, though, and we chose to focus entirely on financial
wealth and did not consider any form pension wealth. These omissions may lead us to underestimate the effect of

22

financial assets invested in the stock market by 26.0 percentage points.31 By way of comparison,
the estimates for the same first-stage specification but controlling for log current earnings are
considerably smaller, at 0.2002 for the probit (statistically significant at a little more than 90%)
and 0.3182 for the tobit (statistically significant at a little less than 90%). These estimates imply
predicted increases of 29.3 and 13.7 percentage points if decision-making power shifts from the
wife to the husband.
Non-structural estimation. In the final panel of Table 6, the results are similar when the
raw answers are included as dummy variables. If the husband reports having the final say, then
the household is 5.1% more likely to invest in the stock market relative to the wife having the
final say and a little greater than that relative to “about equal”. The effects are somewhat
reduced and not statistically significant based on the wife’s reports. As we noted earlier, this
specification raises difficulties in reconciling the discrete and sometimes conflicting answers of
both spouses.
Lastly, we find some suggestive evidence that other preferences of the individual in
charge matter more as well. In results that are not shown, when husbands have the final say,
then the household invests more in the stock market if the husband is less risk averse, while
wives’ risk aversion has no affect. When wives are in charge, wives’ risk aversion has
substantial effects, though they are not statistically significant. We find similar patterns for time
preference.
Summary. Taking our two major sets of results together, we note that the difference in
portfolio allocations can explain part but not all of the age-related results. In the benchmark
calculation discussed above, a shift from the threshold of the wife to the husband having the final
say would raise the predicted share of financial assets invested in the stock market by 26.0
percentage points. According to some simple calculations, this could raise wealth at age 65 by
36.1%.32 Since our earlier benchmark suggested that the same household would accumulate

bargaining power. For people in our sample whose pensions offer an investment choice, men are significantly more
likely than women to invest theirs “mostly or all” in stock.
31

For the probit, we calculated this as

and (10) and

µj

Φ ( γˆµˆ 1 + Xδˆ ) − Φ ( γˆµˆ 0 + Xδˆ ) , where notation is based on equations (6)

refers to the jth threshold in the first-stage ordered probit. For the tobit, we calculated the change in

the expected censored value of the left-hand side variable using the formula from Greene (2000).
32
In these calculations, we assume that bonds and stocks earn real returns of 2.25% and 7.10%, the respective
averages for the period 1926-2004. We further assume that people have the lifetime age-earnings profile of the
median HRS individual, excluding those with non-zero earnings; that they save a constant fraction of their salary
each year from age 22 until they retire at age 65; and that they rebalance their portfolio annually.

23

50.8% more if the husband had the final say and 67.5% less wealth if the wife had the final say
(both in comparison to decision-making power being exactly equal), the difference in portfolio
choices explains only a fraction of the difference in wealth.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
Our analysis takes advantage of unique data on the distribution of decision-making power
between spouses. We interpret this question as revealing whose preferences are reflected to a
greater degree in household decisions. We find that decision-making power depends on plausible
variables like earnings and also influences some important household outcomes. Moreover, the
second set of results is much stronger than the first set.
In terms of outcomes of bargaining, we find that, household wealth is significantly higher
the older is the husband but not the wife when husbands have the final say, and the older is the
wife but not the husband when wives have the final say – an intriguing twist on the life cycle
model. We find further that, when husbands have the final say, households invest significantly
more in the stock market, though the difference in portfolio allocations can explain only part of
the age-related results. Being able to investigate outcomes that are both novel in the household
bargaining literature and important is a major contribution of our research.
From a policy perspective, the results suggest that household bargaining can help explain
the relatively high rate of poverty among widows. These concerns provide support for proposals
to increase Social Security survivor benefits, especially in case of Social Security privatization.
A shift away from the current annuitized Social Security benefit towards a lump-sum private
account would increase the risk of impoverishment among older widows who were in a weak
bargaining position while married. Likewise, the major shift over the last twenty years in the
structure of employer-provided pensions from annuitized defined benefits towards lump-sum
defined contribution accounts may undermine the well-being of widows.
In terms of determinants of bargaining power, our major result in this paper is somewhat
negative, since we remain unable to explain a great deal about the observed distribution of
bargaining power. Labor market earnings have significant but moderate effects in our estimation
results for this older sample – switching average lifetime earnings of husbands and wives reduces
the predicted percentage of men reported to have the final say by their wives from 31.5% to
19.7%. These results are noteworthy because the HRS affords much more detail about the entire

24

path of earnings than data used in previous “income pooling” tests, yet earnings appear to play a
limited role in determining threat points.
Thus, future research may focus greater attention on other factors influencing threat
points, perhaps including the role of marriage markets since remarriage has become common as
divorce rates have risen over time. In addition, it should be possible to extend this research by
estimating formal models of bargaining with the HRS data and by exploiting the entry in
subsequent waves of the HRS of younger cohorts who were asked the same questions about who
has the final say.

APPENDIX
We now describe the method that we use to estimate the parameters in (6) when we observe
discrete measures y and possibly z rather than the true values y* and z*. This approach is based
on Amemiya (1979) and was elaborated by Maddala (1983, Section 8.9). Although focusing on
the simultaneous tobit model, Amemiya (p.175) noted that, “The principles on which our
estimators are based can be applied in general whenever structural parameters need to be
determined from the estimates of reduced-form parameters.”
While we continue to assume the relationship outlined in (1), (2a), (2b), and (6), the details of
separately identifying the parameters α, βh, and βw in (1)-(2b) are not germane to the estimation
procedure, so we will introduce some simplifications. We will first discuss a simple version and
then show how we incorporate the sum of earnings as a covariate in (6) when also including
earnings separately in the first stage.
Consider the following structural model:

X 1α 1 + Xδ 1 + u1

(A.1a)

y* =

(A.1b)

z * = γy * + X 2α 2 + Xδ 2 + u 2 .

Equation (A.1a) is the analog to (1), except with α1 and δ1 representing α 1 and δ1 as defined in
(5a), while (A.1b) is the analog to (6). X1 are variables that only appear in the first equation (or,
as we call it sometimes, the first stage), X2 are variables that only appear in the second equation,
and X are variables that appear in both. The parameter γ is a scalar, and α1, α2, δ1, and δ2 may
be scalars or vectors. Substitute (A.1a) into (A.1b) to obtain

z * = γX 1α 1 + X 2α 2 + X (γδ 1 + δ 2 ) + γu1 + u 2 .
We can now write the reduced form of the structural equation (A.1b) as
(A.2)

z* = X 1π 1 + X 2π 2 + Xπ 3 + e .

25

We can estimate (A.1a) to obtain consistent estimates of α̂ 1 and δ̂1 and (A.2) to obtain consistent
estimates of π̂ 1 , π̂ 2 , π̂ 3 , and the covariance matrix Ω̂ e . Note that y* and z* may be either
continuous or discrete; in our case, (A.1a) is an ordered probit and (A.2) takes the form of,
variously, probit, tobit, and OLS.
The relationship between the structural and reduced form parameters is
(A.3a) π 1 = γα 1
(A.3b) π 2 = α 2
(A.3c) π 3 = γδ1 + δ 2 .
(A.3b) identifies the structural parameters α2. In regards to the rest, Amemiya proposes using
the consistent estimates of π̂ 1 , π̂ 3 , α̂ 1 , and δ̂1 in order to estimate γ̂ and δ̂ 2 by generalized
least squares (GLS), with Ω̂ e as the weighting matrix. He shows that this approach is more
efficient than the two-stage estimator proposed by Nelson and Olsen (1977) and elaborated by
Maddala (1983, Section 8.8).
Now, we will discuss how to incorporate the sum of household earnings as a covariate in (A.1b)
when each spouse’s earnings are covariates in (A.1a). We will rewrite the equations as

X 11α 11 + X 12α 12 + X 1oα 1o + Xδ 1 + u1

(A.1a′)

y* =

(A.1b′)

z * = γy * + ( X 11 + X 12 )δ 3 + X 2α 2 + Xδ 2 + u 2 .

We have now decomposed X1 into X 11 and X 12 (which will represent the husband’s and the
wife’s earnings) and X 1o (other variables that will only appear in the first equation). Moreover,
the sum X 11 + X 12 (total household earnings) now appears in the second equation. Once again,
we can substitute to obtain

z * = X 11 ( γα 11 + δ 3 ) + X 12 ( γα 12 + δ 3 ) + γX 1oα 1o + X 2α 2 + X (γδ 1 + δ 2 ) + γu1 + u 2
and then write the reduced form of the structural equation (A.1b′) as
(A.2′)

z * = X 11π 11 + X 12 π 12 + X 1o π 1o + X 2π 2 + Xπ 3 + e .

The relationship between the structural and reduced form parameters is now
(A.4a) π 11 = γα 11 + δ 3
(A.4b) π 12 = γα 12 + δ 3
(A.4c) π 1o = γα 1o
(A.4d) π 2 = α 2
(A.4e) π 3 = γδ1 + δ 2 .
We can proceed in the same way as before. We estimate (A.1a′) to obtain α̂ 11 , α̂ 12 , and αˆ 1o . We
estimate (A.2′) to obtain π̂ 11 , π̂ 12 , πˆ 1o , π̂ 2 , π̂ 3 , and Ω̂ e . Lastly, we estimate the system (A.4a),
(A.4b), (A.4c), and (A.4e) using GLS to obtain the remaining structural parameters in (A.1b′).

26

To sum up, we use the methods that we outlined earlier in the Appendix to estimate the
parameters reported in Table 7, with (A.1b) taking the form of a probit or tobit. We estimate a
yet more generalized version of (A.1b′) for Table 6, adding additional terms that interact y* with
elements of X – specifically, the husband’s age and wife’s age. As a consequence of these
interactions, (A.2′) involves terms that interact age with the error term e, so we use the HuberWhite method to estimate the covariance matrix Ω̂ e .
For the results in both tables, we also try different specifications of the first-stage equation
(A.1a). When we use specifications that include each spouse’s current or average past earnings
in the first stage, then we include the sum of earnings in the second stage. While we would
prefer the log of the sum of earnings, including this non-linear transformation of first-stage
covariates is not possible using the method we have outlined above. As an alternative, we
consider a first-stage specification of (A.1a) with the ratio of spouses’ earnings, and then we can
use the log of the sum of earnings as a covariate in the second stage.

REFERENCES
Amemiya, Takeshi. 1979. “The Estimation of a Simultaneous-Equation Tobit Model.”
International Economic Review 20 (1): 169-181.
Barsky, Robert, F. Thomas Juster, Miles Kimball, and Matthew Shapiro. 1997. “Preference
Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and
Retirement Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (2): 537-579.
Behrman, Jere. 1995. “Intrahousehold Distribution and the Family,” in M.Rosenzweig and
O.Stark, eds., Handbook of Population and Family Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp.
Bergstrom, Theodore. 1995. “A Survey of Theories of the Family,” in M.Rosenzweig and
O.Stark, eds., Handbook of Population and Family Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp.
Bergstrom, Theodore. 1996. “Economics in a Family Way.” Journal of Economic Literature
34 (4): 1903-1934.
Browning, Martin. 2000. “The Saving Behaviour of a Two-Person Household.” Scandinavian
Journal of Economics 102 (2): 235-251.
Browning, Martin, Francois Bourguignon, Pierre-André Chiappori, and Valérie Lechene. 1994.
“Income and Outcomes: A Structural Model of Intrahousehold Allocation.” Journal of Political
Economy. 102 (6): 1067-96.
Browning, Martin, and Pierre-André Chiappori. 1998. “Efficient Intra-Household Allocations:
A General Characterisation and Empirical Tests.” Econometrica. 66 (6): 1241-1278.

27

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2004. “American Time-Use Survey Summary.” Press release,
September 14, http://www.bls.gov/news.release/atus.nr0.htm.
Duflo, Esther. 2003. “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old Age Pension and IntraHousehold Allocation in South Africa.” World Bank Economic Review 17 (1): 1-25.
Duflo, Esther, and Christopher Udry. 2004. “Intrahousehold Resource Allocation in Côte
d’Ivoire: Social Norms, Separate Accounts and Consumption Choices.” National Bureau of
Economics Research Working Paper No. 10498.
Flinn, Christopher. Forthcoming. “Minimum Wage Effects on Labor Market Outcomes under
Search, Bargaining, and Endogenous Contact Rates.” Econometrica.
Friedberg, Leora, and Steven Stern. 2005. “Marriage, Divorce, and Asymmetric Information.”
Draft, University of Virginia.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Jonathan Parker. 2002. “Consumption Over The Life Cycle.”
Econometrica 70 (1): 47-89.
Greene, William. 2000. Econometric Analysis, Fourth edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Haddad Lawrence, and John Hoddinott. 1994. “Women’s Income and Boy-Girl Anthropometric
Status in the Cóte d’Ivoire.” World Development 22 (4): 543-553.
Hersch, Joni. 1996. “Smoking, Seat Belts and Other Risky Consumer Decisions: Differences by
Gender and Race.” Managerial and Decision Economics 17 (5): 471-481.
Hoddinott, John and Lawrence Haddad. 1995. “Does Female Income Share Influence
Household Expenditures? Evidence from Cóte d’Ivoire.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
Statistics 57(1): 77-96.
Jianakoplos, Nancy, and Alexandra Bernasek. 1998. “Are Women More Risk Averse?”
Economic Inquiry 36 (4): 620-630.
Lundberg, Shelley, and Robert Pollak. 1996. “Bargaining and Distribution in Marriage.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 10 (4): 139-158.
Lundberg, Shelley, Robert Pollak, and Terence Wales. 1997. “Do Husbands and Wives Pool
Resources: Evidence from the UK Child Benefit.” Journal of Human Resources 32 (3): 463480.
Lundberg, Shelley, Richard Starz, and Steven Stillman. 2003. “The Retirement Consumption
Puzzle: A Marital Bargaining Approach.” Journal of Public Economics 87 (5-6): 1119-1218.
Lyons, Angela, and Tansel Yilmazer. 2004. “How Does Marriage Affect the Allocation of
Assets in Women’s Defined Contribution Plans?” Center for Retirement Research at Boston
College, CRR Working Paper 2004-28, November.
28

Maddala, G.S. 1983. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Manser, Marilyn, and Murray Brown. 1980. “Marriage and Household Decision Making: A
Bargaining Analysis.” International Economic Review 21: 31-44.
McElroy, Marjorie and Mary Horney. 1981. “Nash-Bargained Decisions: Toward a
Generalization of the Theory of Demand.” International Economic Review 22: 333-349.
McElroy, Marjorie. 1981. “Appendix: Empirical Results from Estimates of Joint Labor Supply
Functions of Husbands and Wives,” in R.Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics, Volume
4, pp. 53-64. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
National Economic Council. 1998. “Women and Retirement Security.” Prepared by the
Interagency Working Group on Social Security, http://www.ssa.gov/history/pdf/sswomen.pdf.
Nelson, F., and L. Olson. 1977. “Specification and Estimation of a Simultaneous-Equation
Model with Limited Dependent Variables.” Social Science Working Paper No. 149, California
Institute of Technology.
Phipps, Shelley, and Peter Burton. 1998. “What’s Mine is Yours? The Influence of Male and
Female Incomes on Patterns of Household Expenditure.” Economica 65: 599-613.
President’s Commission to Strengthen Social Security. 2001. “Strengthening Social Security and
Creating Private Wealth for All Americans: Report of the President’s Commission.” Washington,
December 21, http://csss.gov/reports/Final_report.pdf.
Rose, Elaina. 1999. “Consumption Smoothing and Excess Female Mortality in Rural India.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (1): 41-49.
Schultz, T. Paul. 1990. “Testing the Neoclassical Model of Family Labor Supply and Fertility.”
Journal of Human Resources 25 (4): 599-634.
Thomas, Duncan. 1990. “Intra-Household Resource Allocation: An Inferential Approach.”
Journal of Human Resources 25 (4): 635-664.
Thomas, Duncan. 1994. “Like Father, Like Son, Like Mother, Like Daughter: Parental
Resources and Child Height.” Journal of Human Resources 29 (4): 950-988.
Ward-Batts, Jennifer. 2003. “Out of the Wallet and into the Purse: Using Micro Data to Test
Income Pooling.” Claremont Colleges Working Paper No. 2003-10.

29

TABLE 1
Distribution of decision making power in the HRS sample
“When it comes to making major family decisions, who has the final say?”
Husband reports … has more say:
husband
about equal
wife

Wife reports …
husband
about equal
wife

18.1%
8.8
3.3

Total [N]

11.5
40.1
6.5

30.2 [1278]

58.1 [2460]

Total [N]

2.3
3.9
5.5

31.9 [1350]
52.8 [2235]
15.3 [652]

11.7 [499]

100% [4237]

“Does … have a lot more say, somewhat more, or only a little more?”

Wife reports …
husband – a lot more
husband – somewhat/
a little more
about equal
wife – somewhat/
a little more
wife – a lot more
Total

Husband reports … has … say:
husband husband – about
wife –
– a lot somewhat equal somewhat
more
/a little
/ a little
more
more

wife –
a lot
more

Total

2.3
2.0

3.3
10.4

2.4
9.0

0.3
1.1

0.3
0.5

8.6
23.0

1.7
0.3

7.1
1.9

40.2
3.9

2.8
2.0

1.1
0.8

52.9
8.9

0.3

0.9

2.7

1.5

1.2

6.6

6.6

23.6

58.2

7.7

3.9

100%

Data: Health and Retirement Study, Wave 1, 1992.
Sample: N = 4237. See text for more details.

30

TABLE 2
Characteristics of the sample, based on who has more say
Husband
Income, work variables:
both spouses work
only husband works
only wife works
neither spouse works
husband’s weekly hours
wife’s weekly hours
husband’s earnings
wife’s earnings
Other variables:
income
net worth
financial assets (median/mean)
% of financial assets invested in
equity (median/mean)

Who has more say?
Wife
About
equal

Disagree

42.1
29.1
9.1
19.7
44.0
34.2
31,100
12,000

39.4
22.0
22.0
16.6
44.0
39.4
25,000
19,000

46.4
24.6
13.3
15.9
44.2
37.3
32,000
17,000

43.9
25.7
15.4
15.0
45.0
36.8
30,000
15,000

45,700
121,700
8,000/
43,500
0.0/17.9

41,216
65,700
3,000/
22,676
0.0/10.4

49,200
132,000
10,500/
50,451
0.0/18.3

46,360
117,500
8,900/
49.850
0.0/17.2

Data: Health and Retirement Study, Wave 1, 1992.
Sample: N = 4237. See text for more details.

31

TABLE 3-A
Determinants of decision making power
Estimation results from bivariate ordered probits
Dependent variable: Respondent reports husband has final say (Yi = 1),
it’s about equal (Yi = 0), wife has final say (Yi = -1)
Husband is respondent
Log likelihood (LL/N)
Rho
Threshold value µ0
Threshold value µ1
Income variables
husband’s earnings/10,000
wife’s earnings/10,000
husband’s pension income/10,000
wife’s pension income/10,000
husband has pension in current job
wife has pension in current job
Other work variables
occupation: professional, tech
sales, clerical
services
skilled blue collar
unskilled blue collar
self-employed
Human capital variables
cognition: score #1
score #2
education: no high school diploma
at least some college
health is fair or poor
both parents: no high school dipl
at least some college

Wife is respondent

-1.2745***
0.4921***

- 1.801
0.4545*** (0.0257)
(0.1864)
-1.1504*** (0.1929)
(0.1887)
0.3966** (0.1924)

0.0072
-0.0356**
0.0360
-0.1072
0.0123
-0.0595

(0.0053)
(0.0149)
(0.0312)
(0.1118)
(0.0511)
(0.0526)

0.0150***
-0.0753***
0.0435
-0.1212
0.0196
0.0365

(0.0054)
(0.0149)
(0.0289)
(0.0986)
(0.0518)
(0.0538)

Characteristics of:
husband
wife
*
0.1352
-0.0641
(0.0726)
(0.0726)
0.0998
-0.0228
(0.0816)
(0.0613)
0.0357
-0.0241
(0.0877)
(0.0674)
-0.0982
0.1744
(0.0714)
(0.1658)
-0.1085
0.0547
(0.0707)
(0.0897)
0.3442***
-0.1153*
(0.0603)
(0.0683)

Characteristics of:
husband
wife
0.1039
-0.0693
(0.0728)
(0.0723)
0.0067
0.0306
(0.0821)
(0.0620)
-0.1288
-0.0727
(0.0922)
(0.0716)
-0.1333*
-0.0448
(0.0731)
(0.1658)
-0.1519**
-0.0740
(0.0727)
(0.0947)
0.2133***
-0.0425
(0.0627)
(0.0716)

0.0032
(0.0079)
0.0159**
(0.0073)
-0.1529***
(0.0503)
0.0806*
(0.0487)
0.0087
(0.0475)
-0.0114
(0.0373)
-0.1646*
(0.0909)

0.0120
(0.0080)
0.0015
(0.0074)
-0.1466***
(0.0524)
0.0074
(0.0491)
0.0228
(0.0507)
0.0402
(0.0383)
-0.0679
(0.0948)

32

-0.0025
(0.0073)
-0.0115
(0.0076)
0.0740
(0.0510)
-0.0780
(0.0481)
-0.0197
(0.0507)
0.0121
(0.0386)
-0.1454*
(0.0837)

-0.0077
(0.0075)
0.0016
(0.0077)
0.1374**
(0.0542)
-0.0571
(0.0494)
0.0167
(0.0525)
0.0294
(0.0394)
-0.1065
(0.0814)

Cultural background variables
national origin: born outside U.S.
race: black
ethnicity: hispanic
religion: attend church ≥ twice/mth
both are Protestant
both are Evangelical
both are Catholic
both are Jewish
both report no religion
religion differs
Other variables
risk averse
long time horizon
age-50
has kids: over age 18 only
age 18 & under only
over and under age 18

0.1896**
-0.2288***
(0.0891)
(0.0817)
**
0.4748
-0.3932*
(0.2000)
(0.2017)
0.1077
0.1617
(0.1193)
(0.1169)
0.0804*
0.0918**
(0.0454)
(0.0452)
0.2295*** (0.0740)
0.3746** (0.1535)
-0.1126** (0.0499)
0.1874 (0.1331)
-0.2177 (0.1746)
0.0515 (0.0487)

0.0157
-0.1025
(0.0902)
(0.0854)
0.0404
-0.3176
(0.2280)
(0.2308)
-0.0517
0.0685
(0.1250)
(0.1228)
0.0873*
0.0529
(0.0469)
(0.0468)
0.2060*** (0.0807)
0.5177*** (0.1583)
-0.1722*** (0.0501)
-0.0454 (0.1353)
-0.0974 (0.1634)
-0.1220*** (0.0500)

0.0279*
0.0014
(0.0165)
(0.0170)
-0.0247
0.0305
(0.037)
(0.0378)
-0.0079**
-0.0081**
(0.0040)
(0.0039)
-0.1109 (0.1033)
-0.2466 (0.1601)
-0.1878* (0.1131)

-0.0099
(0.0170)
-0.0157
(0.0378)
-0.0013
(0.0042)
-0.0010
-0.1616
0.0548

-0.0010
(0.0175)
0.0411
(0.0390)
-0.0015
(0.0041)
(0.1035)
(0.1615)
(0.1133)

Data: Health and Retirement Study, 1992.
Sample: N = 4237. Statistical significant at the 90% (*), 95% (**), and 99% (***) level is noted. See text for
more details.

33

TABLE 3-B
Determinants of decision making power
Variations on specification of earnings variable
Dependent variable: Respondent reports husband has final say (Yi = 1),
it’s about equal (Yi = 0), wife has final say (Yi = -1)

Log likelihood/N
Threshold value µ0
Threshold value µ1
Earnings variables
current earnings/10,000
husband
wife
average past earnings/10,000
husband
wife
Threshold value µ0
Threshold value µ1
Earnings variables
current earnings/10,000
husband
wife
average past earnings/10,000
husband
wife

(1) current earnings
(from Table 3-A)

(2) average past
earnings

(3) current, average
past earnings

-1.801

-1.790

-1.792

-1.2745 (0.1864)
0.4921 (0.1887)
0.0072 (0.0053)
-0.0356** (0.0149)

Husband is respondent
-1.1133 (0.2230)
-1.1515 (0.2242)
0.6658 (0.2255)
0.6218 (0.2264)
-

0.0053 (0.0065)
-0.0301* (0.0178)

1951-1991
age 22-45
0.0114 (0.0244) -0.0011 (0.0297)
-0.1106*** (0.0440) -0.0173 (0.0318)

-1.1504 (0.1929)
0.3966 (0.1924)

Wife is respondent
-1.1235 (0.2345)
0.4428 (0.2345)

-1.0600 (02443)
0.5245 (0.2458)

0.0150***(0.0054)
-0.0753***(0.0149)

-

0.0098 (0.0064)
-0.0678*** (0.0181)

1951-1991
age 22-45
0.0200 (0.0247) -0.0048 (0.0305)
-0.2405*** (0.0442) -0.0797*** (0.0312)

-

Data: Health and Retirement Study, Wave 1, 1992.
Sample: N = 3087 in columns (2), (3). All specifications include on the right-hand side all of the other variables
shown in Table 3-A. See text for more details.

34

TABLE 3-C: Determinants of decision making power
Variations on specification of work variables
Dependent variable: Respondent reports husband has final say (Yi = 1), it’s
about equal (Yi = 0), wife has final say (Yi = -1)
(2) work
(3) only
(4) log of
(5) ratio of
(1) weekly
(no occ
work
earnings
earnings
work hours
dummies)
variables
Log likelihood (LL/N)
Selected work variables
husband’s earnings/10,000
wife’s earnings/10,000
wife’s earnings
husband’s+wife’s earnings
husband’s+wife’s
earnings = 0
husband works
.

wife works

-1.799
0.0064
(0.0054)
-0.0256*
(0.0153)
-

wife’s weekly hours
husband’s earnings
wife’s earnings
wife’s earnings
husband’s+wife’s earnings
husband’s+wife’s
earnings = 0
husband works
.

wife works
husband’s weekly hours
wife’s weekly hours
Also includes:occ,self-empl
other control variables

-1.830
-1.803
Husband is respondent
0.0116**
0.0111
0.0094
(0.0052)
(0.0051)
(0.0060)
-0.0364***
-0.0342**
-0.0205***
(0.0145)
(0.0145)
(0.0063)
-

-1.799

-

-

-

-

-

0.1388***
(0.0498)
-0.0365
(0.0461)
-

-

-

0.0036
(0.0058)
-0.0133
(0.0169)
-0.2402***
(0.0923)
0.0358
(0.0776)
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

husband’s weekly hours

-1.810

-0.0007
(0.0014)
-0.0042***
(0.0016)
0.0136
(0.0054)
-0.0613*
(0.0155)
-

Wife is respondent
0.0204
0.0129
0.0275
(0.0053)
(0.0052)
(0.0369)
-0.0762***
-0.0856**
-0.0340***
(0.0146)
(0.0148)
(0.0377)
***

-

-

-

-

-

-0.0455
(0.0515)
-0.0299
(0.0476)
-

-

-

0.0117
(0.0058)
-0.0526***
(0.0168)
-0.2412***
(0.0945)
0.0450
(0.0785)
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

no
yes

yes
no

yes
yes

yes
yes

0.0001
(0.0015)
-0.0065***
(0.0018)
yes
yes

Data: Health and Retirement Study, Wave 1, 1992. Sample: N = 4237. Except as noted, all specifications include on
the right-hand side all of the other variables shown in Table 3-A. See text for more details.

35

TABLE 4
Decomposition of estimated determinants of decision making power
Estimation results from Table 3-A
Dependent variable: Respondent reports husband has final say (Yi = 1),
it’s about equal (Yi = 0), wife has final say (Yi = -1)
Income variables
husband’s earnings/10,000
wife’s earnings/10,000
husband’s pension income/10,000
wife’s pension income/10,000
husband has pension in current job
wife has pension in current job
Other work variables
occupation: professional, technical
sales, clerical
services
skilled blue collar
unskilled blue collar
self-employed
Human capital: cognition score #1
score #2
education: no high school diploma
at least some college
health is fair or poor
both parents: no high sch diploma
at least some college
Cultural: born outside U.S.
race: black
ethnicity: hispanic
religion: attend church ≥ twice/mth
both are Protestant
both are Evang’l/Fundamentalist
both are Catholic
both are Jewish
both report no religion
religion differs
Other variables: risk averse
long time horizon
age-50
has kids: over age 18 only
age 18 & under only
over and under age 18

True effect
Husband’s reporting bias
Current earnings specification
0.0111*** (0.0044)
-0.0039 (0.0060)
-0.0555*** (0.0126)
0.0198 (0.0160)
0.0397 (0.0246)
-0.0038 (0.0345)
-0.1142 (0.0866)
0.0070 (0.1201)
0.0160 (0.0430)
-0.0037 (0.0565)
-0.0115 (0.0447)
-0.0480 (0.0577)
Characteristics of husband:
True
Bias
**
0.1196
0.0156
0.0532
0.0466
-0.0465
0.0756
-0.1158**
0.0176
**
-0.1302
0.0217
0.2788***
0.0654
0.0076
-0.0044
0.0087
0.0072
-0.1497***
-0.0032
0.0440
0.0366
0.0157
-0.0071
0.0144
-0.0258
-0.1163
-0.0483
0.1027
0.0869
0.2576
0.2172
0.0280
0.0797
0.0839**
-0.0034
0.2178***
0.4462**
-0.1424***
0.0710
-0.1576
-0.0353
0.0090
0.0189
-0.0202
-0.0045
-0.0046
-0.0033
-0.0560
-0.2041
-0.0665

36

Characteristics of wife:
True
Bias
-0.0667
0.0026
0.0039
-0.0267
-0.0484
0.0243
0.0648
0.1096**
-0.0096
0.0644
-0.0789
-0.0364
-0.0051
0.0026
-0.0049
-0.0066
0.1057***
-0.0317
*
-0.0676
-0.0104
-0.0015
-0.0182
0.0207
-0.0087
-0.1259*
-0.0195
***
-0.1656
-0.0631
-0.3554*
-0.0378
0.1151
0.0466
0.0724*
0.0195
0.0117
-0.0716
0.0298
0.1164
-0.0601
0.0868*
0.0002
0.0012
0.0358
-0.0053
-0.0049
-0.0033
-0.0549
-0.0425
-0.1213

Average past earnings specification 3-B(2)
0.0157 (0.0205)
-0.0043 (0.0270)
***
-0.1756 (0.0370)
0.0650 (0.0479)

Selected results
husband’s earnings/10,000
wife’s earnings/10,000

Data: Health and Retirement Study, Wave 1, 1992.
Sample: N = 4237. See text for more details.

TABLE 5
Simulations of predicted decision making power
Husband reports … has more say Wife reports … has more say
about
about
husband
wife
husband
wife
equal
equal
Based on specifications that control for current earnings,
work status (as in Table 3-C 2)
Actual values
Baseline predictions
using own values of
earnings, work status
using average values of
earnings, work status
Predictions if …
switch average earnings
switch earnings, work
husbands work, wives don’t
wives work, husbands don’t

0.302

0.580

0.118

0.319

0.527

0.154

0.311

0.576

0.113

0.325

0.525

0.150

0.310

0.579

0.111

0.323

0.530

0.147

0.282
0.275
0.350
0.253

0.590
0.593
0.558
0.600

0.128
0.132
0.092
0.147

0.266
0.263
0.372
0.270

0.545
0.546
0.509
0.545

0.189
0.191
0.117
0.185

Based on specifications that control for lifetime earnings,
work status (adapted from those in Table 3-B 2)
Baseline predictions
using own values of earnings,
work status
using average values of
earnings, work status
Predictions if …
switch average earnings
switch earnings, work
husbands work, wives don’t
wives work, husbands don’t

0.298

0.582

0.120

0.318

0.530

0.153

0.298

0.584

0.119

0.315

0.535

0.149

0.243
0.236
0.330
0.250

0.602
0.604
0.568
0.602

0.155
0.160
0.101
0.148

0.197
0.193
0.375
0.273

0.551
0.550
0.510
0.547

0.253
0.258
0.115
0.180

Predicted probabilities, averaged over the estimation sample, based on the bivariate ordered probit estimates
reported in Table 3.

37

TABLE 6
Consequences of decision making power
Impact on wealth
Dependent variable: Log household wealth
Characteristics of husband:

Characteristics of wife:

A. Use continuous information on true decision-making power y*

husband’s decision-making power
age
husband’s power*age
current household earnings
long time horizon
risk averse
husband’s decision-making power
age
husband’s power*age
average household earnings
husband’s decision-making power
age
husband’s power*age
log(current household earnings)
husband’s decision-making power
Age
husband’s power*age
log(average household earnings)
Selected variables:
husband’s decision-making power
age
husband’s power*age
log(current household earnings)
long time horizon
risk averse
husband’s decision-making power
age
husband’s power*age
log(average household earnings)

(1) Efficient estimation (correct standard errors)
Based on current earnings specification (3-A)
-0.0971 (0.2471)
0.0284*** (0.0061)
0.0383*** (0.0064)
0.0236 (0.0155)
-0.0234* (0.0134)
0.0622*** (0.0061)
***
0.0973 (0.0368)
0.1295*** (0.0379)
0.0311* (0.0179)
0.0038 (0.0183)
Based on average past earnings specification (3-B 2)
0.8217*** (0.2281)
***
0.0185 (0.0063)
0.0404*** (0.0069)
0.0324** (0.0133)
-0.0345** (0.0136)
***
0.3162 (0.0203)
Based on ratio of earnings specification (3-C 5)
with control for current earnings
0.2927 (0.3111)
***
0.0288 (0.0061)
0.0400*** (0.0061)
0.0097 (0.0158)
-0.0189 (0.0144)
***
0.3296 (0.0357)
with control for average past earnings
0.5442 (0.3504)
0.0256*** (0.0068)
0.0360*** (0.0070)
0.0253 (0.0166)
-0.0319** (0.0165)
0.3555*** (0.0493)
(2) Two-stage estimation (incorrect standard errors)
Based on current earnings specification (3-A)
0.1528 (0.2550)
0.0320*** (0.0072)
0.0372*** (0.0078)
**
0.0478 (0.0193)
-0.0415* (0.0161)
0.0256*** (0.0090)
***
0.1168 (0.0399)
0.1313*** (0.0409)
0.0279 (0.0194)
-0.0096 (0.0202)
Based on average past earnings specification (3-B 2)
-0.0663 (0.2615)
***
0.0206 (0.0079)
0.0380*** (0.0090)
0.0440** (0.0175)
-0.0359** (0.0165)
***
0.3741 (0.0514)

38

husband’s decision-making power
age
husband’s power*age
log(current household earnings)
husband’s decision-making power
age
husband’s power*age
log(average household earnings)

Based on ratio of earnings specification (3-C 5)
with control for current earnings
0.4064* (0.2342)
***
0.0338 (0.0073)
0.0374*** (0.0078)
0.0430** (0.0181)
-0.0390** (0.0159)
***
0.0325 (0.0093)
with control for average past earnings
0.2092 (0.2671)
0.0263*** (0.0083)
0.0344*** (0.0090)
**
0.0414 (0.0194)
-0.0362* (0.0187)
0.3698*** (0.0493)

B. Use discrete information on reported decision-making power yh, yw
husband reports: he has final say
“about equal”
age-50
husband has final say *age
“about equal”*age

(1) Information reported by husband
-0.0408 (0.1239)
-0.1118 (0.1129)
-0.0026 (0.0131)
0.0540*** (0.0142)
0.0407*** (0.0150)
-0.0300** (0.0151)
**
0.0318 (0.0135)
-0.0139 (0.0149)

wife reports: he has final say
“about equal”
age-50
husband has final say *age
“about equal”*age

(2) Information reported by wife
0.0047 (0.1113)
0.0436 (0.1032)
0.0032 (0.0126)
0.0512*** (0.0122)
0.0412*** (0.0137)
-0.0294** (0.0130)
0.0186 (0.0127)
-0.0102 (0.0122)

Data: Health and Retirement Study, 1992.
Sample: N = 4077 when current earnings are included or 2983 when average past earnings are included. Other
control variables besides earnings are those reported in Table 3-A , along with subjective life expectancy. See text
for more details.

39

TABLE 7
Consequences of decision making power
Impact on stock market investments
Dependent variable: Household investment in equities

Mean value

Probit
Invests in equities (1, 0)
[marginal effect in brackets]

Tobit
Share of financial assets
invested in equities

0.32

0.17

A. Use continuous information on true decision-making power y*

husband’s decision-making power
age-50: husband
wife
current household earnings
long time horizon: husband
wife
risk averse: husband
wife
husband’s decision-making power
average household earnings
husband’s decision-making power
log(current household earnings)
husband’s decision-making power
log(average household earnings)

(1) Efficient estimation (correct standard errors)
Based on current earnings specification (3-A)
Restrict effect of sum of current earnings
0.3689 (0.2567) [0.1232]
0.0774
(0.1390)
0.0097 (0.0080) [0.0032]
0.0031 (0.0046)
0.0262*** (0.0086) [0.0087]
0.0122*** (0.0050)
0.0490*** (0.0069) [0.0163]
0.0202*** (0.0031)
***
0.1329 (0.0464) [0.0444]
0.0651*** (0.0265)
0.1397*** (0.0475) [0.0466]
0.0628*** (0.0271)
-0.0172 (0.0212) [-0.0058]
-0.0042
(0.0121)
0.0166 (0.0220) [0.0056]
0.0059 (0.0126)
Based on average past earnings specification (3-B 2)
Restrict effect of sum of average earnings
****
1.1700
(0.2926) [0.3981]
0.6626*** (0.1537)
0.2926*** (0.0271) [0.0996]
0.1619*** (0.0148)
Based on ratio of earnings specification (3-C 5)
with control for current earnings
*
0.5998 (0.3558) [0.2002]
0.3182
(0.2001)
0.1656*** (0.0329) [0.0553]
0.0878*** (0.0187)
with control for average past earnings
1.2523*** (0.4088) [0.4262]
0.6874*** (0.2198)
***
0.3555 (0.0493) [0.1174]
0.1966*** (0.0256)

(2) Two-stage estimation (incorrect standard errors)
Based on current earnings specification (3-A)
Selected variables:
husband’s decision-making power 0.5425** (0.2556) [0.1811]
0.3080** (0.1414)
age-50: husband
0.0035 (0.0081) [0.0012]
0.0009 (0.0047)
***
wife
0.0273 (0.0086) [0.0091]
0.0137*** (0.0050)
log(current household earnings)
0.0171** (0.0087) [0.0057]
0.0113** (0.0050)
***
long time horizon: husband
0.1330 (0.0461) [0.0447]
0.0651** (0.0267)
wife
0.1186*** (0.0473) [0.0399]
0.0479* (0.0272)
risk averse: husband
-0.0306 (0.0212) [-0.0102]
-0.0121 (0.0122)
wife
0.0065 (0.0219) [0.0022]
0.0019 (0.0127)
Based on average past earnings specification (3-B 2)
husband’s decision-making power 0.3963 (0.2881) [0.1349]
0.2705* (0.1537)

40

log(average household earnings)
husband’s decision-making power
log(current household earnings)
husband’s decision-making power
log(average household earnings)

0.3615*** (0.0480) [0.1230]
0.2138*** (0.0270)
Based on ratio of earnings specification (3-C 5)
with control for current earnings
***
0.7521 (0.2218) [0.2510]
0.4098*** (0.1248)
0.0246*** (0.0090) [0.0082]
0.0154*** (0.0052)
with control for average past earnings
0.7928*** (0.2532) [0.2698]
0.4100*** (0.1365)
***
0.3443 (0.0459) [0.1172]
0.2004*** (0.0257)

B. Use discrete information on reported decision-making power yh, yw
husband reports: he has final say
“about equal”

(1) Information reported by husband
0.1490* (0.0827) [0.0505]
0.1137** (0.0473)
-0.0400 (0.0765) [-0.0133]
0.0069 (0.0442)

wife reports: he has final say
“about equal”

(2) Information reported by wife
0.0791 (0.0727) [0.0266]
0.0473 (0.0424)
0.0150 (0.0675) [0.0050]
0.0017 (0.0397)

Data: Health and Retirement Study, 1992.
Sample: N = 4237 when current earnings are included or 3087 when average past earnings are included. Other
control variables besides earnings are those reported in Table 3-A , along with subjective life expectancy. See text
for more details.

41

