                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           OUTSOURCING JOBS? MULTINATIONALS AND US EMPLOYMENT

                                          Ann E. Harrison
                                        Margaret S. McMillan

                                        Working Paper 12372
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12372


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2006




For assistance with data the authors would like to thank Raymond Mataloni, Fritz Foley and Stanley
Watt. For helpful comments we wish to thank David Card, the fellows at the Radcliffe Institute for
Advanced Study, especially Larry Katz, seminar participants at the BEA, the University of Michigan,
Stanford, UC Berkeley, Yale University, the IMF, the University of Maryland and Pierluigi Balduzzi.
For financial assistance the authors gratefully acknowledge the National Science Foundation. McMillan
acknowledges the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study for both financial support and time to devote
tothis project. The statistical analysis of firm-level data on US multinational companies was conducted
at the International Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis of the US Department of Commerce
under arrangements that maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and do not reflect official positions of the US Department of Commerce. Research
assistance from Joan Hamory, Clair Null, and Andrew Waxman is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Ann E. Harrison and Margaret S. McMillan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Outsourcing Jobs? Multinationals and US Employment
Ann E. Harrison and Margaret S. McMillan
NBER Working Paper No. 12372
July 2006, Revised October 2007
JEL No. F16,J01

                                             ABSTRACT

Critics of globalization claim that US manufacturing firms are being driven to shift employment abroad
by the prospects of cheaper labor. Others argue that the availability of low-wage labor has allowed
US based firms to survive and even prosper. Yet evidence for either hypothesis, beyond anecdotes,
is slim. Using firm-level data collected by the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), we estimate
the impact on US manufacturing employment of changes in foreign affiliate wages, controlling for
changing demand conditions and technological change. We find that the evidence supports both perspectives
on globalization. For firms most likely to perform the same tasks in foreign affiliates and at home
("horizontal" foreign investment), foreign and domestic employees appear to be substitutes. For these
firms, lower wages in affiliate locations are associated with lower employment in the US. However,
for firms which do significantly different tasks at home and abroad ("vertical" foreign investment),
foreign and domestic employment are complements. For vertical foreign investment, lower wages
abroad are associated with higher US manufacturing employment. These offsetting effects may be
combined to show that offshoring is associated with a quantitatively small decline in manufacturing
employment. Other factors, such as declining prices for consumer goods, import competition, and
falling prices for investment goods (which substitute for labor) play a more important role.


Ann E. Harrison
University of California, Berkeley
329 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
harrison@are.berkeley.edu

Margaret S. McMillan
Tufts University
Department of Economics
114a Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu
I.       Introduction



           During the last three decades, domestic manufacturing employment of US-based multinationals

has fallen steadily. 1 Between 1982 and 1999, foreign manufacturing employment of US multinationals

increased from 26 percent to nearly 40 percent of their labor force. These parallel developments have led

critics of globalization to conclude that US firms are shutting down factories at home and shifting

employment abroad in order to lower labor costs. Concerns about offshoring have intensified as newly

released data indicate a further decline in manufacturing employment both by US-based multinationals

and for the US economy as a whole.

         The public outcry motivated Congress to take action. On October 22, 2004 the US Congress passed

the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004. The Act contains a provision to encourage profit repatriation

back to the US by domestic multinationals--explicitly for the purpose of job creation at home. Yet the

evidence linking offshore activities to falling domestic labor demand is, in fact, contradictory. Several

studies suggest that there are no employment losses from offshoring activities. The first important

research to illustrate this point is Brainard and Riker (1997), who showed that employment in low and

high income affiliates of US multinationals is complementary for manufacturing activities. Borga (2005)

and Desai, Foley, and Hines (2005) also find that expansion of US multinationals abroad stimulates job

growth at home. Reviewing these studies, Mankiw and Swagel (2006) conclude that “foreign activity

does not crowd out domestic activity; the reverse is true.”

         A second set of studies (Brainard and Riker (2001), Hanson, Mataloni and Slaughter (2003),

Muendler and Becker (2006)) reaches the opposite conclusion: jobs abroad replace jobs at home, but the

effect is small. These different answers are problematic for policymakers who are left uncertain about

how to respond to the growing ranks of US firms setting up shop abroad. How can we reconcile these

two different sets of findings? We believe that the answer lies in understanding the different motivations

for foreign investment.

1
    See Table 1, which shows a four million worker decline between 1982 and 1999.



                                                         2
         Theoretical models of trade and foreign investment imply that different types of foreign

investments will be associated with opposite effects on domestic labor demand. Markusen and Maskus

(2001) separate multinationals into vertically- and horizontally-integrated types.                    They show how

different incentives for foreign investment lead to different organizational structures, which in turn

produce different degrees of substitution between employment at home and abroad.                              Horizontal

multinationals, which are defined as firms which produce the same products in different locations, are

primarily motivated by trade costs to locate abroad. 2 For these types of firms, investment abroad

substitutes for exports. One implication is that foreign affiliate employment should substitute for home

employment. For vertically-integrated firms, however, trade and foreign investment are complements.

Vertically-integrated enterprises are motivated by factor endowment differences (and consequently factor

price differences in a world where there is not factor price equalization) to locate different components of

production in different locations. As pointed out by Brainard and Riker (1997), one implication of this

kind of multinational activity is that parent and affiliate employment should be complementary.

         More recent work by Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) draws on insights from Autor, Levy

and Murnane (2002) to develop a framework in which falling costs of offshoring can lead to wage gains

for workers at home.             Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) use Autor, Levy and Murnane’s

differentiation between routine and non-routine tasks to build a theoretical model of trade in tasks.

Advances in technology (such as improvements in communication) make offshoring of routine tasks less

costly, leading firms to shift production abroad. What is surprising is that offshoring of routine tasks for

vertically-integrated multinationals (there is no horizontal motive for foreign investment here) leads to

ambiguous predictions for domestic wages. The intuition behind this result is that falling costs of

offshoring act like a positive productivity shock, reducing costs of intermediate goods production.

Although the primary motivation for offshoring is to reduce labor costs, low-skill workers at home may

still gain if terms of trade effects and labor supply effects are not too large.

         In this paper, we develop an empirical framework which is flexible enough to allow different

elasticities of substitution (or complementarity) between home and affiliate employment for firms that

have different motivations to engage in foreign activities. With this framework, we are able to identify

2
    For the purpose of simplicity, we will occasionally refer to horizontally-integrated firms as horizontal firms, and
                                                             3
the separate effects of horizontal versus vertical foreign investment on home employment, and also allow

for different degrees of substitution (or complementarity) in high- and low-income affiliate locations. At

the same time, we control for other confounding changes, such as other factor price changes, demand

shocks, and technological change. To address the possibility that methodological differences might be

driving the conflicting results described above, we adopt a variety of different approaches to estimating

labor demand and a range of econometric techniques.

       We find that the insights derived from trade theory go a long way towards explaining the apparently

contradictory evidence on the relationship between offshoring and domestic manufacturing employment.

For US parents involved in primarily horizontal activities, affiliate activity abroad substitutes for domestic

employment. For vertically-integrated parents, however, the results suggest that home and foreign

employment are complementary. Foreign wage reductions are associated with an increase in domestic

employment. The results differ across high- and low-income affiliate locations, in part because factor-

price differences relative to the US are much more important in low-income regions. Nevertheless, the

negative effects for horizontal foreign investment are small: a 10 percent reduction in wages in affiliate

locations is associated with only a 0.2 percent reduction in US parent employment.

       We also show that offshoring is not the primary driver of declining domestic employment of US

manufacturing multinationals between 1977 and 1999. In fact, there is some evidence that operating in

low-income affiliate locations preserves jobs, instead of destroying them.         We show that declining

domestic employment of US multinationals is primarily due to falling prices of investment goods (such as

computers, which substitute for labor), falling prices of consumption goods, and increasing import

penetration. Our research highlights both the importance of heterogeneous firm responses to opportunities

for direct investment abroad and the need to account for other avenues through which international

competition affects US labor demand.

       Our results are consistent with the literature that focuses on the impact of international trade on US

jobs. Revenga (1992) finds a negative impact of changes in import prices on US employment growth.

Katz and Murphy (1992) also find that increased import competition negatively affected relative labor

demand in the US, particularly in the 1980s with the growing of the US trade deficit. Borjas, Freeman


vertically-integrated firms as vertical.
                                                      4
and Katz (1997) find that increased trade with developing countries depresses wages at the bottom of the

income distribution. Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2006) examine the impact of US imports on both the

survival and employment of US manufacturing firms. They find that imports only harm US

manufacturing employment when those imports are from low wage countries.

        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the Bureau of

Economic Analysis data on outward direct investment and our choice of sample. Section III describes the

empirical framework and discusses econometric issues. Section IV presents the results and Section V

concludes.



      II.      The BEA Data



      We analyze firm-level surveys on US direct investment abroad, collected each year by the Bureau

of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the US Department of Commerce. The BEA collects confidential data on

the activities of US-based multinationals, defined as the combination of a single US entity that has made

the direct investment, called the parent, and at least one foreign business enterprise, called the foreign

affiliate. We use the data collected on majority-owned, non-bank foreign affiliates and non-bank US

parents for the benchmark years from 1982 and 1999. These benchmark years (1982, 1989, 1994 and

1999) include more comprehensive information than the annual surveys. 3

        Creating a panel using the benchmark years of the BEA survey data is a nontrivial task for several

reasons. First, not all firms are required to report to the BEA and reporting requirements vary across

years. Second, we must consider the implications of the changes to the Standard Industrial Classification

(SIC) codes in 1972 and 1987 and the switch from SIC codes to the North American Industrial

Classification System (NAICS) codes in 1997. The fact that parents are allowed to consolidate

information for several affiliates in one country on a single form calls for special care in the aggregation

and interpretation of affiliate level data.

        All foreign affiliates with sales, assets or net income in excess of a certain amount in absolute

value must report their data to the BEA. This amount was $3 million dollars in 1982, 1989 and 1994 and




                                                     5
rose to $7 million dollars in 1999. In addition, a new reporting requirement was imposed on parents in

1999. Parents whose sales, assets or net income exceeded $100 million (in absolute value) were required

to provide more extensive information than parents whose sales, assets or net income fell below that

level. 4 To determine whether the changes in reporting requirements biased made small firms

overrepresented in our sample in the early years, we imposed a double filter on the data using the uniform

cutoff for affiliates (based on the strictest reporting requirement of $100 million in 1999) of $5.59 million

in 1982 US dollars and $79.87 1982 US dollars for parents. As it turns out, the reporting requirements

were large enough that imposing the filter on the data makes little difference on our initial results.

Therefore, we use all of the available data.

         Finally, we face selection issues with our sample of “manufacturing” firms. 5 We keep those

parents whose primary industry of sales is manufacturing since our goal is to determine whether

manufacturing jobs at home are being replaced by manufacturing jobs abroad. However, some parents

were reclassified from manufacturing to wholesale trade and services. To account for this, we keep all

parents that were ever classified in manufacturing and their manufacturing affiliates. 6

3
  While the BEA collects annual data on US direct investment abroad, these data do not include all the variables we
need and can find in the benchmark years.
4
  Parents who do not meet this cutoff but who have affiliates that meet the $7 million cutoff are still required to
provide extensive information for affiliates.
5
  To document what has happened within industries in manufacturing over time, we created a concordance that
allows us to assign SIC codes to NAICS codes. This was necessary because in 1999 the BEA collected data on
NAICS codes and not SIC codes. We chose to convert SIC codes to NAICS codes since all future information will
be collected on the basis of NAICS codes. For example, data for the benchmark year 2004 will be available shortly
and firms report based on NAICS codes. The 1977 and 1982 benchmark years are based on the 1972 SIC codes.
The 1989 and 1994 benchmark years are based on the 1987 SIC codes. The 1999 benchmark data are based on the
1997 NAICS codes. In addition to the fact that the industry codes are not directly comparable across all benchmark
years, the BEA industry codes have been slightly modified to reflect the fact that these are enterprise data and are
called, respectively, SIC-ISI and NAICS-ISI. Working with these codes, we created a program (available upon
request) that assigns the SIC-ISI codes for the years 1977-1994 to NAICS-ISI codes. Both parents and affiliates are
classified into their primary industry of sales using the following algorithm, which tracks the algorithm used by the
BEA: the top five industries by parent or affiliate sales are used to assign to each parent or affiliate one of the 22
aggregates. Sales are collapsed into the top five industries of sales and then the maximum sale by industry is
identified. A parent or affiliate is classified as being in manufacturing if its maximum sales across the top five
industries of sales is in manufacturing.
          6
            There are a number of parents who have been reclassified from manufacturing to wholesale trade and
services. For example, several firms were in manufacturing but are now classified in wholesale trade because almost
all of their manufacturing is done overseas and not in the United States. To account for this, we chose our sample in
two different ways. First, we included parents who either were classified in manufacturing or had previously been
classified in manufacturing and their manufacturing affiliates. Next, we included only parents who were currently in
manufacturing in any given year and their manufacturing affiliates. Since the results are not sensitive to this
distinction, we use the larger of the two samples, keeping all parents that were ever classified in manufacturing and
their manufacturing affiliates.



                                                          6
        Table 1 reports the number of employees of US manufacturing parents both in the US and in

foreign affiliate locations. US employment of manufacturing parents declined from nearly 12 million in

1982 to slightly below 8 million in 1999. The second row of Table 1 shows the employment coverage of

our sample after we perform the cleaning procedures described above. The sample size remains almost

the same, particularly in the later years.     The following two rows report the breakdown of US

employment for horizontal versus vertical multinationals (discussed in more detail below and defined in

Table 2). US employment declines are twice as large for horizontal versus vertical multinationals. While

US employment of both types of multinationals declined, foreign affiliate employment increased. Almost

all the increase in foreign affiliate employment occurred in low-income affiliate locations, and affiliate

employment gains in vertically-integrated firms were twice as large as for horizontally-integrated firms.

The fact that US employment of vertical multinationals fell by less but (low-income) affiliate employment

increased significantly more is consistent with the idea of complementarity between home and foreign

employment for vertical multinationals, as suggested by Markusen and Maskus (2001) and Grossman and

Rossi-Hansberg (2006).

        The share of US multinational employment concentrated in affiliates increased from 26 percent in

1982 to 39 percent in 1999. Although total affiliate employment increased by more than one million

employees, the foreign employment gains did not fully offset the domestic losses. This suggests that

there are other important determinants of falling domestic employment for US multinationals. Alternative

explanations, which shall be incorporated into our empirical framework, include changing prices of

capital, labor-saving technical change, changing terms of trade, and increased import competition.

        Manufacturing multinationals reporting to the BEA accounted for the majority of economic

activity in US manufacturing during the sample period. Appendix Table A.1 (based on Mataloni and

Fahim-Nader (1996) and Mataloni and Yorgason (2006)) reports the coverage of the BEA data for

benchmark years 1982 through 1999. In 1982, gross product by these enterprises accounted for over 80

percent of total manufacturing and 77 percent of manufactured exports in the United States. By 1999, the

BEA’s coverage had declined slightly: these enterprises accounted for only 63 percent of US exports and

about half of manufacturing employment. These firms also accounted for more than 80 percent of total

private US research and development expenditures throughout the sample period (Mataloni and Fahim-

                                                    7
Nader (1996)). Appendix Table A.1 also shows that the proportion of services firms accounted for by the

BEA sample is extremely small. During the sample period, the BEA sample accounted for only between

6 and 8 percent of total gross product in services.               Consequently, we restrict our analysis to

manufacturing, which we believe provides a more representative sample.

        How reliable are these data? These are the only data officially collected by a US government

agency on affiliate activity abroad. We have initiated a number of data checks to analyze the reliability of

the coverage. 7, 8 We were able to cross-check the employment numbers for US affiliate activity reported

by the BEA with data on inward foreign investment reported by the official statistical agencies in

Germany and Sweden. These checks are reported in Appendix Table A.2. We report total employment in

both countries as indicated by the BEA database and show that it is quite close to the same numbers

collected by the national statistical agencies. Although there are some discrepancies between BEA and

German and Swedish data, this may be, at least partially, accounted for by variation in reporting based

upon fiscal year vs. calendar year. The BEA classifies a firm in 1999 if its fiscal year ends in 1999—this

could be for any month in 1999. Although most firms have their fiscal year ending in December, enough

have earlier end dates that some of the 1999 BEA employment figures correspond to a mix of the 1998

and 1999 employment figures reported by the statistical bureaus for Sweden and Germany.




III.    Empirical Framework



        Previous work has used very different econometric models to specify the impact of foreign

affiliate activity on labor demand at home, making it difficult to identify whether the conflicting results

stem from different approaches or different datasets and time periods. Brainard and Riker (1997) estimate

labor demand as a function of wages in different locations, Desai, et al. (2006) estimate a reduced form

7
  We are particularly grateful to Marc Muendler and Karolina Eckholm for helping us do this cross-checking. They
provided the data on the activities of US multinational affiliates in Germany and Sweden.
8
  We also contacted Statistics Canada to check whether they record information on affiliates of US multinationals in
Canada, which would allow us to cross-check US data on foreign affiliates there with Canadian data on inward


                                                         8
equation with log labor at home as a function of log labor abroad, and Brainard and Riker (2001),

Hanson, Mataloni and Slaughter (2003) and Muendler and Becker (2006) use a translog cost function

approach to derive factor shares as a function of wages in different locations. Katz and Murphy (1992)

and Card (2001), focusing on the effects of immigration and trade, both use a CES functional form to

derive an equilibrium relationship between the ratio of employment at home to employment abroad and

the ratio of wages at home to wages abroad.

         We chose as our primary specification to derive labor demand from a generalized cost function.

Our preferred approach is attractive for several reasons. It puts minimal restrictions on the nature of the

production function, unlike the CES specification which imposes a constant elasticity of substitution

across different factor inputs.       In the translog approach, we worry that identifying elasticities of

substitution or complementarity and calculating standard errors is a less transparent process (depending,

among other things, on the choice of factor shares) than estimating a labor demand equation. Previous

approaches in the offshoring literature have imposed a short-run cost function and kept capital inputs

fixed, which would make it difficult for us to compare our results to earlier coefficient estimates.

However, for completeness we also derive estimating equations using a generalized translog and CES

function approach. We shall see that the implied elasticities of complementarity (or substitution) are

remarkably robust across these different specifications.

         Modifying Hamermesh (1993), let us consider a firm using N domestic factors and N* foreign

factors of production X1…XN , X1*…XN* . We begin by assuming there are only two locations (domestic

and foreign) but will generalize to j locations in the empirical specification which follows. Let the

production function for a US multinational firm i producing total aggregate worldwide output Yi and using

N domestic and N* foreign inputs Xi and Xi* be

         (1) Yi = f ( X 1i ,...., X Ni X 1i* ,...., X Ni* ), fi > 0, fii < 0

Output Y can include production at home and abroad and production could be exported or sold on

domestic markets. Then the associated cost function, based on the demands for X1 through XN and X1*

through XN* is given by


foreign investment. Statistics Canada informed us that they do not gather data on affiliates because it is too difficult
to define a foreign affiliate and referred us to the BEA.

                                                                9
         (2) Ci = g ( w1i ,...., wNi , w1i* ,...., wNi* , Yi ), gi > 0

where the wi’s and wi*’s are the N and N* input prices at home and in the foreign affiliate location. One

can use Shepard’s lemma to derive the factor demand for the nth input for US multinational firm i:



         (3) X ni = X nid ( w1i ,...., wNi , w1i* ,...., wNi* , Yi ), n = 1,..., N , n* = 1,..., N *



Our first approach will be to estimate a log-linear version of equation (3), focusing on US labor demand

and extending (3) to allow for three locations. With three locations, there are three types of labor inputs:

home labor, foreign labor in low-income affiliates, and foreign labor in high-income affiliates. This

framework is flexible enough to allow for a range of production technologies, including Brainard and

Riker’s (1997) assumption that production is vertically decomposed across high-wage and low-wage

regions. We will also allow for two other types of inputs, making the total number of inputs N in each

location equal to three: labor, physical capital, and research and development inputs. As with wages, we

allow physical capital and research and development inputs to be separately identified depending on

location.

        One estimation issue which arises is that global output Y for firm i is jointly determined with

domestic US employment. If we were to estimate (3) directly, we would have a significant simultaneity

problem. We solve this by assuming that aggregate worldwide output Y for firm i is a function of

domestic and foreign prices:



         Yi = Y ( P, P*)




Substituting this into (3) yields:



         (4) X ni = X nid ( w1i ,...., wNi , w1i* ,...., wNi* , P, P*), n = 1,..., N , n* = 1,..., N * .




                                                               10
        Our first set of estimating equations is based on log-linearization of (4), generalizing to j

locations, and takes the following form:



(5) ln Liht = β 0 + ∑ α j ln Pjt + ∑η j wijt + ∑ ω j rijt + ∑ χ j tijt + dt + f i + ε ijt .
                       j                j            j           j


The dependent variable lnL is the natural logarithm of net annual employment by the US parent in the

United States, the P’s are final goods prices, w is the wage in location j and time t, r is the price of capital

in location j and time t, and t is the price of research and development goods. We allow for time effects d

and a firm-specific (common to the parent and its affiliate) fixed effect fi, which takes into account both

firm-specific productivity differences and other non-varying firm characteristics, while j indexes location

and t indexes time.



Defining Horizontal and Vertical Multinationals



        Markusen and Maskus (2001), in their comprehensive survey of general equilibrium approaches

to the multinational firm, define horizontal multinationals as “firms that produce the same product in

multiple plants, serving local markets by local production.” This definition of horizontal integration

implies that intra-firm trade will be low, since foreign investment substitutes for US exports. Vertical

firms are defined as “firms that fragment the production process into stages based on factor intensities and

locate activities according to international differences in factor prices.” An important finding of

Markusen and Maskus is that foreign investment replaces trade in the case of horizontal multinationals

but is positively correlated with trade in the case of vertical foreign investment. Although we cannot

directly test the motivation for foreign investment with our data, we can use the different implications for

intra-firm trade as a way to distinguish vertical from horizontal foreign investment.

        We construct intra-firm trade as the sum of exports to foreign affiliates for further processing plus

imports from foreign affiliates as a share of sales. We then define firms as vertical if they have a high

share of intra-firm trade and firms as horizontal if they have a low share. Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg

(2006) also use intra-firm trade to quantify the increase in vertical activities of multinationals, pointing

out that intra-firm trade “mostly reflects the international division of labor within multinational
                                                         11
enterprises.” We measure high intra-firm trade in two ways. First we run a regression of intra-firm trade

on industry dummies, and define firms as vertical if the industry dummy is statistically significant. As

reported in Table 2, this is equivalent to selecting those industries with a high average share of intra-firm

trade during the sample period as vertical multinationals.

        The results in Table 2 suggest that the following industries may be characterized as vertical:

chemicals, plastics, primary and fabricated metals, machinery, computers and electronics, electrical

equipment, and transportation equipment. The remaining industries are classified as horizontal: textiles

and apparel, food, beverages and tobacco, leather products, wood and paper products, petroleum products,

non-metallic metals and furniture. While it may be surprising that apparel is classified as horizontal and

not vertical, potential vertical activity in that sector is limited by high trade costs. Much horizontal FDI is

motivated by trade barriers (such as tariffs or quotas). Textiles and apparel and beverages and tobacco are

typically the most protected sectors in both industrial and developing countries (for developing countries,

see Hanson and Harrison (2001)). To make this point more clearly, we have also listed in the last three

columns a summary measure of tariffs for China, an average for all developing countries, and tariffs in

the United States. The average tariffs by sector for developing countries and China is for 1999 and is

taken from the World Bank’s trade database. The measure of tariffs for the US includes tariffs and

transport costs for each sector for the US in 1979, based on Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006). For the

United States, we selected an earlier year to indicate more clearly the differences in the pattern of

protection across sectors; in more recent years, tariffs in the United States have been reduced to very low

levels. Trade frictions are highest for textiles and apparel, beverages and tobacco, leather, and non-

metallic minerals (cement). This implies that firms in highly protected sectors (textiles and apparel) or in

sectors with high costs of transportation (cement) must frequently engage in horizontal investments in

order to access domestic foreign markets.

        It is also instructive to compare our classification of horizontal versus vertical with the

classification used by Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) to categorize workers into routine and non-

routine tasks. They argue that computers are likely to substitute for labor in the case of routine tasks,

which could be either cognitive or manual, and most likely to be complementary with labor in the case of

cognitive non-routine tasks. As pointed out by Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2006), “routine” tasks are

                                                      12
more likely to be offshored via vertical foreign investment (there is no motivation for horizontal foreign

investment in their framework). We posit that the type of routine tasks that are important in

manufacturing are manual rather than cognitive. We pick a measure of non-routine manual tasks which

measures eye-hand-foot coordination (EFT). It is possible to use the Autor, et al. data to classify

industries according to their EFT level, by merging CPS worker and occupation data with their industry

affiliation. In Table 2, firms defined as vertically-integrated on the basis of high intra-firm trade measure

poorly in the EFT scale. So our measure of vertical versus horizontal could also be interpreted as a

measure of distance from non-routine manual tasks.



Data and Estimation Issues

        To estimate equation (5) we need data on US employment, capital prices, wages, final goods

prices, and research and development prices. We need factor prices and output prices for each of the j

locations in which the multinational firm has operations. We measure US employment as the (log)

number of individuals employed by the parent in the US, since hours or even employment broken down

by skill levels are not collected for US parents. Domestic prices of investment are defined at the

disaggregated industry level and are taken from the NBER’s manufacturing database. Domestic US

wages are also taken from the NBER’s manufacturing database, and are available at the disaggregated

industry level.

        While in principle there could be as many factor and final goods prices as there are countries in

the BEA database, in practice the number of j locations is limited by data availability and the need for

parsimony in estimation. We restrict our j locations to 3: domestic (US) activity, high income locations,

and low-income locations. One problem is that many firms, especially small enterprises, do not have any

operations in low-income countries. To permit us to include these firms in the estimation, we set wages

for these firms equal to zero and add a dummy variable indicating whether or not the firm has a missing

observation for low-income affiliates.

        For foreign prices P* we use the prices of consumption goods, taken from the Penn World

Tables. We also rely on the Penn World Table measures of foreign investment prices to capture the

impact of the price of foreign capital. While in principle all foreign factor prices should be broken down

                                                     13
into low-income foreign and high-income foreign affiliate locations, collinearity in investment and

consumption prices have led us to aggregate these prices across foreign affiliate locations. Because both

capital and goods are significantly more mobile than individuals, the factor price differentials across high

and low-income affiliate locations are much larger for labor inputs.

        In US manufacturing, international competition plays an important role in price determination, so

we proxy for US industry-level prices using both industry dummies and import competition. These data

were made available at the 4-digit ISIC level by Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006). We also include a

measure of import penetration from low-wage countries, also computed by these authors. Alternative

specifications reported later in the paper use industry-level aggregates of output as alternative measures of

output shocks, with separate industry-level measures of Y calculated for parents and affiliates.

        We do not have adequate measures of prices for research and development goods. However, we

believe that these are important inputs into production and could account for a significant impact on

manufacturing employment, particularly if research and development inputs are associated with labor-

saving technical change. Consequently, we proxy for prices of research and development goods with the

share of research and development employment in total employment at the firm level. These are

separately available for both the parent and affiliates in each location.

        Since wages are calculated at the country level using BEA aggregates of the firm-level measures,

we assume that wages are exogenously determined. However, we also test for the validity of this

assumption by using wages collected by UNIDO. Our wage measure is defined using the following

formula:

                     Lic ,to
  wijt = ∑ Wct
        c∈ j      ∑   c
                          Lic ,to



        where w is the wage facing the ith firm at time t in country c in affiliate location j, and the Wct’s

are country-time specific wages either computed using the BEA data on worker compensation aggregated

to the country level or the UNIDO wages. Wages are employment-weighted averages of wages in high-

and low-income affiliates, where the weights are given by the parent’s initial share of employment within

countries belonging to each high- and low-income category. We use initial period employment weights to

                                                      14
avoid endogeneity problems. Affiliate country locations are defined as either high- or low-income based

on the World Bank’s country classifications (see Table 3).

IV.     Results



        We report sample means in Table 4. The US employment share in worldwide parent activity

averaged 83.4 percent for horizontally-integrated and 80.7 percent for vertically-integrated firms. Affiliate

labor expenditure shares accounted for between 14 and 17.2 percent of expenditures, while low-income

affiliate shares only accounted for the remaining two percent. During this period, the US parent share of

worldwide labor expenses fell 4 percent, with most of the 4 percent drop in US parent shares going to

low-income affiliate locations.

        US parent employment shares fell considerably more than expenditure shares, falling from 74 to

61 percent of worldwide parent employment (see Table 1). The reason why the employment changes

were large but expenditure share changes were small is because wage trends offset the employment

developments: real wages in the sample went up in the United States but fell in high-income and low-

income affiliate countries. The real wage declines abroad were large, particularly in low-income

locations. One explanation which is consistent with these wage trends is a change in the composition of

employment: US parents (and their high-income affiliates) are retaining relatively high-skilled workers

and shifting relatively low-skilled jobs to low-income countries where labor is less expensive. This was

particularly true among vertical multinationals, where domestic wages increased by nearly 20 percent in

real terms over the sample period and low-income affiliate real wages fell by 27 percent.

        Research and development employment as a share of total parent employment averaged 3.1

percent for horizontal and 9.1 percent for vertically-integrated US multinationals. The significantly

higher R&D shares and much larger domestic (US) wage increases for vertical multinationals is

consistent with the hypothesis that these types of firms divide their activities between foreign and

domestic locations, performing the most skill-intensive activities at home. R&D employment as a share

of total employment rose in the US but fell in both high- and low-skill affiliate locations, suggesting that

US parents chose to increasingly concentrate R&D activity in the United States.



                                                     15
        Average import penetration in the four-digit SIC sector over the period was 12.7 percent for

horizontal firms and 17.8 percent for vertical firms. Import penetration increased by 8.2 percentage

points for horizontal firms and 14.6 percentage points for vertical firms, which reflects an enormous

increase in the exposure of US manufacturing firms to import competition. Import competition from low-

wage countries also increased for both types of enterprises, increasing by 9.9 for horizontal firms and 6.2

percentage points for vertical firms. While the price of investment goods in the US fell for both sets of

enterprises, prices fell faster for vertically-integrated firms, reflecting, in part, the importance of falling

computer-related costs for these firms. The real price of consumption goods, as reported by the Penn

World Tables, also fell for both sets of enterprises reflecting not just changes in demand but also advances

in productivity and increased competition from lower wage countries.



Fixed Effect Results for Labor Demand

        We report the results of estimating equation (5) in Table 5. The log of US employment is our

dependent variable and we use a within transformation of the data to eliminate firm fixed effects. All

specifications include time dummies to control for year-specific shocks. The first column of Table 5

reports coefficient estimates when we pool horizontal and vertical enterprises. The results suggest that

employees in low-income affiliates are substitutes for parent home employment and employees in high-

income affiliates are complements. The point estimate of 0.017 on low-income affiliate wages indicates

that a 10 percent fall in foreign wages would lead to a 0.17 percent fall in US parent employment. The

point estimate on high-income affiliate wages suggests the opposite: that a 10 percent increase in high-

income affiliate wage increases would be associated with a 0.31 percent fall in parent employment. In

columns (2) and (3), we allow the slope coefficients of our explanatory variables to vary according to

whether firms are vertically or horizontally integrated. Formal F-tests of equality of coefficients are

presented in column (4); in most cases, we reject that the coefficients are the same across the two types of

enterprises. Consequently, we separately report results for vertically and horizontally integrated parents

throughout the remainder of the paper.

        Column (2) reports the results for vertically-integrated multinational enterprises.       The coefficient

on low-income affiliate wages, at -0.032, suggests that a 10 percent fall in affiliate wage levels would lead

                                                       16
to a 0.32 percent increase in domestic (US) labor demand. For these types of firms, employment in low-

income affiliates is complementary with home employment. The coefficient on high-income wages, while

also negative, is smaller in magnitude and statistically insignificant. These results suggest that falling

wages abroad should boost US manufacturing employment for vertically-integrated firms, consistent with

the predictions in Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2006). Their model suggests that for vertical

multinationals, lower wages abroad could act as cost savings that translate into higher employment at

home.

        The results are different for horizontal foreign investment, as reported in column (3) of Table 5.

The coefficient on both high- and low-income affiliate wages is now positive and statistically significant.

The coefficient on low-income affiliate wages, at 0.027, suggests that a 10 percent fall in affiliate wages

would be associated with a 0.27 percentage point fall in parent employment. The coefficient on high-

income affiliate wages is also positive and statistically significant. These results suggest that affiliate

employment in horizontally-integrated multinationals substitutes for parent employment. However, the

magnitudes are very small: even an implausibly large decline of 50 percent in foreign affiliate wages

would result in only a 1.5 percent fall in parent employment.

        The own-wage elasticity, which varies between -0.34 and -0.52, suggests that a one percent

increase in the domestic US manufacturing wage reduces labor demand by 0.34 to 0.52 percent. The

magnitude is in line with the dozens of studies cited in Hamermesh (1993), who reports that most studies

find that the own-wage elasticity for labor lies between 0.3 and 0.7. The coefficient on the industry-

specific home price of investment is positive for both types of enterprises, suggesting that reductions in

the price of domestic investment goods reduce domestic labor demand. The coefficient on investment

abroad has the opposite sign, suggesting that reductions in the cost of investment abroad are associated

with increased labor demand at home. The coefficient estimates on the domestic price of investment

goods imply that in the US, investment and labor are generally substitutes. This is consistent with a story

in which less skilled workers are being replaced by capital (computers) and consistent with previous labor

demand studies on capital-labor substitution cited in Hamermesh (1993).

        Increases in import penetration (arms-length trade) and foreign demand shocks also affect

domestic labor demand. A 10 percentage point increase in import penetration during the sample period

                                                      17
would imply a decline in US manufacturing employment of 3.5 percentage points for vertical firms. For

horizontal enterprises, import penetration from low-wage countries significantly and negatively affected

labor demand. The point estimates imply that a 10 percentage point increase in import penetration from

low-wage countries was associated with a 6.1 percentage point fall in labor demand. The different effects

for horizontal and vertical firms across different types of import competition reflect the fact that there was

significantly more import competition from low wage countries in the industries which we characterize is

horizontal, including textiles and apparel, leather products, pulp and paper, and woods products. A one

percent increase in the prices of consumption goods in affiliate locations is associated with a 0.58

percentage point increase in employment for vertical multinationals and a 1.15 increase for horizontal

multinationals.

        Big negative employment effects are also associated with our domestic proxy for the prices of

technology inputs, the share of research and development employment in total parent employment. The

results indicate that a ten percentage point increase in the parent research and development employment

shares would be associated with a 3.5 percentage point decline for vertical firms and 9.1 percentage point

decline for horizontal firms. For horizontally-integrated firms, parent research and development

employment as a share of total employment increased by 4.3 percentage points between 1977 and 1999,

implying a reduction in home employment of 4 percent. However, the coefficients on affiliate R&D

employment are either insignificant or positive, suggesting that R&D activities in affiliates are associated

with positive employment gains for the US parent.

        The critical parameters of interest in Table 5 are the coefficients on affiliate wages, which

indicate whether affiliate employment substitutes for or is complementary to home employment. In Table

6, we explore whether our results are robust to the definition of affiliate wages. Instead of constructing

country-level wages from the BEA sample, we use country wages reported by UNIDO. Wages are

calculated based on surveys administered by UNIDO, supplemented with secondary sources (such as

national statistical agencies) gathered by UNIDO as well. Wages are calculated as compensation divided

by number of employees, collected at the 3 digit ISIC level (Revision 2). All values are converted to US

dollars using the IMF exchange rate series rf. As in Table 5, we weight country-level wages using the

parent’s initial distribution of employment across affiliate locations when the parent first appears in the

                                                     18
sample. The results in Table 6 are consistent with our earlier results, suggesting that the source for

country-level wages does not affect our coefficient estimates. The coefficients on high- and low-income

affiliate wages are the same sign and close in magnitude to the previous results. As before, the results

indicate that home and foreign employment are complements for vertical multinationals but that home

and foreign employment are substitutes for horizontal multinationals.




Alternative Specifications

        We face potentially important selection problems. Between each benchmark year, roughly 20% of

the parents drop out of our sample and do not reappear. If some of these firms relocate all operations

abroad and close down their US operations, then our estimates of the employment costs of multinational

activity could be downward biased. Following Wooldridge (2002, p. 581), we test for survivorship bias

by including a lead of the selection indicator, si, t+1, in our estimating equations, where si,t+1 is equal to zero

for firms that do not exit the sample and switches from zero to one in the period just before attrition. The

results of this test are reported in the third to last row of columns one and three of Appendix Table A5.

The coefficient on the lead of the selection indicator is negative and significant for both vertically- and

horizontally-integrated firms. The significant and negative sign on the selection variable is a possible

indicator that firms which relocate abroad are those most likely to contract employment. To address this

potential criticism, we correct for selection bias below.

        To obtain consistent estimates of our parameters, we use the inverse probability weighting

scheme outlined in Wooldridge (2002) which consists of the following two-step procedure. In each time

period, we estimate a binary response model for the probability of survival for the group in the sample at

time t-1. Using the fitted probabilities from the first step, we obtain the following weights:

         ∧         ∧     ∧             ∧
         p it = π it * π i ,t −1 * ...π I ,1 .

where hats denote fitted probabilities. This methodology allows us to choose covariates in the probits that

are essentially everything we can observe for units in the sample at time t-1 that might affect attrition. In

our case, we include all of the regressors in our original model plus firm size, firm profitability and the

firm’s share of employment in low-income countries.
                                                        19
        Columns (2) and (4) of Appendix Table 5 report the estimated coefficients and standard errors

obtained using the weighting procedure described above. In columns (1) and (3) we report the unweighted

estimates for purposes of comparison. In general, the point estimates in the weighted regressions are

larger for home prices and smaller for foreign prices: the implication is that small firms are more sensitive

to domestic price movements and less sensitive to foreign price movements than large firms. However, in

most cases the point estimates are not very different from those in Tables 5 and 6.

        One serious drawback to using the weighted estimates is that the weighting scheme gives an

inordinate amount of importance to the small firms in our sample. The correction is problematic for the

following reason: if we define “small” as a firm for which the size of the capital stock is less than the

mean of the capital stock of all firms, then the “small” firms in our sample account for only 23.8% of

employment while the large firms account for the remainder. Since small firms are much more likely to

drop out of our sample, our weighting scheme assigns larger weights to firms with a relatively small share

of total employment. From this standpoint, it might make sense to weight firms by firm size rather than

the inverse of firm size. The problem is that we would still be left with inconsistent estimates. For all of

these reasons, we prefer to use as our baseline the unweighted estimates reported in the previous tables.

        We also test for the robustness of our results to two alternatives: a framework based on a translog

cost function and a framework based on CES production functions. The translog approach has been

adopted by Brainard and Riker (2001), Hanson, Mataloni and Slaughter (2003) and Muendler and Becker

(2006). This alternative approach has the advantage that the translog cost function approximates many

well behaved cost functions. The translog total variable cost (TC) function (omitting time and parent

subscripts) for wages W, investment prices r, research and development input prices t and output Y is

given by:




                                                     20
       ln TC = α 0 + ∑ϖ j ln Y + ∑ α jw ln W + ∑ ν j ln r + ∑ α jA ln t
                           j            j               j              j

                   1                    1                2 1
                     ∑∑  α jY ( ln Y ) + ∑∑ ξ jk ( ln W ) + ∑∑ β jk ( ln t )
                                      2                                      2
               +
                   2 j k                2 j k              2 j k
                   1
                     ∑∑  ω jk ( ln r ) + ∑∑ ϑ jk ln W ln r + ∑∑ τ jk ln Y ln t
                                      2
(5’)           +
                   2 j k                 j k                 j k

               + ∑∑ ρ jk ln Y ln W + ∑∑ χ jk ln r ln t + ∑∑ ϕ jk ln r ln Y + ∑∑ κ jk ln t ln W + ε
                   j   k                    j       k              j       k               j   k




Differentiating ln TC with respect to ln Wj according to Shepard’s lemma, and allowing for a firm fixed

effect, yields labor’s share in total costs in location j for parent i at time t:

(6) LSHAREijt = β 0 + ∑ ρ j ln Yijt + ∑ κ j ln tijt + ∑ ξ j ln w jt + ∑ ϑ j ln rijt + f i + ε ijt ,
                                j               j            j                 j


where LSHARE is defined as the cost share of labor expenditures in location j for parent i in time t,

relative to expenditures on labor and capital across all locations.

          We report coefficient estimates for equation (6), substituting our price measures for output Y to

avoid endogeneity concerns, and the implied Allen elasticities of substitution from the translog cost share

approach, in Appendix Table A.6. The coefficients on affiliate wages imply that foreign labor in

horizontal multinationals substitutes for home labor in both high- and low-income affiliate locations. The

magnitudes for high-income affiliates are consistent with our first two approaches: in both vertical and

horizontal firms, workers in high-income locations are substitutes for domestic employees. In low-

income affiliates, however, employment is complementary with US employment. As expected, the own-

price elasticity is negative.

          For completeness, we also consider aggregating capital and labor across locations using a CES

function (Katz and Murphy (1992) and Card (2001) use this approach). Thus we define L as follows:

                                    σ
         ⎡                  ⎤
                        σ −1 σ −1
(7) Li = ⎢ ∑ (eij N ij ) σ ⎥
         ⎣ j                ⎦




                                                            21
where e represents productivity shocks, Li is the total quantity of labor used, and σ is the Allen elasticity

of substitution between labor in location i and j and is defined below. 9

           The first-order condition with respect to labor hired in the US is:

                    ∂Li
(8)      pi ,hYL          = wi ,h
                   ∂Li ,h

The first-order condition with respect to labor hired in high-income affiliates is:

                        ∂Li
(9)      pi ,hif YL             = wi ,hif
                       ∂Li ,hif

where p are final goods prices at home and abroad and w are wages at home and abroad. The first-order

condition with respect to labor hired in low-income affiliates is:

                         ∂Li
(10)      pi ,lif YL             = wi ,lif
                        ∂Li ,lif

Since,

                                                              1
      ∂Li    σ ⎡                   ⎤ σ −1
                               σ −1 σ −1                      −1
           =      ⎢ ∑ ( ij ij ) ⎥          ⎡ (  i ,h i ,h ) ⎦
                                                            ⎤ σ
(11)                   e  L     σ
                                           ⎣   e    L            ei ,h
     ∂Li ,h σ − 1 ⎣ j              ⎦     σ

and,

                                                                  1
                                                                       −1
       ∂Li      σ ⎡                     ⎤ σ −1
                                    σ −1 σ −1
(12a)         =      ⎢ ∑ ( eij Lij ) ⎥
                                     σ          ⎡( ei ,hif Li ,hif ) ⎤ σ ei ,hif
                                                ⎣                    ⎦
      ∂Li ,hif σ − 1 ⎣ j                ⎦     σ

                                                                  1
                                                                     −1
       ∂Li      σ ⎡                   ⎤ σ −1
                                  σ −1 σ −1
              =      ⎢ ∑ ( ij ij ) ⎥          ⎡ (  i ,lif i ,lif ) ⎦
                                                                   ⎤ σ
(12b)                     e  L     σ
                                              ⎣   e      L              ei ,lif
      ∂Li ,lif σ − 1 ⎣ j              ⎦     σ

we can insert (11) and (12) into (8) through (10) and take the following:

                               σ −1 −1
                        pih eh σ Lhσ                 wih
(13a)                           σ −1 −1
                                                =
                                 σ   σ
                                                    wi ,hif
                      pi ,hif ei ,hif Li ,hif

9
  If sigma is equal to zero, we have the case of perfect complements (i.e. left shoes and right shoes, the leontief
function that looks like L=min(Lh, Lf) this is obviously extreme but might be applicable to some kinds of natural
resource extraction. The polar opposite is σ tending to infinity (i.e. labor at home and labor abroad are perfect
substitutes so L=Lh+Lf) – this is also extreme but some version of this might be realistic for production workers.




                                                                      22
                       σ −1 −1
                pih eh σ Lhσ                wih
(13b)                   σ −1 −1
                                        =           .
                         σ   σ
                                            wi ,lif
              pi ,lif ei ,lif Li ,lif

Taking logs of both sides of (13a) and (13b) yields the following:

                                        ph                e              wh
(14a ) ln( Lh / Lhif ) = σ ln                + (σ − 1) ln h      −σ ln            .
                                        phif             ehif            whif

                                         ph               e              wh
(14b) ln( Lh / Llif ) = σ ln                  + (σ − 1) ln h     −σ ln        .
                                        plhif             elif           wlif

Equations (14a) and (14b) underscore the fact that as long as there is some substitution (or

complementarity) between domestic and foreign labor, the cost of labor abroad plays an important role in

determining the demand for US labor. In addition, one of the restrictions of the CES specification is that

the Allen elasticity of substitution between parent and low-income affiliates should be the same as the

elasticity of substitution between parent and high-income affiliates.

        The estimates are reported in Appendix Table A7. The implied Allen elasticity of substitution,

which is the negative of the reported coefficient estimate on wages, is positive for horizontally-integrated

multinationals. For horizontal firms, a one percentage point increase in the ratio of US to foreign affiliate

wages would lead to a decline in US employment of between 0.16 and 0.19 percentage points. The CES

approach corroborates the results in Tables 5 and 6 showing that affiliate labor in horizontal

multinationals substitutes for parent employment. For vertical multinationals, labor in low-income

affiliates is complementary with US parent employment but labor in high-income affiliates substitutes for

US parent employment.



Comparing Elasticities of Labor Demand Across Specifications

        All three approaches yield coefficient estimates which can be used to derive elasticities of factor

demand η and Allen elasticities of substitution σ . In equation (5), the key parameters are the elasticities

of factor demand η . Typically, inputs i and j are referred to as p-complements if ηij is less than zero,

and p-substitutes if ηij is greater than zero. The key parameters in equation (6) are the ξ j ’s. To convert




                                                                  23
these into Allen partial elasticities of substitution between locations, we can calculate the following based

on observed labor shares sj :



(15) σ jk = (ξ jk + s j sk ) / s j sk
        σ jj = (ξ jj + s j s j − s j ) / s j s j


The Allen partial elasticity of substitution σ jk gives us the percentage change in the ratio of Lj to Lk with

respect to the percentage change in the ratio of wk to wj. The Allen partial elasticity of substitution is

directly estimated as the coefficient on relative wages using the CES approach (equations (14a) and

(14b)). To convert the Allen partial elasticity of substitution into an elasticity of factor demand, we

multiply by the factor share:

(16) ηij = s j σij = ∂ ln Li / ∂ ln w j



            We report both Allen and factor price elasticities of substitution for each of the three estimation

strategies in Table 7. Factor shares are typically computed by taking the sample means of the data. 10

Recall that a negative elasticityηij implies that an increase in foreign wages reduces the demand for US

labor, while a positive sign indicates that US and foreign labor are price substitutes. The different

approaches suggest that home and affiliate employment are substitutes for horizontal multinationals but

complements for vertically-integrated firms. The price elasticity of demand ηij is positive and significant

for horizontal multinationals across all specifications, consistent with substitution between home and

foreign affiliate employment. The price elasticity appears to be between 0.02 and 0.03 in low-income

affiliates and averages around 0.10 for high-income affiliates. In high-income affiliate locations, a 1

percentage point increase in affiliate employment is associated with a 0.1 percentage point decline in US

employment. The point estimates for horizontal multinationals are similar to those derived by Muendler,

et al. (2006) and Brainard and Riker (2001) for low-income locations but higher in high-income affiliates.

For vertical multinationals, the point estimates are consistently negative in low-income locations but not

10
     Confidence intervals could be computed using bootstrapped standard errors.

                                                          24
precisely estimated for high-income locations. The results imply that low-income employment is

complementary with domestic employment in vertical multinationals, but again the magnitudes are not

large: a 10 percentage point decline in foreign wages would be associated with a .3 percentage point

increase in US employment.

         We summarize the effects of factor price changes, trade, and technical change on US

manufacturing employment in Table 8. We combine the coefficient estimates presented in Table 5 with

the actual mean changes in wages, investment prices, trade, research and development employment, and

goods prices taken from Table 3. We see that the major determinants of contraction in US manufacturing

parent employment are (1) falling real prices of consumption goods (2), falling prices of investment goods

(which incorporates the falling prices of computers), which makes it cheaper to substitute capital for

labor, and (3) increasing import competition. While the increase in home wages relative to affiliate wages

has played a role for both vertical and horizontal multinationals, that effect is quantitatively small. For

horizontal foreign investment, the combined effects of higher domestic wages and falling foreign wages

only account for a 4.5 percent decline in US employment. In comparison, falling consumption prices

account for an 11 percent decline, falling investment prices at home account for a 9 percent decline, and

increasing import competition from low-wage countries accounts for a 6 percent decline in home

employment.     For vertical multinationals, falling prices in low-income countries boosted employment by

a small percentage, but falling domestic investment prices and import competition again played a much

more important role. These figures suggest that high US labor costs are not the primary force behind the

significant reduction in US employment of American multinational firms.

        We have not allowed for the possibility that hiring workers abroad prevents a parent from

shutting down operations. Borjas, Freeman and Katz (1997) study this counterfactual by asking what

would have happened to low wage workers if imports from developing countries had been produced by

US firms. In a similar spirit, we would like to know what might have happened to US workers if the

parent had not hired workers in developing countries. Our dummy for employment in developing

countries suggests that low-income affiliate activities have, in fact, preserved some jobs. Table 8 shows

that firms which expanded operations in low-income affiliate locations on average increased parent

employment by 2 (for horizontal) to 3 (for vertical) percentage points. On the other hand, the gains from

                                                     25
operating in low-income countries were not sufficient to offset the negative effects on domestic parent

employment of falling investment prices, falling consumer prices abroad, and increasing import

competition.



VI. Concluding Comments

      This paper measures the impact of different forms of globalization on manufacturing employment

by US multinationals in the United States. Over the period 1982 to 1999 manufacturing employment of

US multinationals contracted by 4 million jobs, possibly foreshadowing the overall reduction in US

manufacturing employment that accelerated from 1999 onwards. During this period, the number of

workers hired by affiliates in developing countries increased while wages paid to these workers declined.

these facts are consistent with the hypothesis that US parents are exporting low-wage jobs to low-income

countries. In this paper, we show that this hypothesis is only partially supported by the evidence.

      The expansion of manufacturing employment in developing countries amounts to only one-quarter

of the jobs lost at home. Our research shows that other factors—including technological change, and

international trade—are much more important determinants of US manufacturing employment. Moreover,

the results also suggest that job losses would have probably been even greater in the absence of expanded

offshoring by US multinationals.

        Using data on US based multinationals from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), we

estimate the impact on US manufacturing employment of changes in foreign affiliate wages, controlling

for changing demand conditions, import competition and technological change. We find that the evidence

on the links between offshoring and domestic employment is mixed, and that the effect depends on both

the type and the location of foreign investment. We conclude that the heterogeneity in effects is one

reason why previous research on this topic has yielded such apparently contradictory results. For firms

most likely to perform the same tasks in foreign affiliates and at home (“horizontal” foreign investment),

foreign and domestic employees appear to be substitutes. For these firms, lower wages in affiliate

locations are associated with lower employment in the US. However, for firms which do significantly

different tasks at home and abroad (“vertical” foreign investment), foreign and domestic employment are

complements. The complementarity between domestic and foreign activities for vertically-integrated

                                                    26
firms is consistent with theoretical models developed by Grossman, Markusen, Maskus, and Rossi-

Hansberg. For vertical foreign investment, lower wages abroad are associated with higher US

manufacturing employment.

        However, even for horizontal multinationals, the negative impact of offshoring on US labor

demand is small. For horizontal foreign investment, the combined effects of higher domestic wages and

falling foreign wages only accounts for a 4 percent decline in US employment. In comparison, falling

consumption prices account for an 11 percent decline, falling investment prices which have allowed firms

to replace workers with computers or machines account for a 9 percent decline, and increasing import

competition from low-wage countries accounts for a 6 percent decline in home employment.        For

vertical multinationals, the gains from operating in low-income countries were not sufficient to offset the

negative effects on domestic parent employment of falling investment prices, falling consumer prices

abroad, and increasing import competition.




                                                    27
References


Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane, “The Skill Content of recent Technological
        Change: An Empircal Exploration”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003.

Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen and Peter Schott, “Survival of the Best Fit: Exposure to Low-wage
       Countries and the (uneven) growth of U.S. Manufacturing”, Journal of International Economics
       68 (2006):219-237.

Borga, Maria, “Trends in Employment at US Multinational Companies: Evidence from Firm-
       Level Data”, Brookings Trade Forum 2005, The Brookings Institution: Washington, D.C.(2006):
       135-164.

Borjas, George J., Richard Freeman and Lawrence F. Katz, “How Much Do Immigration and Trade
        Affect Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1997, No.1
        (1997): 1-90.

Brainard, Lael and David Riker, “US Multinationals and Competition from Low Wage Countries”, NBER
        Working Paper 5959, March 1997.

Brainard, Lael and David Riker, “Are US Multinationals Exporting US Jobs?,” in Globalization and
        Labour Markets, ed. By D. Greenaway, and D.R. Nelson, Vol. 2, Elgar, Cheltenham, UK and
        Northhampton, MA, 2001: pp. 410-26

Card, David, “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Market Impacts of Higher
       Immigration”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 19, No. 1, January 2001: 22-64.

Congress of the United States. American Jobs Creation Act of 2004. Public Law 108-357.
       October 22, 2004.

Desai, Mehir, Fritz Foley and James Hines, “Foreign Direct Investment and Domestic Economic
        Activity,” Harvard Business School Working Paper, November 2005

Economic Report of the President, February 12, 2007, http://www.gpoaccess.gov/eop/2007
      /2007_erp.pdf.

Grossman, Gene and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring”,
      Working paper, 2006.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. (1993), Labor Demand, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Hanson, Gordon, Ray Mataloni and Matthew Slaughter, “Expansion Abroad and the Domestic
       Operations of US Multinational Firms”, mimeo, 2003.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
        Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, February 1992: 22-64.

Mankiw, Gregory, and Phillip Swagel, “The Politics and Economics of Offshore Outsourcing”, NBER
       Working Paper 12398, July 2006.

Markusen, James R. and Keith Maskus, “General-Equilibrium Approaches to the Multinational Firm: A
       Review of Theory and Evidence”, NBER Working Paper 8334, 2001.

Mataloni, Raymond J. Jr. and Mahnaz Fahim-Nader, “Operations of US Multinational

                                                  28
       Companies: Preliminary Results From the 1994 Benchmark Survey,” Survey of Current Business,
       December 1996.

Melitz, Marc, “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
        Industry Productivity”, Econometrica, 2003.

Muendler, Marc-Andreas and Sascha O. Becker, “Margins of Multinational Labor Substitution,” UCSD
      Working Paper, April 15, 2006.

Revenga, Ana L, “Exporting jobs? The impact of import competition on employment and wages in
       US manufacturing,” Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 107, No.1, 1992: 255-284.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. (2002), Econometric Analysis of Cross-Section and Panel Data, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass.




                                                 29
                                            TABLE 1
   TRENDS IN MANUFACTURING EMPLOYMENT BY US MULTINATIONALS 1982-1999

                                                     1982          1989           1994        1999
Parents
(1)              BEA Mfg                            11,758       10,706          9,622        7,954
(2)              Our sample                         10,689        9,668          9,104        7,564
                 Vertical                            5,812        5,581          4,958        4,963
                 Horizontal                          4,877        4,087          4,146        3,301

High-income Affiliates
            Total                                    2,595        3,171           3,048       2,903
            Vertical                                 1,664        2,124           1,901       1,905
            Horizontal                                 932        1,048           1,147         998

Low-income Affiliates
           Total                                     1,064        1,405           1,584       1,868
           Vertical                                    589          833             894       1,105
           Horizontal                                  475          571             690         764

All Affiliates
                 Total                               3,659        4,576           4,632       4,772
                 Vertical                            2,253        2,957           2,795       3,010
                 Horizontal                          1,406        1,619           1,837       1,762

Affiliate Share of Employment
               Total                                  26%          32%            34%          39%
               Vertical                               28%          35%            36%          38%
               Horizontal                             22%          28%            31%          35%


(1) Source: Mataloni (1994, 2007), Employment is by Industry of Parent and includes petroleum
extraction and refining.
(2) Our totals differ from the BEA's because we drop observations for which wages, employment, R&D
spending and/or R&D employment are negative.




                                                     30
                                                   TABLE 2:
                DEFINING HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
Industry (97 NAICS code)           Intrafirm   Mean    Autor, et al.           Tariffs
                                    Dummy    Intrafirm EHF Index1
                                               Trade
                                                                      USA    Developing                       China
                                                                     (Schott  Countries                      (World
                                                                      et al)   (World                         Bank)
                                                                                Bank)
                                                                      1979      1999                          1999
Textiles & Apparel                   -0.004     .008     1.268        26.3       14.6                         26.3
                                     [0.004]
Food                                 -0.003     .018     1.261        15.2      14.3                         33.6
                                     [0.004]
Beverages & Tobacco                   0.004     .016     1.257        27.3      29.4                         63.8
                                     [0.005]
Leather Products                     -0.005     .019     1.210        16.0      10.2                         12.6
                                     [0.010]
Wood Products                         0.053     .013     2.131        14.0       8.1                          7.2
                                     [0.514]
Paper                                -0.006     .016     1.010         9.9       7.5                         10.7
                                     [0.004]
Petroleum & Coal Products             0.003     .027     1.211         5.1       6.2                          9.2
                                     [0.005]
Chemicals                            0.039     .072      0.866         9.7       7.0                         14.0
                                   [0.004]**
Plastics & Rubber                     0.016     .051     1.032        16.2      10.3                         14.6
                                   [0.004]**
Nonmetallic Minerals                  0.002     .024     1.387        17.3       9.5                         17.1
                                     [0.005]
Primary Metals                        0.010     .043     1.253        12.1       6.8                          8.4
                                    [0.005]*
Fabricated Metals                     0.017     .048     0.953        14.0       8.9                         11.4
                                   [0.004]**
Machinery                             0.049     .082     0.781         9.0       6.2                         13.0
                                   [0.004]**
Computer & Electronics                0.110     .143     0.550         7.9       5.8                         12.8
                                   [0.005]**
Electrical Equipment                  0.042     .074     0.825        10.8       7.5                         12.2
                                   [0.006]**
Transportation Equipment              0.021     .055     1.050        10.0      10.3                         16.8
                                   [0.004]**
Furniture                             0.011     .014     1.162        16.0      10.8                         22.1
                                     [0.007]
Miscellaneous                         0.060     .093      .726        12.5      10.5                         16.5
                                   [0.005]**
Observations                          3866
R-squared                             0.25

Notes:
Robust standard errors in brackets, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
For a detailed description of which industries are included in miscellaneous see:
http://www.census.gov/epcd/naics/NAICS33C.HTM#N339. Intrafirm trade is defined as the sum of exports to
foreign affiliates for further processing plus imports from foreign affiliates, divided by sales.
EHF is a measure of eye-hand-foot coordination required to perform manual tasks. The higher the value, the less
“routine” the tasks performed by manual labor.

                                                        31
                                                   TABLE 3
                CLASSIFICATION OF COUNTRIES INTO LOW VERSUS HIGH INCOME CATEGORIES
                                World Bank / Our
                                Classification for Low  Nominal Manufacturing Wages 1994 in US Dollars
Country                         versus High Income                          BEA

Estonia                           Low                                       1,470
Guyana                            Low                                       1,504
China                             Low                                       1,579
Malawi                            Low                                       1,689
Romania                           Low                                       1,866
Sri Lanka                         Low                                       1,898
Ukraine                           Low                                       2,151
India                             Low                                       2,325
Dominican Republic                Low                                       2,763
Tanzania                          Low                                       3,057
Zimbabwe                          Low                                       3,109
Uzbekistan                        Low                                       3,136
Zambia                            Low                                       3,152
Vietnam                           Low                                       3,326
Indonesia                         Low                                       3,401
Botswana                          Low                                       3,517
Pakistan                          Low                                       3,631
Nigeria                           Low                                       3,940
Honduras                          Low                                       4,111
Thailand                          Low                                       4,168
Costa Rica                        Low                                       4,236
Yemen, Rep.                       Low                                       4,248
Senegal                           Low                                       4,318
Philippines                       Low                                       4,427
Slovak R.                         Low                                       4,531
Colombia                          Low                                       4,603
El Salvador                       Low                                       4,622
Egypt, Arab Rep.                  Low                                       4,756
Fiji                              Low                                       4,824
Kenya                             Low                                       5,098
Malaysia                          Low                                       5,334
Hungary                           Low                                       5,426
Ghana                             Low                                       5,475
Poland                            Low                                       5,540
Jamaica                           Low                                       5,557
Ecuador                           Low                                       5,596
Panama                            Low                                       6,453
Mexico                            Low                                       6,465
Guatemala                         Low                                       6,786
Trinidad and Tobago               Low                                       6,994
Venezuela, RB                     Low                                       7,393
Swaziland                         Low                                       7,500
Russian Federation                Low                                       7,527
Uruguay                           Low                                       7,997
Turkey                            Low                                       8,370
                                              32
Morocco                Low         8,422
Tunisia                Low         9,058
Nicaragua              Low         9,206
Malta                  Low         9,211
Chile                  Low         9,485
South Africa           Low         10,257
Barbados               Low         10,480
Peru                   Low         11,065
Brazil                 Low         11,227
Singapore              High        11,885
Portugal               High        14,236
Bahamas, The           High        14,288
Taiwan                 High        14,699
Saudi Arabia           Low         14,912
Korea, Rep.            High        15,549
Bahrain                High        16,047
Netherlands Antilles   High        16,596
Hong Kong, China       High        17,478
New Zealand            High        17,736
Argentina              Low         18,003
Israel                 High        19,572
Greece                 High        22,855
Australia              High        23,313
Ireland                High        23,392
Spain                  High        25,848
United Kingdom         High        26,487
Sweden                 High        27,380
Italy                  High        30,574
Austria                High        31,209
Finland                High        32,049
Denmark                High        32,934
Norway                 High        33,022
United Arab Emirates   High        33,603
France                 High        33,628
Aruba                  High        34,745
Canada                 High        35,268
Netherlands            High        35,973
Belgium                High        40,134
Luxembourg             High        43,614
Germany                High        44,146
Switzerland            High        44,248
Japan                  High        57,126




                              33
                                                                                TABLE 4
                                                      SUMMARY STATISTICS: VERTICALLY-INTEGRATED FIRMS
Variable                                                                                     No. of        Mean            Standard          Change in
                                                                                             Obs                           Deviation         1982-1999
Log US employment                                                                            2088               7.327           1.570              -0.369
US (domestic) Share in Labor Expenditures across all locations                               2088               0.807           0.131              -0.041
High-Income Affiliate Share in Labor Expenditures                                            2088               0.172           0.116               0.038
Low-Income Affiliate Share in Labor Expenditures                                             2088               0.021           0.040               0.003
Log US Manufacturing Wages, NBER                                                             2088               3.394           0.155               0.177
Log High-Income Affiliate Wages                                                              2088               2.979           0.380              -0.170
Log Low-Income Affiliate Wages                                                               2088               2.319           1.088              -0.266
Log US Price of Investment, NBER                                                             2088               0.798           0.092               -0271
Log Foreign Price of Investment, PWT                                                         2088               0.675           0.264              -0.079
Log Foreign Price of Consumer Goods, PWT                                                     2088               0.712           0.283              -0.059
U.S R&D Employees (% in Total Employment)                                                    2088               0.091           0.091               0.043
High-Income Affiliate R&D Employment (% in Total Employment)                                 2088               0.036           0.063              -0.024
Low-Income Affiliate R&D Employment (% in Total Employment)                                  2088               0.005           0.016              -0.006
Import Penetration, Schott                                                                   2088               0.178           0.108               0.146
Import Penetration from Low-Income Countries, Schott                                         2088               0.044           0.040               0.062
Percent Firms with Employees in Low-income Countries                                         2088              12.225           1.564               0.136
Parent Sales by Industry                                                                     2088               9.649           1.406               0.348
Affiliate Sales by Industry                                                                  2088               9.281           1.366               0.351



                                                    SUMMARY STATISTICS: HORIZONTALLY-INTEGRATED FIRMS

Variable                                                                                     No. of        Mean            Standard          Change in
                                                                                             Obs                           Deviation         1982-1999
Log US employment                                                                            1778               7.928           1.775              -0.239
US (domestic) Share in Labor Expenditures across all locations                               1778               0.834           0.137              -0.039
High-Income Affiliate Share in Labor Expenditures                                            1778               0.140           0.126               0.036
Low-Income Affiliate Share in Labor Expenditures                                             1778               0.025           0.046               0.005
Log US Manufacturing Wages, NBER                                                             1778               3.322           0.204               0.043
Log High-Income Affiliate Wages                                                              1778               3.001           0.363              -0.199
Log Low-Income Affiliate Wages                                                               1778               2.208           1.080              -0.189
Log US Price of Investment, NBER                                                             1778               0.827           0.040              -0.151
Log Foreign Price of Investment, PWT                                                         1778               0.647           0.259              -0.117
Log Foreign Price of Consumer Goods, PWT                                                     1778               0.674           0.276              -0.094
U.S R&D Employment (% in Total Employment)                                                   1778               0.031           0.050               0.003
High-Income Affiliate R&D Employment (% in Total Employment)                                 1778               0.020           0.058              -0.023
Low-Income Affiliate R&D Employment (% in Total Employment)                                  1778               0.006           0.023              -0.006
Import Penetration, Schott                                                                   1778               0.127           0.085               0.082
Import Penetration from Low-Income Countries, Schott                                         1778              0.0513           0.059               0.099
Percent Firms with Employees in Low-income Countries                                         1778              12.828           1.733               0.092
Parent Sales by Industry                                                                     1778               9.746           1.704               0.212
Affiliate Sales by Industry                                                                  1778               9.486           1.651               0.244
Unless indicated, variables are computed using the BEA benchmark surveys of direct investment abroad for the years 1982, 1989, 1994, 1999.




                                                                                     34
                                                    TABLE 5
                           WITHIN ESTIMATES OF LABOR DEMAND BY US PARENTS
                              (1)             (2)            (3)                                 (4)
                              Pooled          Vertical       Horizontal                          F-test (p-value) for
                                                                                                 equality of
                                                                                                 coefficients for
                                                                                                 columns (2) and (3)
Log US Industrial Wages      -0.398                 -0.336                 -0.518                0.105
                             [0.069]**              [0.080]**              [0.090]**

Log Industrial Wages in        0.017                -0.032                 0.027                 0.000
Low Income Countries          [0.033]*              [0.007]**              [0.008]**

Log Industrial Wages          -0.031                -0.060                 0.092                 0.034
High Income Countries         [0.015]*              [0.291]                [0.036]**

Log of the US Price of        0.251                 0.474                  0.573                 0.834
Capital                       [0.160]               [0.181]**              [0.406]

Log of the Foreign Price      -0.338                -0.121                 -0.587                0.114
Of Capital                    [0.150]*              [0.205]                [0.212]**

Log of the Foreign Price      0.819                 0.577                  1.150                 0.032
Of Consumer Goods             [0.149]**             [0.198]**              [0.208]**

Import Penetration            0.031                 -0.350                 0.531                 0.000
                              [0.120]               [0.116]**              [0.491]
Import Penetration from       -0.143                0.327                  -0.610                0.000
Low Wage Countries            [0.204]               [0.291]                [0.274]**

R&D (% Employment)            -0.475                -0.354                 -0.913                0.013
                              [0.100]**             [0.115]**              [0.194]**

R&D (% Employment)            0.346                 0.247                  0.7                   0.014
In High-income Countries      [0.164]*              [0.190]                [0.312]*

R&D (%                        1.399                 1.905                  1.271                 0.122
Employment) in Low-           [0.671]*              [0.947]*               [0.981]
income Countries
Dummy Equal to One if         0.223                 0.231                  0.173                 0.000
Firm has Employees in         [0.097]**             [0.143]**              [0.128]
Low-income Countries
Time dummy 1989               -0.023                0.017                  -0.001                0.819
                              [0.026]               [0.036]                [0.044]
Time dummy 1994               -0.001                0.105                  0.002                 0.564
                              [0.036]               [0.051]*               [0.066]
Time dummy 1999               0.154                 0.268                  0.196                 0.744
                              [0.046]**             [0.064]**              [0.090]*

Observations                   3866                                      3866
Number of firms                1868                                      1868
R-squared                      0.05                                      0.16
Notes: Standard errors corrected for arbitrary heterskedasticity are in brackets. * indcates significant at 5% while
** indicates significant at 1%. In column (1), we impose that the coefficients on horizontal and vertical
multinationals are the same. In columns (2) and (3) we allow the coefficients to differ. Column (4) reports tests of
the equality of coefficients across the two types of enterprises. Dependent variable is the log of US employment.
Within estimates calculated by taking deviations from firm-level means over the sample period. Log industrial
wages in high and low income countries taken from UNIDO database, INDSTAT3 (2006), based on surveys and
secondary sources collected by UNIDO and converted to US dollars.

                                                         35
                                          TABLE 6
 WITHIN ESTIMATES OF US LABOR DEMAND USING UNIDO WAGES INSTEAD OF
           BEA WAGES IN LOW AND HIGH INCOME AFFILIATE LOCATIONS
                         (1)            (2)              (3)
                         Pooled         Vertical         Horizontal
Log US Industrial Wages  -0.311         -0.299           -0.399
                         [0.079]**      [0.077]**        [0.088]**
Log Industrial Wages in
Low-income Countries      0.016         -0.025           0.031
                         [0.033]*       [0.007]**        [0.007]**
Log Industrial Wages in
High-income Countries    -0.041         -0.061           0.092
                         [0.023]*       [0.029]*         [0.036]**
Log of the US Price of
Capital                  0.121          0.411            0.373
                         [0.060]*       [0.112]**        [0.226]
Log of the Foreign Price
of Capital               -0.338         -0.111           -0.518
                         [0.150]*       [0.191]          [0.209]**
Log of the Foreign Price
of Consumer Goods        0.723          0.579            0.970
                         [0.149]**      [0.198]**        [0.333]**
Import Penetration       -0.007         -0.389           0.444
                         [0.120]        [0.155]**        [0.694]
Import Penetration from
Low Wage Countries       -0.267         0.307            -0.734
                         [0.105]*       [0.292]          [0.334]**
R&D (% Employment)       -0.482         -0.358           -0.915
                         [0.100]**      [0.115]**        [0.194]**
R&D (% Employment) in
High-income Countries    0.345          0.243            0.720
                         [0.264]        [0.190]          [0.312]*
R&D (% Employment) In
Low-income Countries     1.356          1.879            1.259
                         [0.671]        [0.999]          [0.982]
Dummy Equal to One if
Firm has Employees in
Low-income Countries     0.232          0.214            0.183
                         [0.077]**      [0.314]**        [0.128]
Time dummy 1989          -0.059         -0.073           -0.098
                         [0.038]        [0.043]          [0.101]
Time dummy 1994          -0.062         -0.044           0.057
                         [0.040]        [0.045]          [0.115]
Time dummy 1999          0.075          0.082            0.072
                         [0.046]        [0.071]          [0.071]
Observations             3166           3166             3166
Number of firms          1529                     1529
R-squared                0.04                     0.15


Notes: Standard errors corrected for arbitrary heterskedasticity are in brackets. * indcates
significant at 5% while** indicates significant at 1%. In column (1), we impose that the
coefficients on horizontal and vertical multinationals are the same. In columns (2) and (3) we
allow the coefficients to differ. Dependent variable is the log of US employment. Within
estimates calculated by taking deviations from firm-level means over the sample period.




                                              36
                                                                          TABLE 7
               Implied Elasticity of Labor Demand and Allen Elasticity of Substitution Across Alternative Specifications
                                                         (1)                    (2)                   (3)                 (4)                   (5)

                                                         Basic                  Replacing BEA         CES                 Translog Cost         Adding Sales to
                                                         Specification          wages with            specification       Function              Basic
                                                         (Table 5)              UNIDO wages           (Table A.7)         (Table A.6)           Specification
                                                                                (Table 6)

Implied Elasticity of Labor Demand η ij
   (% Change in Li in Response to % Change in wj)

   Own Elasticity of Labor Demand
      Vertical                                           -0.336                 -0.299                --                  -0.126                -0.501
      Horizontal                                         -0.518                 -0.399                --                  -0.153                -0.658
   Elasticity with respect to wages in Horizontal
      Firms
      Low-income Affiliate Locations                     0.027                  0.031                 0.029               0.020                 0.027
      High-income Affiliate Locations                    0.092                  0.092                 0.087               0.125                 0.077

   Elasticity with respect to wages in Vertical
      Firms
      Low-income Affiliate Locations                     -0.032                 -0.025                -0.033              -0.010                -0.032
      High-income Affiliate Locations                    -0.060                 -0.061                0.051               0.162                 -0.001


Implied Allen Elasticity of Substitution σ jk

   Elasticity with respect to Low-income Countries

      Vertical                                           .-1.51                 -1.2                  -1.381              -0.455                -1.50
      Horizontal                                         1.08                   1.24                  1.571               0.803                 1.09
   Elasticity with respect to High-income Countries

      Vertical                                           -.351                  -0.355                0.297               0.939                 -0.006
      Horizontal                                         0.657                  0.657                 0.621               0.892                 0.550


Notes: Coefficients taken from Tables 5 and 6 and Appendix Tables A.6 and A.7 in the text. Factor shares used to compute elasticities taken from sample means
(see Table 4). See equations (15) and (16) for formulas to convert elasticities of labor demand into Allen elasticities of substitution and vice versa. The Allen
partial elasticity of substitution σjk gives us the percentage change in the ratio of Lj to Lk with respect to the percentage change in the ratio of wk to wj.




                                                                               37
                                                           Table 8
                   Calculating the Impact of Different Aspects of Globalization on Labor Market Outcomes
Factors Affecting
US Labor Demand       VERTICAL                                                          HORIZONTAL
                      Impact of 1%           Actual      Percentage         Keeping        Impact of            Actual      Percentage         Keeping
                        increase in      increase in      Change in             Only     1% increase        increase in      Change in             Only
                             factor          sample          Labor        Significant       in factor           sample          Labor        Significant
                                                           Demand        coefficients                                         Demand        coefficients
                           (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)
Log US Industrial
Wages                      -0.336            0.177          -5.947           -5.947           -0.518           0.043           -2.217           -2.217
Log Industrial
Wages in Low-
income Countries           -0.032           -0.266           0.851             0.851           0.027          -0.189           -0.510           -0.510
Log Industrial
Wages in High-
income Countries           -0.060           -0.170           1.020                             0.092          -0.199           -1.831           -1.831
Log of US Price of
Capital                     0.474           -0.271         -12.845         -12.845             0.573          -0.151           -8.652           -8.652
Log of Foreign
Price of Capital           -0.121           -0.079           0.956                            -0.587          -0.117            6.868            6.868
Log of Foreign
Price of Consumer
Goods                       0.577           -0.059          -3.404           -3.404            1.150          -0.094         -10.810          -10.810
Import Penetration
                           -0.351            0.146          -5.125           -5.125            0.531           0.082            4.354
Import Penetration
form Low Wage
Countries                   0.327            0.062           2.027                            -0.610           0.099           -6.039           -6.039
R&D Employment
                           -0.354            0.043          -1.522           -1.522           -0.913           0.003           -0.274           -0.274
R&D Employment
in High-income
Countries                   0.247           -0.024          -0.593                             0.730          -0.023           -1.679           -1.679
R&D Employment
in Low-income
Countries                   1.905           -0.006          -1.143           -1.143            1.271          -0.006           -0.763
Dummy =1if firm
has employees in
Developing Ctries           0.231            0.136           3.142             3.142           0.173           0.092            1.592
Net Impact of all
Above Variables
                                                           -22.578         -25.993                                           -19.941          -25.144
Adding Parent
Sales
                            0.142            0.348           4.942             4.942           0.163           0.212            3.456            3.456
Adding Affiliate
Sales
                            0.036            0.348           1.253             1.253           0.124           0.244            3.026            3.026
Net effect
including Parent
and Affiliate Sales                                          -16.383          -19.798                                             -13.459        -18.662
Notes: coefficients in columns (1) and (5) taken from Table 5. Numbers in columns (2) and (6) taken from means Table 4. Numbers is columns (3) and (7)
calculated by multiplying by 100 column (1) and column (2) (for column (3)) and column (5) and column (6) (for column (7)). Columns (4) and (8)
calculated the same way as columns (3) and (7), but only the coefficients which were significant in Table 5 are reported. The Net Impact column sums up
all the previous effects.




                                                                          38
                       APPENDIX TABLE A.1:COVERAGE OF THE BEA SAMPLE
Year and Variable                                 Coverage of BEA   Coverage of BEA      Coverage of BEA
                                                  Sample in         Sample in Services   Sample in Total
                                                  Manufacturing                          US Economic
                                                                                         Activity (Includes
                                                                                         Manufacturing,
                                                                                         Services, Other,
                                                                                         Wholesale Trade)
1982
Total Number of Employees in BEA Sample           11,758.1          993.8                18,704.6
(Thousands)
Gross Product in the BEA Sample (US Millions      421,050           25,997               796,017
of Dollars)
Coverage of the BEA Sample (in %) Relative to     80 %              6%                   33 %
Gross Product for All Firms operating in the US
Value of Dollar Export Sales by Firms in the      163,383           NA                   NA
BEA Sample (Millions)
Coverage of the Bea Sample (in %) Relative to     77 %              NA                   NA
Exports of All Firms operating in the US

1989
Total Number of Employees in BEA Sample           10,706.8          1,700                18,785.4
(Thousands)
Gross Product in the BEA Sample (US Millions      586,568           57,090               1,044,884
of Dollars)
Coverage of the BEA Sample (in %) Relative to     67 %              6%                   25 %
Gross Product for All Firms operating in the US
Value of Dollar Export Sales by Firms in the      236,371           NA                   NA
BEA Sample (Millions)
Coverage of the Bea Sample (in %) Relative to     65 %              NA                   NA
Exports of All Firms operating in the US

1994
Total Number of Employees in BEA Sample           9,622.5           2,653.4              18,947.4
(Thousands)
Gross Product in the BEA Sample (US Millions      690,466           102,520              1,325,945
of Dollars)
Coverage of the BEA Sample (in %) Relative to     59 %              8%                   26 %
Gross Product for All Firms operating in the US
Value of Dollar Export Sales by Firms in the      337,036           NA                   NA
BEA Sample (Millions)
Coverage of the Bea Sample (in %) Relative to     59 %              NA                   NA
Exports of All Firms operating in the US

1999
Total Number of Employees in BEA Sample           7,954.9           2,220,174            23,006.8
(Thousands)
Value of Dollar Export Sales by Firms in the      441,587           NA                   NA
BEA Sample (Millions)
Coverage of the Bea Sample (in %) Relative to     62.5 %            NA                   NA
Exports of All Firms operating in the US




                                                      39
                                        APPENDIX TABLE A.2:
                           CROSS CHECKING THE ACCURACY OF THE BEA DATABASE
                                     Imposing a Cut-off (Reporting           Imposing no Cut-off on Germany
                                     Requirement of a Balance Sheet          affiliate reporting
                                     Total of at least 7 Million Euros for
                                     Germany, US reporting
                                     requirements vary over time, no
                                     reporting requirement for Sweden)
BEA Data
Employees of US Affiliates in 1999   458,744                                 NA
in Germany
Employees of US Affiliates in 1999   67,044                                  NA
in Sweden

German Government Data (Direct
US Ownership only)
Employees of US Affiliates in 1998   466,941                                 488,866
Employees of US Affiliates in 1999   509,537                                 532,594
Employees of US Affiliates in 2000   488,157                                 509,176


Swedish Government Data
Employees of US Affiliates in 1997   51,138                                  NA
(Majority owned only)
Employees of US Affiliates in 1998   61,089                                  NA
yoo(Majority owned only
Employees of US Affiliates in 1999   78,621                                  NA
(Majority owned only)




                                                      40
                                               APPENDIX TABLE A.3:
                                        DESCRIPTION OF VARIABLES AND DATA SOURCES
Variable Name                            Source                     Description
Log Wage (Industry level)                US Bureau of               Wages and salaries of employees and employer expenditures for all
                                         Economic Analysis          employee benefit plans in parents computed separately for parents,
                                                                    high-income affiliates and other affiliates and averaged across
                                                                    industries.



Log Wage (Industry level)                UNIDO                      Wages calculated based on surveys administered by UNIDO,
                                                                    supplemented with secondary sources (such as national statistical
                                                                    agencies). Wages calculated as compensation divided by number
                                                                    of employees at the 3 digit ISIC level Revision 2. All values
                                                                    converted to US dollars using the IMF exchange rate series rf. Data
                                                                    taken from INDSTAT3, published in 2006 by UNIDO.

Log Employment                           US Bureau of               Log of the number of full-time and part-time employees on the
                                         Economic Analysis          payroll at the end of the fiscal year in all affiliates. However, a
                                                                    count taken during the year was accepted if it was a reasonable
                                                                    proxy for the end-of-year number. Computed separately for parents,
                                                                    high-income affiliates and other affiliates.


R&D Share                                US Bureau of               Number of employees in research and development as a percentage
R&D Share (High-income Affiliates)       Economic Analysis          of total employment. Computed separately for US parents, affiliates
R&D Share (Low-income Affiliates)                                   in high-income locations and affiliates in low-income locations.
US Investment Price                      NBER Manufacturing         This is the variable PIINV in the NBER’s manufacturing
                                         Database                   productivity database. It is set to 1 in 1987. It combines separate
                                                                    deflators for structures and equipment, based on the distribution of
                                                                    each type of asset in the industry. This is a deflator for new
                                                                    investment flows, not the existing capital stock. See
                                                                    www.nber.org.
Foreign Investment Price                 Penn World Tables          PPP price of domestic investment calculated from the PWT 6.1.
                                                                    See Appendix for PWT 6.1 for more details, or
                                                                    http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu.
Foreign Consumer Goods Price             Penn World Tables          PPP price of consumption goods calculated from the PWT 6.1. See
                                                                    Appendix for PWT 6.1 for more details, or
                                                                    http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu.
US Import Penetration                    Bernard, Jensen and        Imports into the US divided by imports into the US plus total
                                         Schott (2006)              production in the US less exports from the US by year by 4-digit
                                                                    SIC 1987 revision code industrial classification.
US Import Penetration from Low-Income    Bernard, Jensen and        Share of products in an industry sourced from at least one country
Countries                                Schott (2006)              with less than 5 percent of US per capita GDP




                                                               41
                                 APPENDIX TABLE A.4
             WITHIN ESTIMATES OF LABOR DEMAND BY US PARENTS
                   WITH INDUSTRY SALES ADDED AS A CONTROL
                          (1)            (2)             (3)
                          Pooled         Vertical        Horizontal
Log US Industrial Wages   -0.533         -0.501          -0.658
                          [0.070]**      [0.092]**       [0.096]**

Log Industrial Wages In        0.064           -0.032      0.027
Low-income Countries          [0.033]          [0.007]**   [0.005]**

Log Industrial Wages in       0.030            -0.001      0.077
High-income Countries         [0.023]          [0.029]     [0.036]*

Log of the US Price of        0.137            0.319       0.262
Capital                       [0.161]          [0.106]**   [0.433]

Log of the Foreign Price      -0.298           -0.141      -0.487
of Capital                    [0.149]*         [0.204]     [0.211]**

Log of the Foreign Price      0.734            0.536       1.034
of Consumer Goods             [0.148]**        [0.197]**   [0.207]**

Import Penetration            -0.098           -0.523      0.296
                              [0.120]          [0.156]**   [0.194]

Import Penetration from       -0.046           0.524       -0.551
Low Wage Countries            [0.205]          [0.292]     [0.276]**

R&D Spending (% Sales)        -0.494           -0.344      -1.016
                              [0.099]**        [0.114]**   [0.194]**

R&D Spending (% Sales)        0.308            0.210       0.637
in High-income Countries      [0.163]          [0.189]     [0.310]*

R&D Spending (% Sales)        1.021            1.933       0.899
in Low-income Countries       [0.667]          [0.937]*    [0.979]

Dummy Equal to One if         0.266            0.355       0.160
Firm has Employees in         [0.098]**        [0.142]**   [0.129]
Low-income Countries

Log of Parent Sales by        0.144            0.142       0.160
Industry                      [0.016]**        [0.025]**   [0.019]**

Log of Affiliate Sales by     0.029            0.036       0.124
Industry                      [0.005]**        [0.007]**   [0.007]**

Time dummy 1989               -0.017           -0.033      0.019
                              [0.028]          [0.034]     [0.065]
Time dummy 1994               0.012            0.025       0.039
                              [0.041]          [0.047]     [0.107]
Time dummy 1999               0.101            0.102       0.154
                              [0.046]*         [0.052]*    [0.120]
Observations                  3866             3866        3866
Number of firms               1868             1868        1868
R-squared                     0.07             0.18        0.18
Standard errors in brackets
  * significant at 5%
** significant at 1%
                                          42
                                         Appendix Table A.5
                                        Correcting For Selection
                           (1)                (2)                  (3)          (4)
                           Unweighted         Weighted             Unweighted   Weighted
                                              (Controlling for                  (Controlling for
                                              Selection)                        Selection)
                           Vertical           Vertical             Horizontal   Horizontal
Log US Industrial Wages    -0.339             -0.351               -0.520       -0.541
                           [0.112]**          [0.123]*             [0.131]**    [0.180]**

Log Industrial Wages in    -0.032             -0.021               0.071        0.097
Low-income Countries       [0.008]**          [0.009]*             [0.030]**    [0.039]**

Log Industrial Wages in    -0.003             0.010                0.088         0.047
High-income Countries      [0.032]            [0.029]              [0.039]*     [0.016]*

Log of the US Price of     0.472              0.854                0.566        0.909
Capital                    [0.130]**          [0.136]**            [0.162]**    [0.178]**

Log of the Foreign Price   -0.117             -0.076               -0.583       -0.219
of Capital                 [0.037]**          [0.026]**            [0.224]**    [0.092]**

Log of the Foreign Price   0.572              0.372                1.148        0.424
of Consumer Goods          [0.231]*           [0.126]**            [0.249]**    [0.132]**

Import Penetration         -0.357             -0.398               0.529        0.980
                           [0.122]**          [0.121]**            [0.532]      [0.910]

Import Penetration from    0.331              0.957                -0.606       -0.664
Low Wage Countries         [0.354]            [0.789]              [0.223]**    [0.502]**

R&D (% Employment)         -0.354             -0.250               -0.911       -1.061
                           [0.136]**          [0.125]*             [0.411]**    [0.513]*

R&D (% Employment)         0.247              0.155                0.719        0.667
in High-income Countries   [0.470]            [0.568]              [0.357]*     [0.522]

R&D Spending (%            1.905              1.221                1.267        1.322
Employment) in Low-        [0.915]*           [1.062]              [0.726]      [0.709]
income Countries

Dummy Equal to One if      0.531              0.597                0.172        0.133
Firm has Employees in      [0.178]**          [0.239]**            [0.140]      [0.251]
Low-income Countries

Time dummy 1989            0.017              0.110                -0.002       0.265
                           [0.050]            [0.062]              [0.056]      [0.266]
Time dummy 1994            0.106              0.227                0.001        0.521
                           [0.077]            [0.096]*             [0.089]      [0.259]*
Time dummy 1999            0.269              0.482                0.195        0.812
                           [0.101]**          [0.126]**            [0.129]      [0.144]**
Lead Sit+1                 -0.088                                  -0.151
                           [0.032]**                               [0.040]**
Observations               3866               3866                 3866         3866
Number of firms            1868               1868                 1868         1868
Standard errors in
brackets
 * significant at 5%
** significant at 1%



                                                     43
                           APPENDIX TABLE A.6
 TRANSLOG COST SHARE SPECIFICATION: DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS
  US WAGE BILL AS A SHARE OF TOTAL EXPENDITURES ON LABOR
                     ACROSS ALL LOCATIONS
                       (1)          (2)        (3)
                       Pooled       Vertical   Horizontal
Log of US Industrial   0.055        0.074      0.030
Wages                  [0.004]**    [0.005]**  [0.006]**

Log Industrial Wages in       -0.023           -0.047      -0.007
Low-income Countries          [0.007]**        [0.011]**   [0.003]**

Log Industrial Wages in       0.002            -0.009      -0.016
High-income Countries         [0.004]          [0.006]     [0.006]**

σjj : own elasticity          -0.167           -0.156      -0.184
σjk : low income countries    0.303            -0.455      0.803
σjk : high income countries   1.106            0.939       0.892

Log of the US Price of        0.151            0.159       0.087
Capital                       [0.026]**        [0.031]**   [0.092]

Log of the Foreign Price      -0.154           -0.092      -0.228
of Capital                    [0.025]**        [0.034]**   [0.034]**

Log of the Foreign Price      0.028            -0.060      0.117
of Consumer Goods             [0.025]          [0.033]     [0.034]**

Import Penetration            -0.005           -0.040      0.049
                              [0.020]          [0.026]     [0.031]

Import Penetration from       0.073            0.202       -0.046
Low Wages                     [0.033]*         [0.048]**   [0.045]

R&D Employment                -0.018           -0.021      -0.039
                              [0.017]          [0.019]     [0.034]

R&D Employment in             -0.110           -0.105      -0.097
High-income Countries         [0.027]**        [0.031]**   [-.052]

R&D Employment in             0.295            0.404       0.215
Low-income Countries          [0.111]**        [0.157]*    [0.162]

Dummy Equal to One if         0.017            0.065       -0.023
Firm has Employees in         [0.016]          [0.024]**   [0.021]
Low-income Countries

Time dummy 1989               -0.083           -0.088      -0.082
                              [0.004]**        [0.005]**   [0.008]**
Time dummy 1994               -0.119           -0.116      -0.129
                              [0.006]**        [0.007]**   [0.013]**
Time dummy 1999               -0.145           -0.156      -0.140
                              [0.007]**        [0.008]**   [0.015]**
Observations                  3866             3866        3866
Number of firms               1898             1898        1898
R-squared                     0.20             0.31        0.31
Standard errors in brackets
  * significant at 5%
** significant at 1%

                                          44
                                          APPENDIX TABLE A.7
     CES SPECIFICATION: DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS RATIO OF LOG EMPLOYMENT AT HOME TO LOG EMPLOYMENT ABROAD
     REPORTED COEFFICIENT IS ON THE INDEPENDENT VARIABLE : (LOG) WAGES AT HOME RELATIVE TO WAGES ABROAD
                 COEFFICIENT IS (THE NEGATIVE OF) THE IMPLIED ALLEN ELASTICITY OF SUBSTITUTION σ ij


                              (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
                              Pooled      Pooled      Vertical     Vertical      Horizontal    Horizontal
Log of the Ratio of US        -0.146                  -0.297                     -0.621
Wages to Wages in High-       [0.031]**               [0.227]                    [0.223]**
income Countries

Log of the Ratio of US                    0.063                     1.381                      -1.571
Wages to Wages in Low-                    [0.086]                  [0.061]**                   [0.342]**
income Countries

Log of the Foreign Price      -0.271      -1.100      -0.606       0.559         0.117         -2.155
of Consumer Goods             [0.211]     [0.375]**   [0.275]*     [0.561]       [0.284]       [0.455]**

Import Penetration            -0.208      -0.414      -0.586       -0.332        0.278         -0.244
                              [0.170]     [0.388]     [0.217]**    [0.546]       [0.260]       [0.484]

Import Penetration from       0.111       0.154       1.292        2.818         -0.953        -0.650
Low Wage Countries            [0.285]     [0.526]     [0.405]**    [0.965]**     [0.369]**     [0.287]**

R&D Spending (%               -0.231      0.248       -0.094       0.378         -0.745        0.295
Employment) at home           [0.141]     [0.413]     [0.162]      [0.481]       [0.275]**     [0.720]

R&D Spending in High-         -0.784      -1.239      -0.468       -1.164        -1.464        -1.784
income Countries              [0.231]**   [0.368]**   [0.267]      [0.519]*      [0.437]**     [0.518]**

R&D Spending in Low-          -0.871      0.764       0.292        -1.960        -1.091        3.090
income Countries              [0.947]     [1.128]     [1.334]      [1.688]       [1.375]       [1.573]*

Time dummy 1989               -0.346      -0.471      -0.340       -0.540        -0.340        -0.540
                              [0.038]**   [0.080]**   [0.039]**    [0.088]**     [0.039]**     [0.088]**
Time dummy 1994               -0.445      -0.516      -0.449       -0.686        -0.449        -0.686
                              [0.054]**   [0.121]**   [0.058]**    [0.138]**     [0.058]**     [0.138]**
Time dummy 1999               -0.624      -0.929      -0.633       -1.111        -0.633        -1.111
                              [0.060]**   [0.138]**   [0.065]**    [0.157]**     [0.065]**     [0.157]**
Observations                  3866        1254        3866         1254          3866          1254
Number of firms               1868        598         1868         598           1868          598
R-squared                     0.10        0.18        0.10         0.19          0.10          0.19
Standard errors in brackets
  * significant at 5%
** significant at 1%




                                                      45
