                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            CHARTING THE ECONOMIC LIFE CYCLE

                                               Ronald Lee
                                             Sang-Hyop Lee
                                             Andrew Mason

                                         Working Paper 12379
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12379


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




Research for this paper was funded by two grants from the National Institutes of Health, NIA R01 AG025488
and AG025247. The authors are grateful to other project participants for use of their estimates for other
countries and to Tim Miller, Comfort Sumida, Anchi Tung and Avi Ebenstein for their help with
calculations. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Ronald Lee, Sang-Hyop Lee and Andrew Mason. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Charting the Economic Life Cycle
Ronald Lee, Sang-Hyop Lee and Andrew Mason
NBER Working Paper No. 12379
July 2006
JEL No. J1

                                            ABSTRACT

Understanding the economic lifecycle – how it varies and why – is important in its own right, but
is also critical to understanding how changes in population age structure influence many features of
the macroeconomy. Economic behavior over the life cycle can be summarized by the average levels
of consumption and labor earnings at each age, as shaped by biology, culture, institutions and
individual choice. Here we present estimates of these in detail for the US and Taiwan, showing the
roles played by public and familial transfer systems as well as asset accumulation, and present more
basic profiles for selected additional countries drawing on studies from a larger project. Average
economic dependency occurs when consumption exceeds labor earnings, typically in childhood and
old age. A changing population age distribution alters the relative numbers of weighted consumers
and producers, as summarized by the support ratio. The “demographic dividend” occurs during a
sustained period of improving support ratios during the demographic transition, as can be shown
using these profiles. The estimated cross-sectional age profiles of labor income have a broadly
similar hump shape. However, there are striking contrasts in the timing of earnings over the life
cycle. The consumption profiles reveal even more striking contrasts, with a flat age profile of total
adult consumption in Taiwan and a steeply rising one in the U.S. We believe these differences reflect
the extended family versus the state as the primary locus of transfers to the elderly. Profiles for
private consumption are also quite variable, with Indonesia peaking early around age 25, Taiwan
being essentially flat, and the US peaking late at around 55. Private expenditures on education show
wide variations, with unusually high expenditures in some Asian countries. Because of possible
public-private substitutions, it is questionable to assign causality to either for differences in total
consumption, but it is hard to avoid noticing that without public spending on Medicare and
institutional Medicaid in the U.S., total consumption would decline after 55, whereas with them, it
rises strongly. There is only a short period of life during which production exceeds consumption
barely more than 30 years in the US, Taiwan, and Thailand. The brevity of this phase contrasts
sharply with high life expectancy, approaching 80 years in many countries.


Ronald Lee                        Sang-Hyop Lee                      Andrew Mason
Demography and Economics          Department of Economics            Department of Economics
University of California          University of Hawaii at Manoa      University of Hawaii at Manoa
2232 Piedmont Avenue              2424 Maile Way, Saunders 542       Population and Health Studies
Berkeley, CA 94720                Honolulu, HI 96822                 East-West Center
and NBER                          leesang@hawaii.edu                 2424 Maile Way, Saunders 542
rlee@demog.berkeley.edu                                              Honolulu, HI 96821
                                                                     amason@hawaii.edu
Introduction
The shape of the demographic life cycle is of fundamental interest, which demographers
recognize through extensive efforts to estimate, describe and interpret the age-shapes of
fertility, mortality, marriage, divorce, and migration. These age-shapes are influenced by
biology, culture, economic constraints and individual choice. Similarly, the shape of the
economic life cycle is of fundamental interest in its own right, and this shape is
influenced by the same set of factors. Here we will be primarily concerned with the
estimation and description of the basic economic life cycle, and some illustrative
comparisons of how it differs across countries and over time within countries in recent
years.
         Economic behavior over the life cycle can be summarized by the amount
consumed at each age and by the amount produced through labor at each age. One sort of
economic dependency occurs when consumption exceeds labor earnings, a condition that
marks off periods in childhood and old age. From this point of view, an older person is
economically dependent even if she has accumulated claims on output that more than
offset her consumption, claims that could take the form of entitlements to transfers or
ownership of assets. Often the economic lifecycle is treated in a highly stylized fashion.
Dependency ratios and other similar age structure variables, for example, capture only the
broadest features of the economic lifecycle, and quadratic functions smooth through
important details of the age patterns. Our goal here is to measure it in comprehensive
detail. However, we have not attempted to take time use into account, so such important
issues as the time spent by parents caring for their children, or time spent caring for
elderly relatives, are not covered here.
         Individual consumption or production by age are seldom calculated, because
attention naturally turns toward more disaggregated measures such as wages, labor force
participation rates, hours worked, or household expenditures. However, although per
capita consumption and production may seem like crude measures, they summarize and
incorporate the influences of many factors that may have contradictory or complementary
effects on the economic life cycle.
         Demographic age profiles for fertility and mortality are of interest because they
describe a basic aspect of human behavior. But they are also important because they can
be applied to a population age distribution to calculate the number of births and deaths
occurring in a period. Such a calculation requires the assumption, seldom made explicit,
that variations in the population age distribution and in the age profiles of fertility and
mortality, are independent. The Easterlin Hypothesis asserts the contrary: that an
unusually large age group will experience unusually low fertility. Similarly, an unusually
large share of young children in the population might, in some contexts, be expected to
cause mortality of young children to be higher. The assumption of independence makes it
possible to generate numbers, but various feedback processes render the calculations
suspect.
         Concerns of the same sort arise when age schedules of consumption and
production are applied to population age distributions to generate levels of aggregate
consumption and labor earnings, which we will call expected consumption and expected
labor earnings. When the population age distribution changes, it alters their relative size,
as summarized by the ratio of expected earnings to expected consumption, called the


                                             2
support ratio. 1 There has been recent interest in the demographic dividend, which occurs
during a sustained period of improving support ratios during the demographic transition,
and which is estimated using age profiles of per capita consumption and labor earnings of
the sort described above. However, as with fertility and mortality, such calculations are
undermined when there is feedback from the population age distribution to the age
profiles of consumption and labor earning. For example, there is ample reason to expect
an unusually large cohort to experience reduced earnings (Easterlin, 1978, and a large
subsequent literature). 2
         Just as broad changes in aggregate economic dependency may be illuminated by
age profiles of consumption and labor earnings in general, more specific consequences of
changing population age distributions can be illuminated using per capita age profiles for
more specific kinds of consumption, production, or other economic behaviors, but always
in reference to population level age group averages rather than conditional on
participation. Examples include the demand for housing (Mankiw and Weil, 1989;
McFadden, 1994), stock market fluctuations (Poterba, 2004), saving rates (Modigliani,
1988; Mason, 1987, 1988; Cutler et al. 2001), interest rates, and impending fiscal
problems (Lee and Edwards, 2001, 2002). As always, such disaggregation carries its own
hazards, since there may be substitution across subcategories such as publicly provided
health care or education, and private expenditures on these, and the overall patterns of
change may be obscured.
         This paper will consider methodological issues in estimating the economic life
cycle. It will then present cross-sectional estimates of consumption and labor earning for
a number of countries, including some disaggregation into public and private, and a
separate examination of expenditure on education. Next, we will consider how to
interpret and explain the differences that are observed. Finally we will consider changes
over time in the age profiles for Taiwan and the US since around 1980.
         The estimates presented here draw upon a number of studies that are being carried
out as part of a larger study of the economic lifecycle and the reallocations systems -
primarily through saving and public and familial transfers – that respond to the economic
lifecycle. A system of accounts, called National Transfer Accounts, is being developed
that is consistent with National Income and Product Accounts but provides much-needed
age data. The methodology for constructing estimates is discussed briefly in this paper,
but more detailed information will be available on the project website –
www.ntaccounts.org. The researchers and a principle source for the estimates presented
here are provided in the references section.




1
  For example, Cutler et al (1991) estimate support ratios for the US from 1950 to 2050. The inverse of the
support ratio is the Chayanov ratio. Chayanov (1966) used standardized age profiles of production and
consumption to form ratios of expected consumers to expected producers at the household level. Such
ratios are now known as “Chayanov ratios”. See e.g Lee and Kramer, 2002.
2
  The effect of a small change in population age structure on the macro-economy can be decomposed into
two additive components: the effect of the change in population age structure weighted by the initial age
profiles of production and consumption (or other items of interest), plus the induced changes in the shapes
of these age profiles weighted by the initial population age distribution (Lee, 1997). The first effect is
compositional or mechanical, and the second is behavioral.


                                                     3
Conceptual Background
Individuals versus Households
Age profiles of consumption and production are viewed from an individual, rather than a
household, perspective in this paper. In economies where formal sector employment
dominates, measuring production (or earnings) for individuals is a relatively straight-
forward task. In traditional settings, where employment is informal and production is
often organized within a family enterprise, estimating production by age for individuals is
difficult. In any setting, allocating consumption to individuals is a challenging task,
because most expenditure data are collected for households rather than individuals.
Moreover, some goods are jointly consumed or involve increasing returns to scale so that
allocating consumption to individuals inevitably involves arbitrary rules.
     From the household perspective, production and consumption are attributes of
households, varying with age of the household head. Constructing production and
consumption profiles is more straight-forward, but there are tradeoffs involved. The first
is that the effects of co-resident children and elderly on household consumption and
production profiles must be explicitly modeled or – as is often the case – neglected
altogether. Indeed, a large share of all societal income redistribution occurs within
households, and would therefore be invisible to accounting on a household basis. The
second is the difficulty of translating changes in population age structure into changes in
the age structure of household heads and household membership.
     Here we opt for the individual perspective, but irrespective of the methodology
employed, the age patterns of consumption and production are central to understanding
the role of population in the macroeconomy.

Forces shaping age profiles of consumption
A large body of theory and empirical research in economics addresses the age-time
trajectory of consumption chosen by individuals. In the absence of intergenerational
transfers, the expected present value of consumption must be no greater than that of labor
earnings over the life cycle. With perfect foresight about future labor earnings, taxes,
survival, discount rates, and other relevant information, with perfect credit markets, and
with typical assumptions about how consumption affects utility, standard lifecycle theory
concludes that consumption will increase exponentially with age along the optimal path
at a rate equal to the discount rate less the rate of time preference. Because this optimal
path typically differs from the age trajectory of labor earnings, individuals borrow and
lend at the market rate of interest to achieve the desired consumption path.
         The real world circumstances of individuals violate each of these assumptions,
and a large literature explores the consequences. The ability of individuals to borrow is
often limited by their current net worth, credit cards aside. Future wages are unknown
due to uncertainty about the macroeconomy, career success, and health, for example.
Intergenerational transfers are pervasive. An individual’s consumption is funded by his
parents until the age of economic independence, which may not come until after age 20.
Consequently adults must allocate a substantial portion of their income to consumption
by their children. In most contexts, elderly people live and consume in the household of
an adult child. Thus an individual’s consumption may be governed by at least three



                                             4
different budget constraints over the life cycle, depending first on the resources of
parents, then on personal resources, and finally on resources of children. Marriage,
divorce and widowhood complicate the situation further. Bequests, which are highly
uncertain in timing and amount, also alter the available resources. Some scholars have
questioned the value of the lifecycle model altogether and proposed alternatives (Carroll,
1992; Carroll and Summers, 1991; Deaton, 1991). 3
        There are many problems in estimating individual consumption. Fertility and the
age pattern of consumption may be jointly determined, in the sense that parents may
choose to have fewer children precisely because they want to invest more resources in
each one of them, as in the quantity-quality theory of fertility (Becker and Lewis, 1973).
Only a fraction of the consumption in a household is assignable to individuals, even
conceptually. Much is joint consumption of public goods, as when a family watches TV.
Some consumption comes in the form of in-kind transfers from the government, for
health care, education, food, housing, or energy assistance, and these transfers are chosen
through the political process and subject to a government budget constraint.
        Very little research has sought to estimate consumption profiles for a society from
cradle to grave, including both public and private transfers, as we seek to do in this paper.

Forces Shaping the Age Profiles of Labor Earnings
Standard economic theory views work as a tradeoff between the utility of leisure and the
utility of the consumption that increased work allows. An individual at each age chooses
to work that number of hours which equates the marginal utility gained through these
wages to the marginal utility lost from reduced leisure time. Experience, health and
vitality, and other factors that vary over the life cycle affect the productivity of labor and,
therefore, its wage value. But they also influence the utility of leisure. Variations with
age in the competing demands on time at home, for example due to child rearing, also
affect the opportunity cost of work. At some ages, the optimal choice may be not to work
at all. In theory, with perfect credit markets, these decisions made at different ages are all
closely linked over the life cycle. You can choose not to work and yet to consume at age
27, for example, by borrowing based on earnings you anticipate at age 52 with due
account taken of discount rates and survival probabilities. In addition to entering the labor
force or staying at home, individuals may spend time investing in their human capital
through education or training, thereby raising their future earnings. Once working, they
may devote some time to maintaining or upgrading skills, or they may let them decline.
Work experience itself tends to raise productivity and wages.
         As with consumption, the real world is more complex. Credit markets are
imperfect. Workers do not have complete flexibility in choosing their hours. Institutions
may constrain wages to rise with age through seniority systems, regardless of
productivity. The productivity of labor, and therefore wages, will depend on
macroeconomic conditions that are outside the control and foresight of an individual.
Public pension programs may be unexpectedly instituted or terminated, altering the life
cycle budget constraint and perhaps introducing strong incentives to retire from the labor
force or return to work. Changes in tax policies may alter the tradeoff between work and

3
  Also see Attanasio, O.P., J. Banks, C. Meghir, and G. Weber. 1999. "Humps and Bumps in Lifetime
Consumption." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 17(1):22-35., which provides support for the
lifecycle model.


                                                   5
leisure. Unemployment may thwart individual plans, and age discrimination may prevent
older people from finding work.
        Aside from these contextual factors, it appears that individual productivity varies
by age. Skirbekk (2003) reviews a dozen studies, concluding that they point to an inverse
U-shaped individual productivity profile, with significant decreases taking place from
around 50 years of age. There are a number of reasons for declining productivity at older
ages. A large body of literature supports the view that mental abilities decline during
adulthood (Maitland et al. 2000, Verhaegen and Salthouse, 1997). Poor physical and
mental health is also strongly related to early retirement (Quinn et. al. 1990; Bound,
1991, Dwyer and Mitchell, 1999). Rapid technological progress has an uneven influence
on skills and competencies by age (Autor et. al. 2003). Rapid changes in educational
systems might also give middle-aged and younger workers a competitive advantage over
their older counterparts.
        All these factors can vary over time and between countries, leading to differences
and changes in the way earnings vary with age. Perhaps most important, however, are the
decisions made by three demographic groups. First, many teenagers and young adults are
extending their time in school and delaying their entry into the labor force as returns to
education rise. Second, many women are increasing the time spent in the labor force as
rates of childbearing have declined and labor market opportunities have improved. Third,
older men are withdrawing from the labor force at a younger age as incomes have risen
and pensions have become available.

Methods for Constructing Consumption Profiles
Consumption consists of private and public components. Age patterns of private
consumption have been much more extensively analyzed, but public consumption – the
consumption of in-kind transfers from the public sector – are important to developing a
full picture of the lifecycle of consumption.

Private Consumption
Consumer expenditure surveys provide information on household level consumption
expenditures. Many studies have addressed the problem of allocating these consumption
expenditures between adults and children, typically as part of an effort to estimate the
costs of children. Much less is known about the allocation of household consumption
between prime age adults and the elderly. This issue is not important in societies where
the elderly live independently because their consumption can be directly observed. In
societies where multigenerational living arrangements are common, the issue is an
important one about which relatively little is known.
        The general approach taken in the literature is based on some measure of the
consumption utility of the adults in a household. With such a measure, we can ask by
how much the total consumption of a household with one additional child would have to
be increased in order to restore the adults’ consumption utility to its original level. The
size of the increase measures the cost of that incremental child.
        The Engel method uses the share of the household budget spent on food as the
measure of adult welfare. It has been used extensively (Espenshade, 1984), but it is also
widely criticized on conceptual grounds. The difficulty with the method is that children
may be more intensive consumers of food than are adults. If so, families with more


                                             6
children would spend a larger share of their budgets on food because their real income is
lower, but also because the household’s preferences are tilted toward food. Thus, children
would appear to reduce the parent’s welfare more, and therefore to cost more, than is
actually the case. The consensus among researchers is that Engel’s method yields an
upward biased estimate of the cost of children. On a priori grounds we can only say that
Engel’s method will generally yield a biased result (Deaton 1997).
        In the Rothbarth method, the welfare metric is the level of spending on goods that
are consumed mainly by adults, usually taken to be tobacco, alcohol, and adult clothing.
The Rothbarth method does not suffer from the same problem as Engel’s method because
these adult goods are not consumed by children. The Rothbarth method, however, must
assume that the presence of children in the household has no direct effect on the utility
that adults derive from consuming their adult goods. Children must affect adult
consumption of these goods only because they reduce the amount parents can spend on
themselves. If the presence of children induces parents to smoke and drink more because
of stress, for example, the Rothbarth method yields an under-estimate of the cost of
children, and vice versa. Views vary as to whether or not this assumption is plausible.
        Several practical difficulties with the Rothbarth method limit its application. First,
in some instances the only adult goods available are tobacco and alcohol. Expenditure on
these is insensitive to income, owing to their addictive characteristics. Furthermore, in
some societies alcohol and tobacco are rarely consumed. Second, the method cannot be
used to allocate consumption among adults of different ages, and it is often contaminated
by the presence of older children, who may also consume the “adult” goods. This leads to
an underestimate of the cost of these children. While the Rothbarth method cannot be
used to estimate expenditures for the elderly, the Engel method can be used to estimate
age-profiles of consumption for all ages, but the flaws in the method make it relatively
unattractive.
        Estimates are often reported in the form of equivalence scales which express the
consumption going to different ages relative to that of a prime age adult. These scales are
often called Equivalent Adult Consumer scales, or EAC. These have been estimated for
many countries, both developing and developed, using the Engel and Rothbarth methods.
It would be useful to address several questions. First, are the available methods robust?
Do they yield plausible estimates of child costs when applied in varying contexts?
Second, do the available methods suggest similar or substantially different equivalence
scales when applied to the same data? If similar, the biases identified in the literature may
be tolerable in practical applications. Third, does the comparison of estimates using the
same method across countries or time yield useful information about changes or
differences in child costs?
        Despite the extensive literature on equivalence scales, it is not yet clear to what
extent these questions can be answered. Table 1 reports estimates of equivalence scales
for Indonesia based on the 1996 socio-economic survey (SUSENAS; Maliki, 2005).
Results from three methods are reported – the Engel method and, the Rothbarth method,
and Ray’s demographic method, a variant of the Engel’s method which uses budget
shares for several expenditure items rather than just food. The Rothbarth method was
estimated using tobacco and adult clothing to represent adult goods. 4 The results are not

4
 Although alcohol is not illegal in Indonesia, the population is predominantly Islamic. Thus, alcohol is not
an appropriate variable.


                                                     7
reassuring. The one consistent finding is that children consume less than adults. The
Engel method and Ray method both yield high estimates for children. The Rothbarth
method yields very low estimates, with children under five having a negative cost. The
age pattern also varies across methods. Costs decline with age according to the Engel
method, increase with age according to the Rothbarth estimates, and are non-monotonic
according to the Ray method.
        If the Engel method is upward biased and the Rothbarth method is downward
biased, then the true value would lie somewhere in between. However, it cannot be
conclusively demonstrated that the true value in fact lies between the two estimates.
        These difficulties have led us to adopt a simple and transparent approach to
allocating consumption to household members. First, we allocate education and health
expenditures to members using a method similar to one employed by Attanasio et al.
(1999). We regress total household education expenditures on the number of household
members in each age group enrolled in school and the number of household members not
enrolled, with the intercept suppressed. Private health expenditures are allocated using a
similar regression approach, using numbers of household members in each age group as
regressors. For some age groups, private health spending might be very low and
estimated coefficients may sometimes be negative. To avoid this happening, health
spending can be constrained to be non-negative.
        Second, other household consumption is allocated to individuals using an ad hoc
allocation rule. The allocation rule is based on an extensive review of the literature and
follows the advice of Deaton (1997) that an ad hoc approach to child costs is probably the
preferred approach, given problems of the Engel and Rothbarth methods. He suggests
that children age 0-4 be 0.4 of an adult and the children age 5-14 be 0.5 and children 15
and older be 1. We employ a more continuous, but similar equivalence scale, which is
equal to 1 for adults aged 20 or older, declines linearly from unity at age 20 to 0.4 at age
4 and below.
        Using these methods, we estimate consumption for each individual in each
household in the sample. We average across all the individuals in the survey of a given
age to construct age schedules of private expenditures on education, on health, and on
other items. Often, expenditures are underreported in surveys, so some further adjustment
of the age profiles may be desirable to make them consistent with reliable national level
control totals for total private expenditures on health, on education, and on the balance of
total private consumption. National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) and other
reliable public statistical sources provide suitable control data. In this way, the profiles
can be made consistent with NIPA, in general, and private and government final
consumption expenditure, in particular.

Public Consumption
Public transfer programs are classified according to the following list of 11 expenditure
categories—Public goods and services; Congestible goods and services; Health;
Education; Sickness and disability; Old age; Survivors; Family and children;
Unemployment; Housing; and Other. This classification scheme is based on the United
Nation’s COFOG (Classification of Functions of Government) System. COFOG was
developed by the UN in order to harmonize the accounting of government expenditures
among the member nations.


                                             8
        Our approach is to assign the benefits to the individual for whom the government
intends them. For example, an educational voucher might be provided by the government
to the parents of school-age children. In this case, the benefits are assigned to the children
who are receiving the education, not to the parents who received the voucher. In some
cases the government may provide a single cash payment to an adult in the household on
behalf of all members of the household. In this case, each household member is assigned
their share of this benefit.
        For estimation, we would like to know the cost of the service provided to the
individual by the government. Survey data are unlikely to include such costs, but they can
be calculated from administrative data. For example, Medicare (US) administrative data
such as the Current Beneficiary Survey contain information on the medical costs of
individuals. These data can be used to derive age profiles of costs of Medicare benefits.
        If we lack information on the actual costs incurred for services to individuals, then
we obtain information on program usage. For example, hospital admissions data by age
are used to develop an age profile of medical costs. If we lack information on program
use, then the minimum data we need is program participation, for example, school
enrollment rates by age. We can improve our estimate by using public school enrollment
rates rather than general enrollment rates which include public and private schooling. We
can further improve estimates by disaggregating by grade level of schooling since costs
may differ substantially by grade level.
        Many public goods and services are not targeted at particular age groups. We
allocate these equally to all members of the population.

Methods for Constructing Earnings Profiles
Estimating labor income is straight-forward using individual survey data. It is the sum of
earnings, fringe benefits, other labor income, and a share of entrepreneurial (self-
employment) income. Entrepreneurial income is typically not reported in a manner that
allows for decomposition into returns to labor versus returns to assets. Thus, we assign a
pre-defined age invariant portion of individual entrepreneurial income as a return to
labor. The labor income of an individual is then the sum of these individual components
of compensation.
        In the case of Taiwan, self-employment income is provided on an individual basis
and individual labor income is estimated directly as described above. However, in the
US, entrepreneurial income is provided at the household level. In this case, we allocate it
to individual members using a regression model, similar to that used in allocating
household health and education expenditures. Household self-employment
(entrepreneurial) income is regressed, with the intercept suppressed, on the total number
of household members who are self-employed and the proportion of self-employed
members in each age group. Analysis of the data for several other countries with
individual entrepreneurial income indicates that the regression method is reliable.
          Our earning age profiles are expressed per member of the population so they also
 reflect labor force participation rates, and reflect the average earnings of men and
 women.




                                              9
Public and Private Consumption
The consumption side of the economic lifecycle depends on both public and private
consumption, but their relative importance is not easily judged. Private consumption is
larger than public consumption. Many public programs, however, target particular age
groups – education for the young, health care for the elderly. Important public programs,
e.g., pension programs, family allowances, or unemployment benefits, provide cash
rather than in-kind transfers. These programs lead to increases in private rather than in
public consumption affecting the economic lifecycle indirectly. An additional
complexity is that public consumption may crowd out private consumption with little
effect on the composition or age pattern of total consumption. Thus, the public-private
breakdown of consumption provides useful and suggestive information, but it is by no
means definitive about how public policy influences the age pattern of total consumption.

Public Consumption
The importance of public consumption varies quite substantially across countries (Table
2). In general, public consumption as a share of total consumption rises with per capita
income, but demographic and institutional factors play very important roles. Public
spending on health and education rise more sharply with income than does combined
public spending, suggesting that age targeting is more important in high income
countries. The relationship between the level of economic development and public
consumption holds to some extent for the five countries compared below. Public
consumption as a share of total consumption was smallest in Indonesia and Thailand and
largest in France and the United States. Pubic spending on health is highest in France
and the US, countries with both higher income and older populations. Public spending on
education is high in France and the US, but also in Thailand which has lower income but
a relatively large school-age population. The substantial variation among the five
countries compared in Table 2 stands out, suggesting the importance of country-specific
institutional factors.

<INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE>

Results for Consumption
There is a striking contrast between the cross-sectional age profiles of total consumption
for Taiwan and the US, as shown in Figure1a and 1b. In the US, consumption rises by
150% from birth to the early 20s; in Taiwan the corresponding increase is only 67%. In
the US, consumption rises by a further 67% from the early 20s to age 90, whereas in
Taiwan, there is virtually no increase at all over this age range. In total, consumption
more than quadruples from birth to age 90 in the US, while in Taiwan it grows by only
two thirds.

<Figure 1. Per Capita Consumption, Private and Public by Sector, United States, 2000
and Taiwan, 1998. ABOUT HERE>

To be sure, these cross sections are a poor guide to the longitudinal changes for actual
generations, which in Taiwan have been exceptionally rapid as we will see later, whereas


                                            10
in the US they have been relatively slow. Nonetheless, these age profiles do tell us about
the age gradient in consumption in any given year, and this gradient is flat in Taiwan for
adult ages, and steeply sloped across all ages in the US. We believe that the family
support system for the elderly in Taiwan, versus public sector transfers for the elderly in
the US, lies behind this difference.
        Age targeting of public consumption is less important in Taiwan than in the US.
Public education targets school age children with a noticeable affect on their total
consumption, but public education is less important in Taiwan. Note, however, that
private education consumption is very high and that total spending on education is higher
in Taiwan than in the US. Taiwan relies on national health insurance to fund health care
spending and as a consequence (since all insurance is counted as private consumption,
even if offered by the government) virtually all spending on health care is a component of
private consumption. Taiwan’s National Health Insurance program was introduced in
1995 and by 1998 was 4.7% of total consumption as compared 6.4% for US Medicare
and Medicaid. The elderly consume only modestly more health care services financed
through NHI than do the young in Taiwan, whereas the US program is limited to those 65
and older. Private consumption of health care by the elderly in Taiwan, including NHI-
funded care, is not much more important than private consumption of health care by US
elderly. This may be one reason why consumption by the elderly in Taiwan is somewhat
lower than consumption by prime age adults and why total consumption does not rise
with age for the elderly. Similarly, that private consumption declines with age in the US
cross-section may merely reflect substitution of public for private health care spending in
the US as compared with Taiwan.
        Figure 2 charts the age profile of public consumption by age relative to average
public consumption for all those aged 0 to 85 for the US, Taiwan, Indonesia, Thailand,
and France. In the absence of any age targeting, the profile would equal 1 at all ages. The
extent of age targeting is most easily judged by comparing values for those in the 30-59
age groups. Judged in this way, the US and France target public consumption the most,
while Indonesia targets public consumption the least. The extent of targeting in Thailand
is similar to that in France, however, and the extent of Taiwan’s targeting is similar to
Indonesia’s. Again, there is danger in looking at components of consumption as
compared with total consumption, because public policy in Taiwan influences health
consumption via public insurance rather than through the direct provision of health care.

<Figure 2. Per Capita Public Consumption Age Profile ABOUT HERE>

        The age profile shows us the relative age orientation of public consumption in
each country. The US and French programs target the young and the old. In the case of
France, the allocation is roughly balanced with the young and the old receiving similar
levels of public consumption. In the US, the program is biased more toward the elderly,
particularly those 75 and older. In Taiwan, Indonesia, and Thailand the programs are
dominated by consumption by the young to the extent that they are age targeted at all. In
Indonesia age targeting is quite limited as compared to Taiwan or Thailand.




                                            11
Private Consumption
Most consumption is private rather than public, and in many important areas, food,
housing, and clothing, for example, the private sector dominates. The public sector is
also important, particularly in education and health. In some instances, the overall shape
of the consumption profile differs significantly from the private sector, as we saw for the
United States elderly. By and large, however, it is private consumption that dominates the
consumption side of the lifecycle equation.
        Estimates of consumption profiles are presented for four countries in Figure 3.
These estimates are based on the standard NTA methodology and, hence, the differences
across countries are not due to the use of different methods nor to different allocation
rules within households. To make the estimated profiles more easily comparable, we have
divided each age schedule by the unweighted average of per capita consumption at each
age over the range 0 to 85. Thus, a value of 0.5 at some age implies that a person at that
age consumes half the average annual amount over the first 86 years of life (assuming
perfect survival).

<Figure 3. Age Profiles of Private Consumption, Four Economies. ABOUT HERE>

         There are two distinctive patterns apparent in Figure 3. The Asian profiles are
more or less similar. Consumption rises rapidly with age from a value of about 0.4 among
new-borns to a value of 1 for those in their mid- to late-teens. For prime-age adults
consumption ranges from the lifetime mean to 25 percent higher than the mean among
younger adults. Private consumption among adults declines gradually with age to a
somewhat greater extent in Thailand and Indonesia than in Taiwan. For those aged 65
and older, consumption varies from a high of about 10 percent above the lifetime mean to
a low of about 5 percent below the lifetime mean.
         Two other features of the Asian profiles are notable. One is the sharp increases
among children especially in Taiwan that reflect private spending on education. The
second is a pronounced generation-length cycle in the Taiwan consumption data. This is
a Chayanov cycle that reflects the variation in per capita household income in multi-
generation families, as their age composition changes. The peaks of the consumption
profile correspond to ages at which two generations – those in their late twenties and late
fifties – are employed.
         The US pattern is quite different from the Asian. Relative consumption by
children is consistently lower than in the three Asian cases. Consumption by newborns at
0.29 is particularly low which bears further investigation in light of the importance of
consumption at this age to subsequent child development. While young adults have
relatively high consumption in the Asian cases, this is not true in the US. Those in their
early twenties are consuming about 20 percent below the lifetime US mean. Private
consumption continues to increase with age in the US reaching a peak at about 35 percent
above the lifetime mean in the mid-50s. Thereafter consumption declines with age and at
a faster clip than in the Asian cases. By age 85 US private consumption is about 10
percent above the lifetime mean, which is a bit higher than in Thailand and Indonesia, but
similar to Taiwan.
         What accounts for the differences in these age patterns? First, consider
consumption by children, which is tied to consumption by their parents. Consumption by


                                            12
children is low in the US because children live in households which have low levels of
consumption. The connection between consumption by adults of childrearing age and
children is far from one-to-one, however. First, the rate of childbearing obviously
matters. If parents have more children, then per capita consumption by both parents and
children will be depressed. Second, the relationship between fertility and income
matters. If low income (low consumption) adults have high fertility then consumption by
children will be depressed. Third, the variance of childbearing matters. If the variance is
high, a larger percentage of children will live in large families with lower per capita
consumption than if the variance is low.
        Next consider adult consumption. One possible explanation is that the age profiles
of consumption are influenced by the age profiles of current labor income. Consumption
by young adults (and their children) may be lower in the US relative to older adults
because young adults earn less relative to older adults in the US as compared to Asia.
We will see later that labor income peaks at a younger age in these three Asian countries
than in the US, but this explains a relatively small part of the difference in the
consumption pattern. A final and important explanation is that private intergenerational
transfers are much more important in the Asian countries than in the US. A much higher
percentage of Asians live in multi-generation households, pool their budgets, and share
standards of living.

Private Education
A potentially important explanation for the high level of private consumption of children
and young adults in the Asian cases is a strong commitment to education. Emphasis on
education is often mentioned as a key ingredient in East Asian economic success. Private
spending on education is very high in Japan and Taiwan, as shown in Figure 4, and in
South Korea (not shown). High spending on private education is not confined to East
Asia – private spending in Brazil rivals that in Taiwan.

<Figure 4. Private Education Consumption by Age. ABOUT HERE>

        Private spending by age reported in Figure 4 was estimated directly for each
country using the standard NTA methodology described above. A relatively broad
measure of education is used that includes pre-school costs and tutoring where it is
available. The values are normalized by dividing by the average consumption of an adult
30 or older. The rather astonishing level of spending on private education in Japan stands
out. Among children aged 16-18 private spending averages nearly half of the average
adult private consumption of all goods and services. A substantial part of this
expenditure is devoted to Juku – private tutoring that prepares students for college
entrance examinations. High levels of spending are not limited to these age groups in
Japan, however. Total education spending for ages 0 to 23 for the cross-section or
synthetic cohort adds up to 4.1 years of mean adult consumption.
        Private spending on education in Taiwan and Brazil does not match the levels in
Japan, but it is very high in any event. In Brazil and Taiwan lifetime spending for the
synthetic cohort on education is 3.3 and 3.4 years of mean adult consumption,
respectively. Lifetime spending is much less in the other countries for which estimates
are available. In Thailand 0.8 years of adult consumption is devoted to education; in the



                                            13
US and France the figure is 0.7 years. The case of Indonesia is intermediate with 1.5
years of adult consumption devoted to education.

Summarizing
In many respects the US and Taiwan represent polar cases with respect to the cross-
sectional consumption profiles. Ignoring some important details discussed above, the
Asian countries for which estimates are presented have similar private consumption
profiles, lower levels of spending on public spending, and public sectors that emphasize
education more and health less. The evidence is far too fragmented, however, to suggest
that there is a general Asian pattern.
        The differences and similarities between the age profiles of consumption for the
US and Taiwan are summarized in Table 3. The values are constructed for a synthetic
cohort subject to the period survival rates from the 1985-89 US life table and the per
capita age profiles for the US and Taiwan. The mean age of consumption is younger in
Taiwan than in the United States by 4.7 years. What accounts for this large difference?
One can formally answer the question using the data in Table 3 and decomposition
techniques, because the mean age is equal to weighted sum of the mean ages of the
components where the weights are the consumption shares. Here we take a more
informal approach.

<Table 3 ABOUT HERE>

        First, consider private versus public. In both sectors, the mean age of
consumption is lower in Taiwan than in the US. The difference is 3.6 years for private
consumption and a much larger 7.9 years for public consumption. However, because
private consumption is three to four times the magnitude of public consumption, the
private and public sectors have effects of similar magnitude.
        Second, education can have a potentially large effect on the mean age of
consumption. Because the mean age of education consumption is so different than the
average age of total consumption, increases in the share of education lead to a relatively
large effect on the overall mean. In both the US and Taiwan, the mean age of education
consumption is more than 25 years less than the mean age of consumption. The high
level of private education spending in Taiwan reduces both the mean age of private
consumption and the mean of total consumption. The effect on the mean age of total
consumption is partially offset by the higher level of public consumption of education in
the United States.
        Third and clearly of great importance is the effect of high public spending on
health in the United States. Private spending on health is of roughly equal importance in
Taiwan and the US and the mean ages are similar. But public spending on health in the
US is 7.0 percent of the total. Moreover, the mean age of consumption of publicly
provided health exceeds the mean age of total consumption by more than twenty years,
reflecting the importance of Medicare and institutional Medicaid (for nursing home care).
        Finally, not to be overlooked is other private consumption. The difference in the
mean ages is 3.3 years. This is an important difference given that private other
consumption accounts for roughly two-thirds of total consumption in both Taiwan and
the US. By itself this accounts for more than two years of the difference in the means



                                           14
ages of total consumption. It underlines the significant difference in private consumption
between the US and Asian countries described above. Differences in education spending
and health spending do not, by themselves, explain why private consumption favors the
young in Taiwan and the old in the United States.

Cross-sectional estimates of labor earnings
The shape of the age profiles of labor income for the eight economies considered here are
similar, at a broad level, and familiar. An inverse U-shape predominates (Figure 5).
Although in some traditional societies, labor income remains high at older ages, this is
not the case for any of the countries included here. Even in Indonesia where income is
relatively low and agricultural and informal employment dominates, the contribution to
lifetime earnings of work after age 65 is small. This is not a direct consequence of
mortality, because the cross-sectional per capita calculations discussed in this section,
and the previous section, are conditioned on survival – that is the cross-section is treated
as a synthetic cohort assumed to survive until age 85. In all cases the great bulk of
lifetime earnings is concentrated in the ages 25 to 64.

<Figure 5. Per Capita Labor Income Profile, Selected Countries. ABOUT HERE>

        There are important systematic differences in the age earnings profile across
countries, however. The two most distinctive features in Figure 5 are the age at which
earnings peak and the importance of earnings in old age. The peak age varies from age
37 in Indonesia to age 49 in the United States – a difference of 12 years. The share of
lifetime earnings by those 65 and older varies from a high of 7.5 percent in Brazil and
Taiwan to a low of 0.9 percent in France. The age at which earnings peak is strongly
related to the level of development. In the three most advanced economies, the US,
Japan, and France, earnings peak at age 48 or 49. Earnings in Brazil, Indonesia, and
Urban China peak at a relatively young age, while Taiwan and Thailand are intermediate.
        The elderly share of earnings does not vary strongly with development. The
earnings of the elderly are relatively important in the US and Japan, but almost trivial in
France due to early retirement. The earnings of the elderly in Brazil and Taiwan are
important, while they are small in Indonesia, Thailand, and Urban China.
        A third potentially important feature of the age earnings profile is the child’s
share of lifetime earnings – defined here as the share earned by those under the age of 25.
The variation across countries is relatively small. With the exception of Indonesia, the
other child shares fall between 6.1 and 9.0 percent (Table 4). In Indonesia, the child
share is 15.3 percent.

        What are the sources of the differences in these age patterns? A detailed
explanation of why earnings peak later in high income than in low income countries is
not pursued here, but a range of explanations are possible and the patterns are intriguing.
Earnings rise fastest with age in the lower income countries, even though ample research
shows that wages rise faster in industrial countries for those with more education. In
Japan, the seniority wage system ties wages much more closely to experience than in the
United States, but the age earnings profiles of the two countries are barely
distinguishable. To some extent the share of earnings of the elderly is broadly consistent


                                            15
with studies of the effects of pension and tax systems on labor incentives (Gruber and
Wise, 2001; Gruber and Wise, 1999). As expected, the earnings shares of the elderly in
Taiwan, the US, and Japan are quite high and in France quite low. But the low earnings
share of the elderly in Urban China, where public pension systems are under-developed,
and the high share in Brazil, where public pensions systems are very substantial, are
surprising.
        Clearly the broad measure of labor production emphasized here provides a
different perspective as compared with more narrowly prescribed analyses that
emphasize, for example, the wage profile for men. Institutional factors such as the
seniority wage system and economic structure may prove to play a less important role
than commonly believed.

Considering the consumption and earning profiles
together
 So far, we have been considering consumption and earnings separately. It is also
 interesting to consider them together, for it is together that they determine the periods of
 economic dependency and the roles of intergenerational transfers. Table 5 summarizes
 and compares consumption and labor income profiles for five countries. The upper
 panel reports the two crossing points, the youngest age and oldest age at which labor
 earning exceeds total consumption, and the span of years between these. There are
 striking differences between the US, Taiwan and Thailand, where young adults don’t
 break even until age 25 or 26, and Indonesia, where they break even at age 20.

 <Table 5 ABOUT HERE>

 Differences at the other crossing age are smaller, but elders become net consumer
 earliest in Taiwan and the US after ages 56 and 57; and in Thailand and Indonesia after
 ages 59 and 60. The corresponding spans of net producing ages range from low values
 of only 31 years in Taiwan and the US, versus 40 years in Indonesia, with Thailand at 33
 in between. These features of the economic life cycle can differ because of varying
 amounts of capital income versus labor income; differing levels of saving; differing
 enrollment in higher education, short-run economic fluctuations, differences in public
 policy and social systems; but also due to higher or lower support ratios which will raise
 or lower the whole consumption profile relative to the labor earnings profile across
 countries. We have not yet tried to parse out the specific factors responsible for the
 differences shown in the Table.
        It is also interesting to compare the average ages of consumption and production
for a synthetic cohort in these countries. Again, the mean ages are based on the per
capita labor income and consumption profiles of each country, weighted by the US
survival rates. The differences between these average ages indicate the direction and
distance of reallocations of income across age within a synthetic life cycle, assuming a
zero discount rate.
        We find that these reallocations are slightly upwards in the US (average age of
consumption is 45.3 and the average age of earning is 44.4), while for Thailand they are
slightly downwards (with a mean age of consumption at 41.5 and earning at 42.4). The



                                             16
reallocations would traverse a greater age range elsewhere – in a downward direction in
Taiwan and in the upward direction in Indonesia.
         It is striking that the US and Indonesia are grouped together as having net upward
transfers given the many differences between these two countries. The mean age is very
late in the US as compared with every other country, apparently due to the important role
of Medicare expenditures on the elderly. This factor is counter-balanced to some extent
by the late average age of earning. Indonesia, on the other hand, has a low mean age of
consumption and a very low mean age of earning. To some extent both the earnings and
consumption profiles reflect the schooling decisions being made there.

Changes in Consumption and Labor Income over Time
Time series of private consumption and labor income age profiles have been estimated to
this point only for Taiwan, from 1977 to 2002, and for the United States, from 1980 to
2000. A comparison of these two economies is quite interesting, however, for a variety
of reasons, but particularly because of the great difference in their rates of economic
growth. Here we will examine the rates of growth by age. We leave the examination of
the cohort trends for another occasion.
        Figure 6 plots the average annual growth in real private consumption and labor
income at each age. To remove the effects of short-term fluctuations, the estimates are
based on five-year centered moving averages of the age profiles. Labor income for
persons aged x in year t is the average of labor income of persons aged x for years t-2 to
t+2. The time series are thereby reduced to 1979-1999 for Taiwan and for 1982-1997 for
the US. The growth rates are presented only for ages 15 and older as those who were
younger had no significant labor income in either economy.

<Figure 6. Annual Growth of Private Consumption and Labor Income by Age, Real,
Taiwan 1979-1999 and the US 1982-1997. ABOUT HERE>

         As should come as no surprise, the growth rates for both private consumption and
labor income in Taiwan are substantially higher than in the US. For Taiwan, the age-
profiles of consumption and labor income increased at annual real rates of 5.5% and 4.6%
per year, respectively. The age profiles of consumption and labor income in the US
shifted upwards at real annual rates of 1.9% and 1.3%. 5 Growth in Taiwan was
spectacular; in the US it was moderate.
         The stability of the age-profile of private consumption in Taiwan is remarkable.
Consumption of those in their thirties and those in their mid-seventies and older grew
somewhat faster than average. Consumption by those in their late fifties and early sixties
grew somewhat slower than average. Overall, however, there is virtually no generational
shift in consumption in Taiwan during this period. The lack of change is all the more
surprising given the many other dramatic changes in Taiwan during this period, e.g.,
rapid economic growth and large changes in age structure. We believe that this sustained
equality across adult ages reflects resource sharing within co-residential households, in
contrast to the nuclear families of the U.S.

5
 Values are calculated using survival weights to calculate average private consumption and labor income
and explained in more detail above.


                                                   17
         The consumption profile growth rates for the US are clearly more rapid above age
50 than below, with a difference of nearly one percent per year. 6 This difference is
substantial in comparison with the average US growth rate during this period.
         The labor income growth rates vary more with age than the consumption growth
rates in both economies, more so in Taiwan than in the US. Certain features are common
to both economies. The slowest growth was at the youngest ages – among teenagers in
Taiwan and twenty-year-olds in the United States. The most rapid growth was at older
ages – those in their mid-seventies and older in Taiwan and those in their sixties and
older in the US. Note that at the highest ages, labor income in both economies is
relatively low and a large percentage increase does not translate into a large absolute
increase. In Taiwan, the labor income of adults near conventional retirement age grew
much more slowly than the labor income of younger adults.
         Is there any connection between private consumption and labor income? The
simple correlation between the age profiles of the growth rates of private consumption
and labor income are 0.80 in the US and 0.50 in Taiwan. The size of the ‘effects’ are
modest, however. An increase in the rate of growth of labor income by one percentage
point is associated with a 0.26 percentage point increase in the rate of growth of private
consumption in the US and a 0.09 percentage point increase in Taiwan. This is a rather
modest amount of tracking, but reflects in part the inclusion of age groups (the young and
the old) for which labor income is relatively unimportant. If we consider only those aged
21 to 60, the partial effect rises to 0.59 in the US and 0.49 in Taiwan; the simple
correlation increases to 0.70 in Taiwan and 0.87 in the US. The effects are substantial,
but still well below a value of one. This suggests that current earnings are to some extent
driving private consumption, but there are also variations in consumption growth that
exhibit a considerable degree of independence from variations in labor income.

Conclusions
    Understanding the economic lifecycle – how it varies and why – is important in its own
    right, but is also critical to understanding how changes in population age structure
    influence many features of the macroeconomy. There are few previous efforts,
    however, to estimate how consumption and production of individuals vary over the
    entire lifespan. A number of technical difficulties, some of which are described above,
    create substantial hurdles to such an enterprise.
             We have presented estimates of labor earnings and consumption for a wide range
    of contemporary economies, including mature economies, rapidly growing economies,
    and low-income countries, from the West and from the East. The estimated cross-
    sectional age profiles of labor income are broadly similar and the hump shape is
    consistent with our expectations. However, there are striking contrasts in the timing of
    earnings over the life cycle, with the peak age ranging from 37 in Indonesia to 49 in the
    U.S.
             The consumption profiles reveal even more striking contrasts, starting with the
    flat age profile of total consumption in Taiwan and the steeply rising one for the U.S.,
    which we believe reflects the extended family versus the state as the primary locus of
    transfers to the elderly. Profiles for private consumption are also quite variable, with

6
    Calculated by regressing the growth rate of private consumption on age.


                                                      18
Indonesia peaking early around age 25, Taiwan being essentially flat, and the US
peaking late at around 55. Private expenditures on education show wide variations, with
unusually high expenditures in some Asian countries. Because of possible public-private
substitutions, it is questionable to assign causality to either for differences in total
consumption, but it is hard to avoid noticing that without public spending on Medicare
and institutional Medicaid in the U.S., total consumption would decline after 55,
whereas with them, it rises strongly.
         Considering the consumption and earnings profiles together, we are surprised by
the short period of life during which individuals are producing more than they are
consuming – barely more than 30 years in the US, Taiwan, and Thailand. The brevity of
this phase contrasts sharply with high life expectancy, approaching 80 years in many
countries.
         We have also looked at two decades of change in the U.S. and in Taiwan. The
stability of the Taiwan consumption profile is remarkable in light of its extraordinary
economic growth, and we attribute this stability to the extended family. In the US we
find that consumption at older ages has been rising over time considerably faster than in
childhood, increasing the steepness of the lifecycle consumption gradient.
         Many important questions remain to be explored, and we look forward both to
broadening the analysis to include the experience of more countries and to deepening it
by probing the causes of the differences we observe.




                                          19
Sources: Figures and Tables
France (1996): Zuber. S. (2004)
Indonesia (1996): Maliki. (2005)
Taiwan (1998): Mason et al. (2005)
Thailand (1998): Amonthep, C. (2005)
US (2000): Mason et al. (2005)
Brazil (1996): Turra and Queiroz (2005)
Japan (1999): Ogawa and Matsukura (2005)
Urban China (2000): Wang and Mason (2005)

References
Amonthep, C. 2005. National Transfer Account Project, http://www.schemearts.com/
        proj/nta/.
Attanasio, O.P., J. Banks, C. Meghir, and G. Weber. 1999. "Humps and Bumps in
        Lifetime Consumption." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 17(1):22-
        35.
Autor, D.H., F. Levy, and R.J. Murnane. 2003. "The Skill Content of Recent
        Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration." Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 118(4): 1279-1334.
Becker, G.S. and H.G. Lewis. 1973. "On the Interaction Between the Quantity and
        Quality of Children." Journal of Political Economy 18(2):S279-S288.
Bound, J. 1991. "Self-reported versus Objective Measures of Health in Retirement
        Models." The Journal of Human Resources 26(1):106-138.
Carroll, C.D. 1992. "The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic
        Evidence." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity CXII(1):1-56.
Carroll, C.D. and L.H. Summers. 1991. "Consumption growth parallels income growth:
        Some new evidence." Pp. 305-343 in National Saving and Economic
        Performance: A National Bureau of Economic Research Project Report, edited by
        B.D. Bernheim and J.B. Shoven. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chayanov, A.V. 1966 [1925]. The Theory of Peasant Economy, translated by D. Thorner
        et al. Homewood, IL: R.D. Irwin.
Cutler, D. M., J. M. Poterba, L. Sheiner, and L. Summers. (1990). "An Aging Society:
        Opportunity or Challenge?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1):1-56.
Deaton, A. 1991. "Saving and Liquidity Constraints." Econometrica 59:1221-1248.
Deaton, A. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys : A Microeconomic Approach to
        Development Policy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Deaton, A. and C.H. Paxson. 1997. "The Effects of Economic and Population Growth on
        National Saving and Inequality." Demography 34(1):97-114.
Dwyer, D.S. and O. Mitchell. 1999. "Health Problems as Determinants of Retirement:
        Are Self-Rated Measures Endogenous?" Journal of Health Economics 18(2):173-
        193.
Easterlin, Richard A., "What Will 1984 Be Like?," Demography v.15 (November, 1978),
        pp.397-432
Espenshade, T. 1984. Investing in Children: New Estimates of Parental Expenditures.
        Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.


                                            20
Gruber, J.and D.A. Wise. 2001. "An International Perspective on Policies for an Aging
       Society." NBER Working Papers W8103.
Gruber, J.and D.A. Wise. 1999. "Introduction and Summary." pp. 437-474 in Social
       Security and Retirement around the World, edited by J. Gruber and D.A. Wise.
       Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.1, Center
       for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP),
       October 2002.
Lee, R. 1997. "Population Dynamics: Equilibrium, Disequilibrium, and Consequences of
       Fluctuations, Chapter 19." Pp. 1063-1115 in Handbook of Population and Family
       Economics, v.1B, edited by M.R. Rosenzweig and O. Stark. North Holland.
Lee, R. and R. Edwards. 2001. The Fiscal Impact of Population Change. Seismic Shifts:
       The Economic Impact of Demographic Change, edited by J. S. Little and R. K.
       Triest. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series, 46.
Lee, R. and R. Edwards (2002). The Fiscal Effects of Population Aging in the US:
       Assessing the Uncertainties. Tax Policy and Economy, edited by J.M. Poterba.
       NBER, MIT Press, 16: 141-181.
Lee, R. and K. Kramer. 2002. “Children’s Economic Roles in the Context of the Maya
       Family Life Cycle: Cain, Caldwell, and Chayanov Revisited.” Population and
       Development Review 28 (3):475-499.
Maitland, S. B., R. C. Intrieri, K. W. Schaie and S. L. Willis. 2000. "Gender Differences
       and Changes in Cognitive Abilities across the Adult Life Span." Aging,
       Neuropsychology, and Cognition 7(1):32-53.
Maliki. 2005. Three Essays on Education and Intergenerational Transfers, PhD
       Dissertation, Department of Economics, University of Hawaii.
Mankiw, N.G. and D.N. Weil. 1989. "The Baby Boom, The Baby Bust, and the Housing
       Market." Regional Science and Urban Economics 19(2):235-258.
Mason, A. 1987. National Saving Rates and Population Growth: A New Model and New
       Evidence. Pp.523-60 in Population Growth and Economic Development: Issues
       and Evidence. D. G. Johnson and R. D. Lee. Social Demography series, Madison,
       Wis.: University of Wisconsin Press.
Mason, A. 1988. "Saving, Economic Growth, and Demographic Change." Population
       and Development Review 14(1):113-44.
Mason, A., R. Lee, A. Tung, M. Lai, and T. Miller. 2005. "Population Aging and
       Intergenerational Transfers: Introducing Age into National Accounts", Annual
       Meeting of the Population Association of America, Philadelphia, PA, March
       31 - April 2, 2005.
McFadden, D. 1994. "Demographics, the Housing Market, and the Welfare of the
       Elderly." Pp. 225-285 in Studies in the Economics of Aging edited by D. Wise.
       Chicago: The University of Chicago Press and NBER.
Modigliani, F. 1988. "Measuring the Contribution of Intergenerational Transfers to
       Total Wealth: Conceptual Issues and Empirical Findings." Modeling the
       Accumulation and Distribution of Wealth, edited by D. Kessler and A. Mason.
       Oxford, Oxford University Press: 21-52.
Ogawa, N. and R. Matsukura. 2005. "The Role of Older Persons' Changing Health and
       Wealth in an Aging Society: The Case of Japan," United Nations Expert Group


                                           21
       Meeting on Social and Economic Implications of Changing Population Age
       Structures, Mexico City, August 31 - September 2, 2005
Poterba, J. M. 2004. "Population Aging and Financial Markets." Symposium on
       Global Demographic Change: Economic Impacts and Policy Challenges,
       Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Quinn, J.F., R. Burkhauser, and D.A. Myers. 1990. Passing the Torch: The Influence of
       Economic Incentives on Work and Retirement. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
       Institute for Employment Research.
Skirbekk, Vegard. 2003. "Age and Individual Productivity: A Literature Survey." MPIDR
       Working Paper 2003-028. (Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research,
       Rostock.)
Turra, C. and B. Queiroz. 2005. "Before it's too late: Demographic Transition, Labor
       Supply and Social Security Problems in Brazil". United Nations Expert Group
       Meeting on Social and Economic Implications of Changing Population Age
       Structures, Mexico City, August 31 - September 2, 2005
Verhaegen, P. and T. A. Salthouse. 1997. "Meta-Analyses of Age-Cognition Relations in
       Adulthood. Estimates of Linear and Nonlinear Age Effects and Structural
       Models.” Psychological Bulletin 122(3):231-249.
Waldman, D. A. and B. J. Avolio 1986. “A Meta-Analysis of Age Differences in Job
       Performance.”, Journal of Applied Psychology, No. 71, pp. 33-38.
Wang Feng and Andrew Mason. 2005. "Demographic Dividends and Prospects for
       Economic Development in China," United Nations Expert Group Meeting on
       Social and Economic Implications of Changing Population Age Structure,
       Mexico City, 31 August - 2 September.
Zuber, S. 2004. National Transfer Account Project, http://www.schemearts.com/
       proj/nta/.




                                         22
Tables
Table 1. Alternative estimates of equivalence scales, Indonesia, 1996.
Method           0-4                5-9                10-14          Notes
Engel’s          0.87               0.72               0.62
Rothbarth        <0                 0.06               0.32           Cigarettes
Rothbarth        <0                 0.22               0.64           Adult clothing
Ray              0.88               0.91               0.83
Source: Maliki (2005) and calculation by authors.

Table 2. Government Share of Final Consumption Expenditure, 2000, Selected Countries
and Countries of the World by Per Capita Income.
                               Government Share of Final Consumption Expenditure (%)
Name (Per Capita GDP)             Total               Health               Education
Indonesia ($2,807)                 9.6                 0.8                    2.0
Thailand ($5,846)                 16.5                 3.1                    7.9
Taiwan ($14,114)                  19.3                 0.3                    3.9
France ($23,225)                  29.8                 9.1                    7.4
US ($31,338)                      23.8                 6.4                    5.8

Per Capita GDP
Less than $1,000                  15.6                2.2                  3.0
$1,000-4,999                      16.1                2.9                  4.5
$5,000-9,999                      20.7                4.6                  5.9
$10,000 or more                   25.4                7.1                  7.0
Notes and Sources: Per capita GDP is purchasing power parity adjusted using 1995 prices.
Source is World Bank World Development Indicators 2004, except for Taiwan for which
source is DGBAS Statistical Yearbook of Taiwan 2004 and Mason et al. (2004). For the US
Medicare and Medicaid expenditures are included in public health spending.

Table 3. A Summary of per Capita Consumption Profiles, US 2000 and Taiwan 1998.

                                   United States                           Taiwan
                         Share of Total        Mean age       Share of Total       Mean age
Consumption                  100.0               45.1              100.0               40.4
 Private Consumption          76.4               45.7              75.6                42.1
   Education                   1.4               16.8               3.7                15.1
   Health                      8.0               50.5               8.6                51.3
   Other                      67.0               45.7              63.2                42.4
 Public Consumption           23.6               43.3              24.4                35.4
   Education                   5.2               13.9               4.1                15.0
   Health                      7.0               67.2               0.4                39.5
   Other                      11.4               39.5              19.9                39.5
Note. Estimates are based on survival-weighted age profiles using the US period life table for
1985-89.




                                               23
 Table 4. A Summary of Per Capita Earnings Profiles, 9 Countries.
                        Mean age       Peak age      Share under 25             Share 65+
 Indonesia (1996)         38.4            37              15.3                     1.6
 Urban China (2000)       41.4            39               9.0                     1.8
 Brazil (1996)            44.9            39               8.5                     7.5

 Taiwan (2001)                 44.4             43                6.9               7.5
 Thailand (1998)               43.1             44                8.7               3.5

 France (1996)                 42.8             48                6.1               0.9
 Japan (1999)                  45.4             48                8.2               6.1
 US (2000)                     45.5             49                7.1               5.9
Note. Estimates are based on survival-weighted age profiles using the US period life table for
1985-89.



 Table 5. Comparisons of labor income and consumption, selected
 countries.
                     Indonesia
                       (1996)     Taiwan (1998) Thailand (1998)   US (2000)
           Crossing ages for consumption and labor income (Yl(x)>C(x))
 First age               20            25              26              26
 Last age                60            56              59              57
 Span                    40            31              33              31
        Mean ages based on profiles weighted by US 1985-89 survival rates
 Consumption            40.6          40.4            41.5           45.3
 Labor income           37.9          42.7            42.4           44.4
 Differences             2.7          -2.3            -0.9            0.9




                                                24
                                             Figure 1a. Per Capita Consumption, Private and Public by Sector, United States, 2000



                             50000


                             45000
                                                                                                         Public Health
                             40000


                             35000                           Public Education        Other Public
Per capita consumption ($)




                             30000


                             25000


                             20000

                                                                                       Other
                             15000                                                     Private

                                                                                                                  Private
                             10000                                                                                Health
                                                     Private
                                                     Education
                             5000


                                0
                                     0   5      10      15       20   25   30   35    40    45      50    55     60      65   70   75   80   85
                                                                                           Age
                                                Figure 1b. Per Capita Consumption, Private and Public by Sector, Taiwan, 1998

                               300000
                                                      Public Education                      Other Public                   Public Health
                                                                                                                           (negligible)

                               250000
Per capita consumption (NT$)




                               200000




                               150000

                                                                                  Other
                                                           Private                Private
                               100000                      Education                                            Private
                                                                                                                Health



                               50000




                                   0
                                        0   5   10    15      20       25   30   35    40   45    50       55   60   65   70    75     80   85   90+
                                                                                            Age
                                                                          Figure 2. Per Capita Public Consumption Age Profile


                                             2.5
Relative to mean public consumption (0-85)




                                              2




                                             1.5                                                                                               Indonesia (1996)
                                                                                                                                               Taiwan (1998)
                                                                                                                                               Thailand (1998)
                                                                                                                                               US (2000)
                                              1                                                                                                France (1996)




                                             0.5




                                              0
                                                   0   5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60    65   70      75   80   85
                                                                                          Age
                                                                                 Figure 3. Per Capita Private Consumption Profile


                                              1.60



                                              1.40
Relative to mean private consumption (0-85)




                                              1.20



                                              1.00
                                                                                                                                                        Indonesia (1996)
                                                                                                                                                        Taiwan (2001)
                                              0.80
                                                                                                                                                        Thailand (1998)
                                                                                                                                                        US (2000)
                                              0.60



                                              0.40



                                              0.20



                                              0.00
                                                     0   5   10   15   20   25    30    35    40   45    50    55    60    65       70   75   80   85
                                                                                                Age
                                                    Figure 4. Private Education Consumption by Age

                                      0.6



                                      0.5
 Relative to Mean Adult Consumption




                                      0.4
                                                                                                                Brazil (3.3)
                                                                                                                France (0.7)
                                      0.3                                                                       Indonesia (1.5)
                                                                                                                Taiwan (3.4)
                                                                                                                Thailand (0.8)
                                      0.2                                                                       US (0.7)
                                                                                                                Japan (4.1)
                                      0.1



                                       0
                                            0   5        10          15         20          25
                                                                   Age

Values in parentheses are the sums of the age specific education values for each country. Amount spent on education per surviving
child, expressed in years of average adult consumption.
                                                                               Figure 5. Per Capita Labor Income Profile


                                       3.5



                                        3
Relative to mean labor income (0-85)




                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                  Brazil (1996)

                                                                                                                                  France (1996)
                                        2
                                                                                                                                  Indonesia (1996)

                                                                                                                                  Taiwan (2001)
                                       1.5
                                                                                                                                  Japan (1999)

                                                                                                                                  Urban China
                                        1                                                                                         (2000)
                                                                                                                                  Thailand (1998)

                                                                                                                                  US (2000)
                                       0.5



                                        0
                                             0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78 81 84
                                                                                    Age
                                          Figure 6. Annual Growth of Private Consumption and Labor Income by Age, Real,
                                                                Taiwan 1979-1999, US 1982-1997


                          14%


                          12%


                          10%


                          8%                                                                                       Labor Income
Percent growth per year




                                           Private Consumption
                          6%
                                                                                             Taiwan

                          4%


                          2%
                                                                                             US
                          0%
                                15   20    25       30       35       40       45       50        55       60       65     70     75   80

                          -2%


                          -4%


                          -6%
