NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVALUATING WELFARE WITH NONLINEAR PRICES
Peter C. Reiss
Matthew W. White
Working Paper 12370
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12370
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2006

Many thanks to Katja Seim for the internet access and mobile phone plan data. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2006 by Peter C. Reiss and Matthew W. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Evaluating Welfare with Nonlinear Prices
Peter C. Reiss and Matthew W. White
NBER Working Paper No. 12370
July 2006
JEL No. D12, D40, H20, L10
ABSTRACT
This paper examines how to evaluate consumer welfare when consumers face nonlinear prices. This
problem arises in many settings, such as devising optimal pricing strategies for firms, assessing how
price discrimination affects consumers, and evaluating the efficiency costs of many transfer programs
in the public sector. We extend prior methods to accommodate a broad range of modern pricing
practices, including menus of pricing plans. This analysis yields a simpler and more general
technique for evaluating exact consumer surplus changes in settings where consumers face nonlinear
prices. We illustrate our method using recent changes in mobile phone service plans.
Peter C. Reiss
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
preiss@stanford.edu
Matthew W. White
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
mawhite@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

When sellers face heterogeneous buyers, it is often profitable to employ nonlinear pricing
strategies that separate consumers according to willingness to pay. Familiar examples include mobile phone calling plans, deductible choices for insurance, point and rate options
for home mortgages, and volume discount pricing of consumer goods. While an extensive theoretical literature examines how these practices benefit sellers, it also stresses their
theoretically ambiguous consequences for consumers.1 This ambiguity places consumer
welfare questions squarely in the empirical domain.
In this paper, we examine how to evaluate exact consumer surplus when consumers
face nonlinear prices. Researchers have long recognized that evaluating welfare when consumers face nonlinear prices poses an intricate problem if consumers’ income elasticities
are non-negligible. Partly as a result, this aspect of demand behavior is commonly ignored
in analyses of price discrimination.2 Yet empirical studies typically indicate that consumption varies with income for a wide variety of goods and services. Thus it seems useful
to have empirical techniques for evaluating consumer welfare that do not ignore either
income or nonlinear prices, but instead address these features in an integrated way.
Our proximate goal is to provide applied researchers with a practical method for evaluating consumer welfare with nonlinear prices, including menus of pricing plans. Elements
of this problem are found in several literatures in economics, including demand analysis
for rationed goods (Neary and Roberts 1980), the efficiency costs of income taxation (Hausman 1983), the benefits of in-kind subsidy programs (Schwab 1985), and durable goods’
demand (Dubin and McFadden 1984). Analytically, questions involving consumer welfare in these settings are special cases of the general problem we consider here. Yet even in
these environments, where prices and budget constraints are simple piecewise linear functions, existing methods for evaluating welfare tend to be computationally involved. Few
(if any) studies attempt to measure exact consumer surplus facing the complex menus of
nonlinear prices encountered in many product markets.3
The technique we present allows researchers to evaluate exact consumer welfare changes
in complex pricing environments, and is simpler to implement than prior methods. Our
approach is based on recasting the problem in ‘supply and demand’ space, rather than
1

Stole (2003), Wilson (1993), and Varian (1989) provide excellent surveys. A classical treatment is Roberts
(1979).
2
An exception is Wilson (1993), who observes that income effects can have significant consequences for the
design of nonlinear pricing schemes and how they impact consumers.
3
There is an extensive econometric literature on modeling choice with nonlinear budget constraints, principally in public finance (see, e.g., Hausman 1985 or Moffit 1986, 1990). A much smaller literature examines
how to evaluate consumer welfare in such settings. See Creedy and Kalb (2005), DeBorger (1989), Fullerton
and Gan (2004), or Maddock (1989), which extend Hausman’s (1983) technique. We relate our approach to
these antecedents in detail further below.

1

proceeding from the budget constraint formulation typical of applied welfare analyses
(see Slesnick 1998). This approach leads to comparatively simple equations for evaluating
exact (variational) consumer welfare changes with budget sets of quite general forms. In
the important special case of discrete nonlinear price schedules, which are common in applications, these equations are computationally straightforward to evaluate if an analytic
representation for indirect utility is available. If not, existing and well-known numerical
methods for obtaining expenditure functions from ordinary demand equations, such as
Vartia (1983)’s method, can be readily applied in our setting as well. As a consequence,
our methods do not require a researcher to know the consumer’s directly utility specification to evaluate exact consumer welfare; all that is required is the ordinary demand
function that is typically estimated in applied work.4
Since the economic motivation for nonlinear prices arises when sellers have imperfect
information about buyers’ tastes, we also consider the implications of unobserved heterogeneity for evaluating welfare. The literature has amply recognized that ignoring unobserved heterogeneity in preferences can yield misleading estimates of consumer welfare in
many settings (McFadden 1999, Creedy and Duncan 2002, Fullerton and Gan 2004). In the
presence of nonlinear prices, however, accounting for unobserved heterogeneity becomes
complex because observationally-equivalent consumers with different preferences tend to
self-select different marginal prices. As we show, this sorting behavior must be addressed
properly in order to obtain accurate measures of welfare. We illustrate the potential error
magnitudes that can arise using an example based on the changes in wireless calling plans
that occurred in Washington D.C. in 2002 and 2003.

2

The Setting

A few preliminaries are useful concerning the definition of exact consumer surplus when
consumers face nonlinear prices.
The analysis of welfare in applied work typically begins with empirical estimates of
the consumer’s ordinary demand functions, here written as q(p, y). These functions solve
max u(q)
q

s.t. p · q ≤ y

(1)

where u is utility, p a vector of prices, and y is income. This formulation assumes the
consumer can purchase any quantity of good i at a constant (marginal and average) price
of pi per unit. If the consumer faces nonlinear prices, however, the consumer’s budget
4

This aspect parallels the measurement of exact consumer surplus in the classical case where prices do not
vary with quantity (Hausman 1981).

2

constraint differs from that in (1) and the standard constructs needed to evaluate welfare—
indirect utility, the expenditure function, and so on—must be redefined appropriately.
Suppose now that one or more goods are subject to nonlinear pricing. Let Pi (qi ) be the
total price—that is, the consumer’s bill—for qi units of good i. For example, if good i is
offered with a two-part price consisting of an initial fee Fi and a constant marginal price of
pi per unit, then Pi (qi ) = Fi + pi qi . If the consumer faces a menu of pricing options, then
we shall interpret Pi (qi ) to be the minimum expense necessary to purchase qi units. In this
way, we may represent the consumer’s problem facing a menu of pricing options using a
single, nonlinear price schedule. This representation is standard in theoretical work and
quite general; it rests upon the result that a single nonlinear tariff can be implemented
through a menu of simple (e.g., two-part) tariffs, and vice versa.5
With nonlinear prices, the consumer’s problem becomes
max u(q)
q

n

i=1 Pi (qi )

s.t.

≤y

(2)

where q = {q1 , q2 , . . . , qn } as before. Let the solution be q̃(P, y), where P = {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pn }
comprises the collection of total price schedules for all goods. Note that a good available at
a constant price pi has Pi (qi ) = pi qi , so (2) accommodates uniformly-priced goods as well.
As usual, the consumer’s indirect utility function is the value of problem (2): ṽ(P, y) =
u(q̃(P, y)). We use ṽ to distinguish it from the conventional indirect utility function with
uniform prices, v(p, y) = u(q(p, y)). This distinction is central to evaluating welfare with
nonlinear prices.
The standard metrics of exact consumer surplus are Hicks’ compensating and equivalent variation. A precise definition in this setting uses ṽ(P, y) or, equivalently, the expenditure function that applies with nonlinear prices. Specifically, let ẽ(P, u) be the inverse of
ṽ(P, y) with respect to y. If prices change from an initial set P 0 to a new set P 1 , then exact
consumer surplus is
s̃(P 0 , P 1 , y) = ẽ(P, u1 ) − ẽ(P, u0 ),

(3)

where u0 = ṽ(P 0 , y) and u1 = ṽ(P 1 , y). Choosing reference prices P = P 1 gives the compensating variation and P = P 0 gives the equivalent variation. In either case, s̃(P 0 , P 1 , y)
is the lump-sum change in income that would leave the consumer indifferent to the price
changes.6 Thus, equation (3) provides a precise generalization of exact consumer surplus
to situations where the consumer faces nonlinear pricing.
It is important to note that different nonlinear pricing schemes result in different func5
See Wilson (1993). This representation assumes no intertemporal changes in preferences, however, which
might be unduly restrictive in some applications.
6
The compensating and equivalent variation differ because they assume different prices apply when income is spent.

3

tional expressions for the consumer’s expenditure function. For instance, if a good’s pricing changes from a two-part tariff (say) to a three-part tariff, that change will entail a new
expression for the expenditure function ẽ(P, u) on which welfare calculations are based.
The dependence of the expenditure function on the precise form of nonlinear pricing is an
important problem in applied work, as explained next.

3

Evaluating Welfare: Shadow Price Techniques

It is useful to clarify why computing exact consumer surplus with nonlinear prices tends
to be a difficult problem. This occurs even before the complications of unobserved heterogeneity in preferences are considered. Accordingly, here we set aside the issue of preference heterogeneity altogether and consider the problem from the standpoint of consumer
theory.
A direct extension to this setting of ‘textbook’ methods for evaluating compensating
and equivalent variation is the following. Starting from a specific functional form for the
(direct) utility function u(q), computing welfare with nonlinear prices proceeds by solving
(2) to obtain q̃(P 0 , y), q̃(P 1 , y), and the indirect utility functions ṽ(P 0 , y), ṽ(P 1 , y). Inverting and differencing appropriately then gives (3). While conceptually straightforward, a
significant impediment arises in implementing this method. Solving the optimization program in (2) can be cumbersome and difficult in practice, requiring general nonlinear programming techniques. Not surprisingly, few papers evaluate welfare using this method.7
Because of this difficulty, it is desirable to consider methods that avoid solving for
ṽ(P, y). An alternative, and quite general, method for evaluating welfare with nonlinear
prices becomes clear by recasting the consumer’s problem in ‘demand and supply’ space.
The economic logic of this technique is most transparent graphically, as shown next.

3.1

A Diagrammatic Analysis

Figure 1 interprets exact consumer welfare with nonlinear prices in terms of supply and
demand at the individual level. For simplicity we assume here that prices change for a
single (nonlinearly-priced) good, and all other goods’ prices remain constant; hence we
drop the good index i temporarily.
In this figure, the price schedules p0 (q) and p1 (q) indicate the marginal price for the qth
unit of a good purchased under the initial and new price schedules, respectively. Thus the
7

Two early efforts are Blomquist (1983) and Hausman (1983). A more recent discussion can be found in
Fullerton and Gan (2004). These approaches are based on mathematical programming techniques for optimizing convex objective functions with (multiple) linear constraints. Such constraints arise if the price schedules
Pi (qi ) are piecewise linear in qi , which is common in applications.

4

total cost of purchasing q units at initial prices is the area under p0 (q) from 0 to q. Note we
have here assumed price schedules that are smooth functions of quantities; this simplification will make the economic intuition of how to evaluate exact consumer surplus most
transparent. The mathematical treatment and examples in succeeding sections address discontinuous and discrete (multi-part) nonlinear prices, which require minor adjustments.
The shaded area in Figure 1 indicates the compensating variation if prices fall from
p0 (q)

to p1 (q). Here q 0 is the initial quantity chosen, p0∗ the marginal price, and u0 = u(q 0 )

initial utility. Since this consumer faces higher prices than p0∗ inframarginally, its com-

pensating variation is not the conventional area under the compensated demand function
h(p, u0 ) between p0∗ and p1∗ . Rather, the expenditure change that maintains constant utility
is the region under h that lies between the two schedules. This region adjusts for the price
changes at inframarginal quantities. Exact consumer surplus thus has its customary interpretation as an area under the compensated demand curve, but it is a complex area when
prices vary with quantity.
This observation is nonetheless useful for applied work. Using integration by parts,
the shaded region can be written as


p0∗

p1∗



h(p, u0 ) dp + d0 (p0∗ ) − d1 (p1∗ ) .

(4)

The term d0 (p0∗ ) is the difference between the expenditure necessary to purchase q 0 under

the price schedule p0 (q) and the expenditure necessary to purchase the same quantity at
a constant marginal price p0∗ . In Figure 1, d0 is the roughly triangular region bounded by
p0 (q) and p0∗ . The interpretation of d1 is analogous for the alternative price schedule.

Our insight is that equation (4) provides a means of calculating exact consumer surplus
without solving for the expenditure function under nonlinear prices, ẽ(P, u). Here it is
important to observe that h(p, u0 ) is not the compensated demand curve that solves the
consumer’s expenditure minimization problem given nonlinear prices. Rather, h(p, u) is
the income-compensated demand curve that would apply if, counter to fact, the consumer
faced (uniform) prices that do not vary with quantity.
The economic logic for using this compensated demand function to determine consumer welfare under nonlinear prices lies in a subtle aspect of its information content.
Unlike the ordinary demand function, this constant-utility demand function h(p, u) contains sufficient information about preferences to determine a key relationship: how total
expenditure (even under nonlinear prices) varies with the consumer’s marginal rate of
substitution along a given indifference curve. This relationship also pins down which indifference curve is achieved, since total expenditure must equal total income. Together,
these provide enough information to evaluate exact consumer surplus. In the compensat5

ing variation case, for example, we hold the initial utility level u0 fixed and move along the
demand curve h(p, u0 ) until it crosses the new price schedule. The difference between initial income and total expenditure (under the new price schedule) at the new bundle is the
compensating variation, and by construction leaves the consumer indifferent to the price
schedule change.
A more formal analysis of this approach is provided next. Its practical consequence is
that an applied researcher never needs to solve nonlinear programming problems like (2)
directly. Indeed, even integrating the function h to evaluate (4) is unnecessary, because its
value can be determined using the conventional expenditure function assuming a linear
budget constraint. This much is a familiar task in applied welfare analysis (see Hausman
1981 or Slesnick 1998).
There is one aspect of Figure 1 that merits further discussion. The values of d0 (p0∗ )

and d1 (p1∗ ) are readily calculated from observed price schedules in applied work, once the
appropriate marginal valuations p0∗ and p1∗ are known. Determining these marginal prices

(and the reference utility level) is typically straightforward using the same ‘supply equals
demand’ conditions indicated in Figure 1. We elaborate on this step in section 3.3.

3.2

A Precise Characterization

This section provides a more formal analysis of how to evaluate consumer welfare under
nonlinear prices, without directly solving the consumer’s problem (2) for the indirect utility ṽ(P, y) or expenditure function ẽ(P, y). It also provides a precise justification for the
depiction of exact consumer surplus shown in Figure 1, and connects this procedure to
related techniques in the literature.
The main insight lies in connecting the consumer’s expenditure minimization problem under nonlinear pricing to the classical expenditure problem with uniform prices. As
above, let h(p, u) be the consumer’s income-compensated demand function when facing
uniform prices p; the expenditure function with uniform prices is then
e(p, u) = p · h(p, u).

(5)

Similarly, let h̃(P, u) be the solution to the consumer’s expenditure minimization problem
when (one or more) goods have nonlinear prices:
min
q

n

i=1 Pi (qi )

s.t.

6

u(q) ≥ ū.

(6)

The expenditure function with nonlinear prices is then
ẽ(P, u) =

n

i=1 Pi (h̃(P, u)).

(7)

The expenditure functions in (5) and (7) have a useful relationship for evaluating welfare. This relationship arises from the equality of their respective compensated demand
curves when evaluated at the consumer’s marginal willingness to pay. For any expenditure minimizing bundle h̃(P, ū), one can always construct a hyperplane tangent to the
indifference curve that gives ū at quantity h̃(P, ū). If the vector p∗ is orthogonal to this
tangent hyperplane, then
h̃(P, ū) = h(p∗ , ū).

(8)

The left-hand side is the least-cost bundle that achieves utility ū facing nonlinear prices
P, and the right-hand side is the least-cost bundle that achieves the same utility facing
a linear budget constraint. Equation (8) simply states that the two are equal if the linear
budget constraint is tangent to ū at the point h̃(P, ū). Note that the ratio of any two prices
in the vector p∗ is the consumer’s optimal marginal rate of substitution at h̃(P, ū). For this
reason we call p∗ a shadow price.8
Equation (8) provides the link to relate the two forms of the expenditure function
above. Differencing (5) from (7) and rearranging yields
ẽ(P, u) = e(p, u) +



i Pi (h̃(P, u))

− p · h(p, u)

Since this holds for any p, it holds for a p∗ that satisfies (8). Substituting h(p∗ , u) for h̃(P, u)
gives
ẽ(P, u) = e(p∗ , u) +


Pi (h(p∗ , u)) − p∗ · h(p∗ , u)

 i

= e(p∗ , u) +

d(p∗ , u)

(9)

The expenditure function ẽ facing the nonlinear schedules P is equal to the conventional
expenditure function evaluated at a constant shadow price plus an adjustment term that
reflects the nonlinearity of prices. As in section 3.1, d(p∗ , u) is the difference between the
minimum expenditure necessary to purchase the quantity h(p∗ , u) under nonlinear pricing
and the expenditure necessary to purchase that bundle at a constant price p∗ . We call
d(p∗ , u) the difference in inframarginal expenditure.
With equation (9), we can obtain a useful simplification for exact consumer surplus
8

The shadow price term originates in the analysis of demand under rationing, which is a special case of the
analysis here. We clarify this connection in section 4.2.

7

with nonlinear prices. Recall that variational surplus under nonlinear prices is
s̃(P 0 , P 1 , y) = ẽ(P, u1 ) − ẽ(P, u0 ).
Evaluating the two right-hand terms using (9) yields


s̃(P 0 , P 1 , y) = e(p̄∗ , u1 ) − e(p̄∗ , u0 ) + d(p̄∗ , u1 ) − d0 (p̄∗ , u0 ) ,
where the reference price vector p̄∗ is proportional to the consumer’s marginal rates of
substitution at the expenditure-minimizing bundle facing P0 or P1 (depending whether
the equivalent or compensating variation is desired, respectively). This yields two comparatively simple expressions for the compensating and the equivalent variation under
nonlinear prices:
CV (P 0 , P 1 , y) = y − e(p1∗ , u0 ) − d(p1∗ , u0 )

(10a)

EV (P 0 , P 1 , y) = e(p0∗ , u1 ) + d(p0∗ , u1 ) − y.

(10b)

and

The variational surplus measures for general nonlinear budget set changes can therefore
be expressed in terms of the consumer’s income, its conventional expenditure function
under uniform prices, and the difference in inframarginal expenditures. There is no need
to solve for the expenditure function ẽ(P, u) that applies with nonlinear prices.
Last, a transformation of (10a) provides the basis for the interpretation of Figure 1 given
in section 3.1. Since
y = ẽ(P 0 , u0 ) = e(p0∗ , u0 ) + d(p0∗ , u0 ),
the compensating variation can alternatively be expressed as
CV (P 0 , P 1 , y) = ẽ(P 0 , u0 ) − ẽ(P 1 , u0 )



= e(p0∗ , u0 ) − e(p1∗ , u0 ) + d(p0∗ , u0 ) − d(p1∗ , u0 )
 p0∗


h(p, u0 ) dp + d0 (p0∗ ) − d1 (p1∗ ) .
=

(11)

p1∗

The last line equals the shaded area in Figure 1. This provides the precise justification
for equation (4) and the interpretation of compensating variation as the region between
the marginal price schedules under h(p, u0 ). The analogous expression for the equivalent
variation is similarly derived.
Antecedents. This analysis is related to the “virtual price and income” technique introduced by Burtless and Hausman (1978) to model choice facing piecewise linear budget
8

constraints (see also Hausman, 1985). The prototypal application is labor supply analysis with multiple income tax brackets; see Blundell and McCurdy (1999) or Creedy and
Duncan (2002) for recent appraisals. In that literature, the expenditure decomposition in
equation (9), or e(p∗ , u)+d(p∗ , u), is termed a consumer’s ‘virtual income’ and the marginal
price p∗ a ‘virtual price.’ These constructs are used to model the choice q̃(P, y) that solves
the consumer’s problem (2) in terms of the ordinary demand (or labor supply) function
q(p, y) that applies facing a linear budget constraint. Terminology aside, this amounts to
a standard mathematical programming technique for solving optimization problems with
multiple linear constraints.
Evaluating welfare is more involved, however. In principle, one could iteratively ‘guess’
at trial income changes Δy, re-solve the consumer’s problem in (2) by constructing the appropriate new set of virtual incomes and prices to determine q̃(P 1 , y +Δy), and then assess
whether this quantity yields the same direct utility as income y under original prices P 0 .
This becomes a computationally involved iterative procedure because the virtual price and
income technique provides an algorithm, not a functional expression, for computing the
value of q̃(P 1 , y + Δy); the algorithm must be re-applied at each trial value of Δy until the
value that leaves the consumer indifferent to the change in the price schedules (tax schedules, etc.) is obtained. The handful of papers that evaluate exact consumer welfare in
public finance applications with nonlinear budget constraints appear to employ this procedure, including Blundell et al. (1988), Fullerton and Gan (2004), and Creedy and Kalb
(2005).
The shadow price method summarized by Figure 1 solves this problem differently. The
key insight lies in defining shadow prices using the compensated (Hicksian) demands in
(8); in contrast, the ‘virtual prices’ employed in the literature are (implicitly) defined in
terms of the ordinary (Marshallian) demands. The latter is useful for modeling choice,
while the former is a more direct route for evaluating welfare. The reason is that defining
shadow prices using the compensated demand function immediately reveals how much
we must change income to hold utility constant if these marginal prices were constant. It
is a simple matter to then determine the complete change in exact consumer surplus, by
adding in the change in inframarginal expenditures. This is the logic of equation (11).
The benefit of this shadow-price method is that it allows one to avoid the cumbersome
process of repeatedly re-solving the consumer’s optimization problem in (2) in order to
evaluate welfare with nonlinear prices, as occurs in previous work. Instead, our method
involves finding a single shadow price, p∗ , which is often a much simpler computational
procedure. As shown next, it essentially amounts to finding where the consumer’s compensated demand function intersects the supply (price) schedule.
In addition, there is an effective dimension reduction using our method. When the

9

researcher is evaluating welfare facing price changes for K goods, the iterative scheme
used in prior studies involves (repeatedly) solving a nonlinear optimization problem in K
dimensions—even if there is only one nonlinearly-priced good in the budget set. By contrast, the shadow price method above requires solving only a one-dimensional problem
(for a single shadow price) when there is only one nonlinearly priced good among all K.
This dimension-reduction occurs because the shadow prices for all other goods equal their
observed (uniform) prices, which are given. If the problem is solved as in prior work, however, then one must solve the K-dimensional consumers’ optimization problem because all
goods’ quantities change with prices. From a practical standpoint, this dimension reduction can greatly simplify the computational burden of evaluating exact consumer welfare
with nonlinear prices when the researcher is modeling consumption choices for more than
two goods.
Last, because our shadow price method makes it unnecessary to solve (2) directly, it
is also unnecessary to have an explicit functional representation for the consumer’s direct
utility function. As Creedy and Duncan (2002) note, demand specifications that fit data
well often have direct utility functions that are difficult to obtain analytically. To be clear
about how one can determining the correct shadow prices without a direct utility function,
we address this step next.

3.3

Determining Shadow Prices without Direct Utility

Two pieces of information are needed to evaluate exact consumer surplus with nonlinear
prices using equation (10a) or (10b). The first is the expenditure function under uniform
prices, e(p, u), along with its derivative h(p, u) = ∂e(p, u)/∂p. In applied work, it is common to begin with an econometric estimate of a consumer’s ordinary demand function
q(p, y). Given a demand model, direct methods for recovering e(p, u) are standard in the
literature. Hausman (1981) describes analytic techniques based on the usual form of Roy’s
Identity for two-good models common in applied work, and Vartia (1983) and others provide simple numerical methods for more complex demand systems.
Second, it remains to determine p0∗ , p1∗ , and the reference utility u0 (or u1 if equivalent
variation is desired). There are several ways to do this, but the simplest follows from
equating supply and demand. Consider again Figure 1, which describes the compensating
variation case. The supply schedule for good i, si (pi ), is the inverse of the marginal price
schedule pi (qi ). Thus si (pi ) indicates the set of quantities available at a marginal price of

10

pi per unit. Since the initial shadow price sets demand equal to supply, we have9
hi (p0∗ , u0 ) = s0i (p0∗ ).

(12)

With a single nonlinearly-priced good, this reduces to one equation in two unknowns, p0∗

and u0 . However, h also conveys additional information: p · h(p, u) indicates how total
expenditure (under uniform prices) varies with marginal willingness to pay, p, along any
indifference curve. The correct initial indifference curve, u0 , equates total expenditure with

nonlinear prices to total income:
y=



0 0
i Pi (hi (p∗ , u ))

or, equivalently,
y = e(p0∗ , u0 ) + d0 (p0∗ ).

(13)

The equivalence of these two expressions follows from (9). Note that the initial difference
in inframarginal expenditure, d0 (p0∗ ), does not depend directly upon utility (it depends
upon u only through p0∗ ; see Figure 1). Solving (12) and (13) gives p0∗ and u0 .

Although determining these marginal prices and reference utility might first appear to
be an involved procedure, solving these conditions in practice is often a simple matter. The
reason lies in the economics of demand and sellers’ pricing decisions: Theory requires the
demand curve h to be monotonically decreasing in price, and price schedules chosen by
sellers are typically monotone as well.10 We illustrate this in several examples below.
Given u0 , we can then determine p1∗ by moving along the demand curve h(p, u0 ) until
it intersects the other price (supply) schedule:
hi (p1∗ , u0 ) = s1i (p1∗ ),

(14)

The solution for p1∗ given by (14) is indicated in Figure 1. The compensating variation is
evaluated by inserting p1∗ and u0 into (10a).11

If the equivalent variation is of interest, the procedure is similar. We first obtain the
reference utility level u1 appearing in (10b) by solving the marginal and total valuation
9

If the supply schedule exhibits discontinuities, we can replace the right-hand side of (12) by its closed
graph. This ensures that there will always exist a solution, given monotonicity of the compensated demand
functions in prices. An example is provided in the next section.
10
Non-monotonic marginal price schedules do occur for some goods, the most common product-market
example being mobile phone contracts. We address this situation below.
11
There is a small gap in our discussion: Technically, (12)-(14) are necessary conditions for the shadow prices
and reference utility level. The distinction between necessary and sufficient conditions becomes important if
the supply schedule is decreasing but less price-elastic (that is, p(q) decreases faster) than the compensated
demand function. In that situation there may be multiple distinct solutions for (p0∗ , u0 ). Fortunately, this is
easily resolved by selecting the pair achieving the highest utility. We illustrate this in section 4.1.

11

conditions:
hi (p1∗ , u1 ) = s1i (p1∗ )
and
y = e(p1∗ , u1 ) + d(p1∗ , u1 ).
Given u1 , we determine p0∗ from the intersection of (compensated) demand and the new
price schedule:
hi (p0∗ , u1 ) = s0i (p0∗ ).
The equivalent variation is then obtained by inserting p0∗ and u1 into (10b).
Depending on the problem being considered, there are other ways to determine the
shadow prices and implement (10a) or (10b). For instance, if the initial consumption bundle q 0 is observed (in data) and the form of the direct utility function u(q) is specified,
then one can immediately determine the initial utility level from u0 = u(q 0 ). Steps (12)(13) become unnecessary and only the new shadow price needs to be found, using (14), to
evaluate (e.g.) the compensating variation.
The method described here has an important advantage, however, in that it does not
require the form of the direct utility function to be known. Thus, a researcher can begin
with an empirically satisfactory model for the ordinary demand function q(p, y) (which
may be parametric or non-parametric), and then compute exact consumer surplus under
nonlinear prices without having to recover the direct utility function.12 The method described here is quite general, accommodating convex or nonconvex budget sets and price
schedules of arbitrary form.

4

Discrete Price Schedules

It is useful to consider a few examples that involve discrete and discontinuous price schedules. These are common in practice, as applications of nonlinear pricing often exhibit only
a few possible marginal prices that change at at specific quantity thresholds. Simple volume discounts are an oft-encountered example. This section also clarifies a few technicalities that can arise in using the previous section’s methods in applied work.

4.1

Decreasing Marginal Prices and Volume Discounts

Figure 2 depicts a simple volume discount pricing scheme for a single good. Here the consumer initially pays a higher marginal price p0h for each unit purchased up to the quantity
12

Doing so assumes the demand model also satisfies the standard integrability conditions to represent a
coherent set of consumer preferences, of course.

12

k 0 , and then a lower marginal price p0l for each unit consumed thereafter. Volume discounts of this form are common in a wide array of products and services; examples span
retail consumer goods, building materials, software licenses, car and hotel rental rates, and
so on.
We now consider how to evaluate exact consumer surplus when a volume discount
price schedule of this form is changed, using the methods described in section 3. As is
conventional in applied work, we assume a composite outside good (serving as a price
numeraire). Suppose the ordinary demand function (facing a constant price p) has the
log-linear form
log q = α + β log p + γ log y.
Solving Roy’s Identity and inverting on y gives the expenditure function that applies under
uniform prices,
α 1+β

e(p, u) = (1 − γ) u + e p

/(1 + β)

1
1−γ

(15)

provided γ = 0 (see, e.g., Hausman 1981). Differentiating with respect to p yields the
compensated demand function
α

h(p, u) = e p

β

α 1+β

(1 − γ) u + e p

/(1 + β)

γ
1−γ

.

Now consider a consumer’s compensating variation when the prices for this good
changes from the initial price schedule s0 (p) to the new, lower schedule s1 (p) = {p1h , p1l , k 1 }
as shown in Figure 2. We can determine the compensating variation by first using (15)
to evaluate the area to the left of h(p, u0 ) between the initial and new shadow prices p0l

and p1h . According to (11), to this we add the initial inframarginal expenditure difference
d(p0∗ , u0 ) = (p0h − p0l )k 0 . This gives the compensating variation for this price change for this

consumer, since d(p1∗ , u0 ) = 0 under the new schedule. Note that the form of the direct
utility function was not needed to determine the compensating variation.
Alternatively and equivalently, we can immediately apply (10a) using (15) to find
 1+β
CV = y − (1 − γ) u0 + eα p1h
/(1 + β)

1
1−γ

The value of u0 is obtained from (12) and (13) using e(p, u) and h(p, u) from (15).
There are two potential subtleties about decreasing marginal prices that are illustrated
in this example. The first is that if the price schedule has a region where the marginal
price falls faster than the slope of the compensated demand function, then it is possible
for h to intersect the supply schedule at more than one point. In such cases, care must be
exercised to select the solution values that minimize total expenditure. We elaborate on
13

this possibility in Appendix A.
The second point to note is that the ordinary demand function passing through supply at the initial consumption level q 0 is not q(p, y), but rather is q(p, y + d0 ) where d0 =
d(p0∗ , u0 ). The reason the additional term d0 enters the ordinary demand function is that if
the income elasticity of demand is nonzero, then there is an income effect due to the higher
inframarginal price up to k 0 . This additional inframarginal expenditure is d(p0∗ , u0 ).

4.2

Increasing Marginal Prices: Limited Discount Pricing, Rationing, and Lifeline Pricing

Figure 3 illustrates the compensating variation for a change in a discrete, increasing marginal
price schedule. In applied work, pricing of this form commonly arises through limitedquantity discounts (e.g., when a seller limits purchases at a discounted price to n units
per customer). Other examples occur in utility pricing, where schedules of this form are
known as ‘lifeline’ pricing; see Reiss and White (2005) for an analysis in that setting. In
public finance, limited-benefit programs (sometimes called ‘in-kind transfer programs’)
give rise to the same structure of marginal prices; see Schwab (1985) and DeBorger (1989)
for examples.
Unlike the decreasing case, with (weakly) increasing marginal prices the consumer’s
budget set is convex. Assuming decreasing marginal utility, there will be only one point
where the compensated demand curve crosses the (closed graph of the) price schedule.
However, a technicality arises in that it is possible for the appropriate compensated demand curve to cross the supply (price) schedule at a ‘gap’ between two marginal prices.
This possibility is illustrated in Figure 3.
When this occurs, the initial shadow price p0∗ is still the consumer’s marginal willing-

ness to pay at the preferred initial consumption bundle q 0 . However, this shadow price is

not equal to either of the two initial marginal prices, p0h or p0l . Instead, the shadow price is
the value of p where demand crosses the closed graph of the supply schedule. This value
of p0∗ is indicated in Figure 3. Similarly, the second shadow price p1∗ is the point where the

compensated demand function h(p, u0 ) crosses the closed graph of the new price schedule.
Note that equations (12)-(14) still suffice to determine the shadow prices and initial utility
level in this setting; there is no need for the direct utility function, even though there is a
range of marginal rates of substitution that all yield consumption where the marginal price
changes.
Having found the two shadow prices, the calculation of CV proceeds as in the previous
example. First, we compute the area under h(p, u0 ) between the two shadow prices. We

then add to this the rectangular area d(p0∗ , u0 ) = (p0∗ − p0l )k 0 , and subtract the rectangular

area d(p1∗ , u0 ) = (p1∗ −p1l )k 1 . This leaves us with the compensating variation as the irregular
14

shaded region in Figure 3.
The analysis in this case with a two-step increasing price schedule has an interesting
connection to research on the welfare consequences of rationing. Neary and Roberts (1980)
and Latham (1980) present modern treatments, although this line of work evidently begins with Robarth (1941). The connection to rationing arises from interpreting the supply
schedule for a rationed good as perfectly elastic until some limit, at which point supply
turns vertical. If a consumer’s demand is actively rationed, then its demand curve will
cross the vertical segment of supply in a manner analogous to that in Figure 3. The indicated shadow price, p0∗ , then equals the LaGrange multiplier on the supply constraint in
the consumer’s problem. (This case motivated our adoption of the shadow price terminology). The analysis of the welfare consequences of rationing becomes a special case of the
general methods discussed in section 3.

4.3

Menus of Pricing Plans

In many settings, consumers face not a single nonlinear price schedule but rather a menu of
pricing plans. Common examples include mobile phone service plans, membership levels
at museums and nonprofit organizations, and deductible choices for insurance. Menus of
prices can present the consumer with an effective schedule of marginal prices that is not
monotonic in quantity. Here we illustrate how the methods of section 3 can be applied
when consumers face a menu of prices.
Consider the example in Figure 4. Here the consumer faces a choice of one of three
pricing plans, where each solid line in Figure 4 represents a different plan. Note that in
this figure the vertical axis measures each plan’s total price, not the marginal price. Plan A
has a minimum fee FA , allows up to kA units to be consumed at a marginal price per unit
of zero, and then imposes a positive marginal price pA for each unit beyond kA . Plan B has
a similar structure, but with higher minimum fee FB , a larger allowance kB , and a lower
marginal price pB beyond this allowance. Plan C has a simpler structure: A higher minimum fee FC than the other plans, but a marginal price of zero for all units consumed. As
Figure 4 suggests, Plan C appeals to relatively high demand consumers, Plan B to moderate demand consumers, and Plan A to consumers with the lowest demand for this service.
This pricing scheme is used by a major European internet service provider for internet
access in the residential market (quantity is in megabits downloaded per month). Lambrecht, Seim, and Skiera (2005) present an empirical analysis of consumer demand facing
the price menu in Figure 4. The interesting consumer welfare question arises from the
striking contrast between this form of internet access pricing and the flat-fee system that
prevails in the United States. Thus, here we consider how the methods of section 3 can be
used to evaluate the consumer welfare consequences of price discrimination in this form.
15

Simplifying Lambrecht et al. slightly, assume that the consumer’s ordinary demand for
this service—if available at a constant marginal and average price p —takes the linear form
q = α + βp + γy.
Solving Roy’s Identity and inverting on y gives the expenditure function that applies under
uniform prices,
e(p, u) = u exp(γp) −

1
γ

(α + βp + β/γ) ,

(16)

γ = 0, and differentiating on p yields
h(p, u) = γu exp(γp) − β/γ.

(17)

Now consider how to evaluate the change in income that would leave the consumer
indifferent if its initial price was replaced by the set of pricing plans in Figure 4. Suppose
that the initial pricing is a simple fixed fee, F , with no additional charge per unit used. In
this case the initial shadow price p0∗ equals the marginal price of zero, and the consumer’s
initial utility level is readily obtained by inserting (16) into the ‘initial income equals initial
expenditure’ condition (13) and solving for u0 , with d(p0∗ , u0 ) = F :
u0 = (y − F ) + γ1 (α + β/γ).

(18)

To calculate the compensating variation when the initial fixed fee pricing is replaced
with the menu, it remains to find the new shadow price p1∗ where demand h(p, u0 ) intersects supply. For this purpose we assume that the consumer chooses the expenditure
minimizing plan and consumption that achieves utility u0 . Because the marginal prices (the
slopes along the lower envelope) of the price schedules in Figure 4 vary non-monotonically
and discontinuously, the calculations are simplest to convey in a table. The five rows in
Table 1 partition all possible quantities into intervals according to plan and marginal price.
These five intervals are indicated in the second column of Table 1 (and in Figure 4), in
terms of the allowance quantities kA , kB , and the threshold quantities τA , τB that separate
expenditure-minimizing plans.
The fourth column of Table 1 shows the expenditure-minimizing consumption level
that achieves u0 , but assuming each interval’s marginal price is constant for all units consumed. These are obtained from (17), with u0 in (18). Here there are only three distinct
values of h(p, u0 ), as there are only three distinct marginal prices under the plans being
offered.
To determine the shadow price p1∗ , we now check each interval (row) in Table 1 to see
if demand exceeds supply or supply exceeds demand. This is done in the last column
16

TABLE 1
C OMPENSATING VARIATION WITH A M ENU OF P RICES

Plan
A
B
C

Quantity
Interval

Marginal
Price

Income-compensated
Demand, h(p, u0 )

Excess Demand
or Supply?

0 < q ≤ kA
kA < q ≤ τA
τA < q ≤ kB
kB < q ≤ τB
τB < q

0
pA
0
pB
0

γu0 − β/γ
γu − β/γ − exp(γpA )
γu0 − β/γ
0
γu − β/γ − exp(γpB )
γu0 − β/γ

Excess demand: h(0, u0 ) > kA
Excess demand: h(pA , u0 ) > τA
Excess demand: h(0, u0 ) > kB
Neither; kB < h(pB , u0 ) ≤ τB
Excess supply: h(0, u0 ) < τB

0

of the table; it evaluates whether the quantity demanded (in column 4) falls within the
admissible interval in column 2. For the sake of illustration we have assumed that this
occurs in fourth interval (row), which implies the shadow price is p1∗ = pB .
The compensating variation now follows immediately from applying (10a) using (16):
CV = y − u0 exp(γpB ) −

1
γ

(α + βpB + β/γ) − [FB − kB pB ].

The final term in square brackets is the difference in inframarginal expenditure, d(p1∗ , u0 ),
with Plan B relative to a constant (marginal and average) shadow price pB :
d(p∗1 , u0 ) = [FB + (q − kB )pB ] − q pB = FB − kB pB .
Although the calculations summarized in Table 1 might appear a formidable procedure
at first, they are easy to implement and evaluate by computer. The same procedure can be
easily extended to situations where the price structure has more marginal prices, or more
plans are offered, and so on. Calculating the equivalent variation is slightly more involved
in this (particular) example, because we have to do calculations analogous to Table 1 to find
the reference utility level as well as the new shadow price simultaneously. This extension
is straightforward, however, and employed in section 6.
There are two technical points that merit note. Both mirror situations illustrated earlier
in sections 4.1 and 4.2. First, it is possible for compensated demand to match supply on
more than one interval, rather than one as indicated in Table 1. This outcome is analogous
to the situation depicted in Figure 2, where h(p, u0 ) crosses the marginal price schedule
at two distinct points. As in that example, the values of h(p, u0 ) will differ at the each
candidate shadow price, and this situation is resolved by selecting from among these the
one with the minimal total expenditure (under the actual, nonlinear price schedule(s)).
This is a simple step in practice.
The second possibility parallels the situation in Figure 3. In this event, is possible that
17

demand exceeds supply (strictly) or supply exceeds demand (strictly) for each interval
(row) in Table 1. This occurs when h(p, u0 ) crosses supply at a ‘gap’ where the marginal
price abruptly (i.e. discontinuously) increases. When this occurs, the shadow price will lie
between two marginal prices and h(p, u0 ) will equal their common interval boundary. The
shadow price in this situation is determined by the value of p that sets h(p, u0 ) equal to this
common interval boundary, as indicated by p1∗ in Figure 3.
In sum, this general procedure would appear to provide a useful and straightforward
means to evaluate exact consumer surplus in applied work when a consumer faces a menu
of prices. Nevertheless, the reader may note at this point that our analysis of this problem
remains incomplete. So far, we have considered how to evaluate exact consumer surplus
for a single consumer. In contrast, the price discrimination question that motivated this
subsection asked how to determine whether consumers—as a whole—are better off under
one pricing scheme versus another. Such consumers are necessarily heterogeneous in their
preferences; it would not be worthwhile for a seller to employ a menu of prices if otherwise. This raises the question of how to integrate the preceding analyses into empirical
models that accommodate unobserved heterogeneity in preferences. We address this next.

5

Welfare with Heterogeneous Preferences

We now turn from evaluating welfare for a single consumer with known preferences to
settings more typical of applied work. In practice, heterogeneity in willingness-to-pay
among consumers is an important feature of demand behavior, and a component of this
variation is inevitably due to factors the researcher does not observe. In this situation, the
best we can do is to evaluate expected welfare given the characteristics of consumers that
are observed.
Applied welfare analyses are usually based on econometric models of (ordinary) demand. Such models represent an individual consumer’s demand by a function of the form
q(p, y, z, ν, θ) where p is price, y income, z a set of observable characteristics, ν unobservable characteristics, and θ a set of parameters. Note that this form of demand corresponds
to behavior facing a uniform price, p, that does not vary with quantity. If the consumer
faces nonlinear prices that change from P0 to P1 , then application of the methods in sections 3 and 4 will yield an expression for exact consumer surplus that depends on the
same arguments: CV (P0 , P1 , y, z, ν, θ). To evaluate expected welfare for a single consumer,
given y and z, we then need to integrate this expression against the distribution of ν.
This logic extends naturally to evaluating the sum of all compensating (or equivalent)
income changes necessary to make a heterogeneous population of consumers indifferent

18

to the price changes.13 In the compensating case, for example, with a heterogeneous population of N consumers this sum is determined by integrating CV (·) against the joint distribution Pν,y,z of all observed and unobserved characteristics in the population:

N

{ν,y,z}

CV (P 0 , P 1 , y, z, ν, θ) Pν,y,z (dν dy dz) .

(19)

Although this expression appears formidable, the integrals involved are inexpensive to
compute using simulation methods. Geweke (1996) and Judd (1999) discuss standard techniques.
The importance of integrating over consumers’ characteristics when evaluating welfare changes in a heterogeneous population is well noted in the literature.14 Nonetheless,
it remains common empirical practice to evaluate welfare, even when income effects are
present, using ‘representative consumer’ techniques that ignore preference heterogeneity altogether (see Slesnick’s 1998 survey). The most common such approach amounts
to ignoring the integral signs in (19) and simply evaluating CV (·) at the mean values
of consumers’ observed and unobservable characteristics. Because these characteristics
commonly enter CV (·) in a nonlinear fashion, however, representative consumer methods
provide welfare measures that typically differ from results based on (19). The standard
concern is that because they ignore heterogeneity in preferences, representative consumer
approaches may yield biased estimates of consumer welfare changes.
Here we wish to emphasize another concern that exacerbates this bias, and arises
specifically when consumers face nonlinear prices. When two consumers with different
preferences face the same nonlinear price schedule, they may choose quantities with different marginal prices (or, equivalently, choose different pricing plans from a common
menu). This sorting response to nonlinear pricing is not unusual; rather, it is precisely why
sellers find nonlinear pricing a profitable endeavor. Yet it implies the two consumers’ compensating (or equivalent) variation values will differ not only because of their underlying
preferences, but also because they face different price changes at the margin. Any representative consumer approach will assume all individuals face the same marginal price—thus
mis-specifying the price changes that heterogeneous consumers actually experience. The
self-selection of different marginal prices (or pricing plans) by heterogeneous consumers
introduces a form of error that will not ‘average out’ if welfare is evaluated using a representative consumer approach.
13

There is an extensive literature concerned with the conceptual foundations of aggregate welfare comparisons with heterogeneous individuals (see Blundell, Preston, and Walker (1995) or Slesnick (1998) for surveys).
We assume that the total payments necessary to make all individuals indifferent to a price or policy change
(that is, the sum of each individuals’ compensating or equivalent variation values) is a matter of direct interest.
14
See McFadden (1999) for a useful discussion in the context of discrete choice models. Fullerton and Gan
(2004) explore this issue in continuous models using nonlinear transfer program examples.

19

The methods for evaluating consumer welfare with nonlinear prices described earlier
allow one to avoid this problem. That is, one first evaluates each consumer’s compensating
(or equivalent) variation using the techniques in sections 3 and 4, contingent on the consumer’s characteristics. Population welfare changes can then be obtained by aggregating
these values, according to (19).
In sum, if consumers face nonlinear prices it appears to be particularly important to
account for heterogeneity in preferences when evaluating welfare. Of course, how badly
one might go awry using a representative consumer approach (or other welfare approximation method) is an empirical matter. Accordingly, it is useful to consider an application
that can convey some magnitudes in a practical context.

6

Application

The pricing of wireless phone service has changed substantially over the past two decades,
with consumers facing ever richer sets of pricing menus. Consumer welfare questions related to these changes arise in a number of areas, including the efficiency costs of wireless
excise taxes (Ingraham and Sidak 2004, Gao et al. 2005), the consumer welfare losses from
regulatory actions (Hausman 1997), and the construction of exact price indicies for this service. In this section, we illustrate how to evaluate the consumer welfare gain from a richer
menu of pricing plans in applied work. As noted at the outset of this paper, finer levels
of price discrimination tend to benefit sellers but it is theoretically ambiguous whether
they make consumers—as a whole—better or worse off. The numerical results below indicate how the methods in sections 3 and 4 can be applied in a complex multi-part pricing
plan setting. Our calculations contrast an exact answer that recognizes observed and unobserved consumer heterogeneity with cruder representative agent and Marshallian consumer surplus approximations.
Table 2 details the terms of two sets of national mobile phone calling plans. The terms
of these plans closely approximate those offered by a major wireless carrier in the Washington, D.C. area in 2002 and 2003.15 In 2003 this firm added two new calling plans, and
changed the fixed monthly fee, allowance minutes, and marginal price (for minutes above
the allowance) on all four prior plans. Inspection of Table 2 reveals that, from a consumer’s standpoint, the 2003 plans do not uniformly dominate, nor are dominated by,
the smaller previous choice set. More work needs to be done to draw welfare conclusions,
as the change in welfare depends on the individual’s consumption, price sensitivity, and
marginal utility of income.
15

The plans in Table 2 differ from this firm’s actual offerings slightly, in order to preserve anonymity and to
help illustrate the methodological points below.

20

TABLE 2
A W IRELESS P HONE C ALLING P LAN M ENU , 2002 AND 2003
Fixed Fee
($ per month)

Allowance
(min. per month)

Marginal Price above
Allowance ($ per min.)

2002 Plans:
National 500
National 700
National 1000
National 1300

69.99
89.99
109.99
139.99

500
700
1000
1300

.35
.35
.25
.25

2003 Plans:
National 400
National 600
National 800
National 1100
National 1400
National 1800

69.99
79.99
89.99
119.99
149.99
179.99

400
600
800
1100
1400
1800

.40
.40
.40
.40
.40
.40

Plan Name

A Model.

Evaluating overall consumer welfare changes requires a model of prefer-

ences and how they vary across consumers. Suppose that, facing a constant (average and
marginal) price p, individual i’s demand for wireless service has the usual linear form
qi = αi − βi p + γi yi ,
where qi is consumption (in minutes per month) and yi income. This specification, or
minor variations of it (log or semi-log form), is widely used in econometric studies of
telecommunications demand including wireless service (Hausman 1997, 2000, Ingraham
and Sidak 2004, Iyengar 2005, Lambrecht et al. 2005, Rappoport et al. 2004). In the twogood framework typically employed (explicitly or implicity) in empirical work, this demand function corresponds (facing a constant price p) to a partial direct utility function of
the form



αi + γi x − q
γi q − βi
,
exp γi
ui (q, x) =
γi q − βi
γi2

where x is expenditure on the composite outside good (serving as a price numeraire). To
capture demand variation, we follow Iyengar (2005) and others by assuming the parameters αi , βi , and γi vary across the population in a parametric way. Specifically, we assume
(αi , βi , γi ) ∼ N (μ, Σ). We select parameters of this distribution to match aggregate statistics on wireless service consumption, as described in Appendix B. This model implies
mean price and income elasticities of −.44 and 0.51, respectively (when evaluated at a constant price of $0.25 per minute). These are broadly consistent with the elasticity estimates

21

reported in econometric studies of mobile phone use.16 In addition, average consumption
at the prices in Table 2 (approximately 600 minutes per month) matches national wireless
plan use.
Calculating Welfare Changes. Now consider how to evaluate consumer welfare when
a seller changes the set of available pricing plans. The compensating change in income that
would leave a consumer just as well off facing the 2003 plan options as she would be with
the 2002 plan choice set is, from (10a),
CV (P 0 , P 1 , yi , νi ) = yi − e(p1∗ (yi , νi ), u0 (yi , νi )) − d(p1∗ (yi , νi ), u0 (yi , νi ))
where νi = (αi , βi , γi ) denotes the unobserved parameters that vary across individuals.
The shadow price p∗1 and initial utility level u0 depend upon these preference parameters

as well as the consumer’s income y. The appropriate values of p∗1 and u0 equate the consumer’s ‘supply and demand’ conditions (12)-(14), as before. For the population overall,
the compensating change in income (per capita) that makes consumers indifferent between
the two sets of pricing plans is then

{y,ν}

CV (P 0 , P 1 , y, ν) Py,ν (dy dν) .

(20)

Positive values of this integral indicate that consumers are better off overall; that is, they
would prefer (on average) the richer choice of plans in 2003 to the limited set offered in
2002.
We calculate this exact welfare measure using Monte Carlo integration. Specifically,
we draw at random a consumer’s preference parameters νi = (αi , βi , γi ) and income yi .
The income draws are from a log-normal approximation to the 2000 Census PUMS income
data (see Appendix B). For these draws we calculate the consumer’s initial utility level
u0 (yi , νi ) and initial shadow price under the 2002 plans using (12) and (13); this step parallels the example in 4.3. The 2003 shadow price, p1∗ (yi , νi ), is determined similarly as the
solution to (14). The difference in inframarginal expenditure, d(p1∗ (yi , νi ), u0 (yi , νi )), is then

obtained directly from the initial price schedules. The expenditure function under uniform
pricing, e(p1∗ (yi , νi ), u0 (yi , νi )), is given by (16). Each consumer’s compensating variation,
CV (P 0 , P 1 , yi , νi ) is then readily determined from (10a).

We repeat this process 20,000 times to evaluate (20). We use 20,000 draws because the
simulation error at that level is effectively negligible. The entire process takes approximately five seconds on a 2 GHz computer.
16
Gao et al. 2005, Hausman 1997, 2000, Ingraham and Sidak 2004, or Rappoport et al. 2004. All of these
studies appear to evaluate elasticities at average prices, analogous to those reported above. For consumption
information, see for example www.telephia.com.

22

Alternative Measures.

To illustrate the consequences of heterogeneity discussed in

section 5, we also evaluate three alternative welfare measures commonly encountered in
the literature. These are:
1. CV assuming a representative consumer, with nonlinear pricing: CV (P 0 , P 1 , ȳ, ν̄). Here a
representative consumer is assumed to have the ‘mean’ tastes and characteristics of
the heterogeneous consumers in the population.
2. CV assuming a representative consumer, but ignoring nonlinear pricing: CVlin (p̄0 , p̄1 , ȳ, ν̄).
Here the representative consumer is assumed to have ‘mean’ tastes and characteristics of the heterogeneous consumers in the population, but nonlinear pricing is
ignored: The consumer is assumed, incorrectly, to face a linear budget constraint at
the average price (in the population) for this service.
3. Change in Marshallian consumer surplus, using average prices: CS lin (p̄0 , p̄1 , ȳ, ν̄). This is
the area under the ordinary (Marshallian) aggregate demand curve, evaluated between the average prices (in the population) before and after the price changes.
The first of these alternative welfare metrics avoids having to evaluate the integral in
(20) that arises when welfare is evaluated with heterogeneous consumers. The second
alternative welfare metric, which assumes a representative consumer and incorrectly assumes that consumer faces a constant (marginal and average) price, is of interest because it
is easily implemented when a researcher has only aggregate price and quantity data available. For this reason, this welfare measure is commonly encountered in the literature (e.g.,
Hausman 1997, Ingraham and Sidak 2004). We evaluate the third measure, the change in
Marshallian consumer surplus, because it remains a widely employed metric for assessing
consumer welfare changes in applied economic research.
Discussion.

Table 3 shows the numerical results we obtain for exact compensating

variation and these three approximations. Each row assumes the true distribution of preferences in the population follows the model of heterogeneous demand behavior described
earlier. The first row is the mean compensating variation for the population, as given by
equation (20). It indicates that, on average, consumers are better off under the 2003 choice
set than under the 2002 choice set by $17.76 per user per year.
Because consumers face price discrimination based on individuals’ demand intensities,
it is natural to expect the three representative consumer-based welfare approximations
to diverge from the exact calculation. The second row of Table 3 represents what one
might calculate in order to accommodate a menu of nonlinear prices in a representative
consumer framework. This measure overestimates the mean consumer welfare gain with
a substantial error of +532 percent. To appreciate why, note that the typical consumer
23

TABLE 3
E XACT C ONSUMER S URPLUS AND T HREE C OMMON A PPROXIMATIONS
Method
Exact compensating variation,
per capita

Formula
Ê

CV (P 0, P 1, y, ν) dPy,ν

Welfare Change

Approximation Error

$ 17.76

—

Representative consumer approximation, with nonlinear prices

CV (P 0, P 1, ȳ, ν̄)

$ 112.20

+532%

Representative consumer approximation, with average prices

CVlin (p̄0 , p̄1 , ȳ, ν̄)

$ −2.64

−114%

Marshallian consumer surplus
with average prices, per capita

CS lin (p̄0 , p̄1 , ȳ, ν̄)

$ −2.64

−114%

uses just over 600 minutes per month and would prefer the 700-minute plan under the
initial 2002 choice set, at $89.99 per month (see Table 2). Under the 2003 plans, the typical
consumer would instead prefer the 600-minute plan for $79.99 and incur small overage
charges. Since the typical consumer’s demand is fairly price inelastic the net gain is slightly
less than the fixed fee decrease of $10 per month, amounting to $112.20 per annum. In sum,
by ignoring heterogeneity in preferences and consumption, this method mis-specifies the
marginal price that most consumers face and poorly estimates consumer welfare.
The third line of Table 3 table reports a conventional representative consumer compensating variation calculation, one that ignores the nonlinearity of prices entirely. It is meant
to mimic what a researcher might do if only the consumer’s total monthly bill is observed
(i.e., the number of minutes used and the dollar amount billed). Here we use the seller’s
average revenue per minute (over all consumers) as the consumer’s price, and assume a
linear budget constraint. This method makes an approximation error of −114%, which
has the wrong sign. This misleading result occurs because the representative consumer’s
average price rises slightly from 2002 to 2003 (by approximately four hundredths of a cent
per minute); at average use of roughly 600 minutes per month and a price-inelastic representative consumer, we obtain a loss of $2.64 annually. This welfare loss conclusion is
incorrect, and arises from two different sources of aggregation bias: it incorrectly assumes
that consumers face the average price on the margin, and it ignores demand heterogeneity
by adopting a representative consumer framework.
The final row in Table 3 reports the consumer surplus measure used in a classic ‘Harberger’ deadweight welfare triangle calculation. This measure of welfare has three sources
of error: It ignores income effects, it aggregates heterogeneous’ individuals consumer welfare changes incorrectly, and it incorrectly employs average instead of marginal prices

24

when consumers face nonlinear pricing. In this particular case, there turns out to be little
difference between this measure of consumer welfare and the previous average price measure: For this small change in average prices and with income-inelastic mean demand (of
.5), there is little difference between the representative consumer’s Hicksian and Marshallian demand curves. The central point to observe here is that even if income elasticities
are small (on average), Marshallian consumer surplus changes can yield poor estimates of
actual (exact) welfare changes when consumers face nonlinear prices.
Overall, these results indicate that common approximation methods for evaluating
consumer welfare changes can yield substantial errors. These errors would appear to be
a potential concern whenever the population of interest is subject to a nonlinear pricing
scheme that exploits the heterogeneity in consumers’ preferences. Because they ignore the
(induced) price variation across consumers with different demand levels, representative
consumer approximations should be expected to be somewhat inaccurate in these settings.
While these errors could turn out to be small in other applications, it remains a challenge
to identify the circumstances in which a researcher can safely conclude as much a priori.

7

Concluding Remarks

This paper proposes a simplified method for evaluating exact consumer surplus when consumers face nonlinear prices, including menus of pricing plans. It also accommodates the
preference heterogeneity that leads consumers to self-select along a menu of price schedules for unobserved reasons. Our approach complements and extends the prior methods
used for special cases in the literature, including welfare analysis with rationed goods
(Neary and Roberts 1980) and the piecewise-linear budget sets that arise in income tax
change simulations (see, e.g., Hausman 1983 or Moffitt 1990). In addition to generalizing
these earlier methods to pricing practices of most any form, our technique is convenient to
implement.
The techniques in this paper can be used to analyze a variety of welfare issues. For example, nonlinear prices and the need to evaluate welfare figure prominently in regulated
markets and tax policy discussions. Most practical applications of this paper’s methods
will build upon econometric models of demand behavior, since—as we have indicated—it
is important to account for the heterogeneity in individuals’ preferences when consumers
face nonlinear prices. Given a model of consumer demand, with these techniques a practitioner can prospectively evaluate consumers’ well-being under any pricing system one
wishes to consider.
These methods may also prove useful for addressing classical policy questions in situations where a consumer’s choices affect the prices it faces. For instance, consider the famil25

iar problem of measuring the deadweight loss from an excise or ad valorem tax. While the
classical ’welfare triangle’ logic is clear when a good has a constant price, the deadweight
loss is no longer so transparent when consumption decisions are made facing a menu of
nonlinear prices. This paper’s methods provide a general means to handle such problems,
using the conventional (Diamond and McFadden 1974) definition of deadweight loss as
the difference between total tax revenue and the total lump-sum transfers needed to leave
each consumer indifferent to the tax. Evaluating the latter when consumers face nonlinear
prices is an immediate application of the techniques presented here.

26

Appendix A.
This appendix provides additional detail regarding the determination of the shadow prices in Figure 2, as noted in section 4.1.
Consider the analytic determination of the initial utility level u0 and shadow price p0∗ in Figure
2. Inserting the expenditure function (15) into the ‘income equals initial expenditure’ condition (13)
and rearranging gives

1−γ
1
1
u0 = 1−γ
y − (p0h − p0∗ )k 0
− 1+β
p1+β eα
(21)
This expresses the initial utility level as a function of the shadow price, p0∗ . To determine the shadow
price, note that the consumer’s initial marginal willingness to pay in this example is either the
high or the low marginal price; which value applies depends whether the expenditure-minimizing
consumption level is below or above the quantity k 0 where the price schedule changes. Equation
(12) implies
⎧
⎨p0 only if h(p0 , u0 ) ≤ k 0
h
h
p0∗ =
⎩p0 only if h(p0 , u0 ) > k 0 .
l
l
This is a feasibility condition; in economic terms, it ensures that the quantity demanded at a particular marginal price will be supplied at that marginal price. The equality case assignment is
determined by the terms of the price schedule (here assumed to be left-continuous at k 0 ). Now if
h(p, u0 ) crosses the supply schedule more than once, then both cases can hold (thus the ‘only if’).
This is the situation depicted in Figure 2. When this occurs, the correct shadow price is the value
that minimizes the total expenditure required to achieve u0 :
⎧
⎨p0
h
p0∗ =
⎩p0
l

if e(p0h , u0 ) ≤ e(p0l , u0 ) + (p0h − p0l )k 0
if otherwise .

(22)

The right-hand side is readily calculated using (21) and (15). Figure 2 is drawn such that the second
case applies and the initial shadow price is p0l . Note the equality case assignment in (22) is arbitrary
because the consumer’s initial utility and total expenditure is the same either way.

Appendix B.
This appendix describes the parameterization of the model used in Section 6.
Distribution of Consumer Income. As noted in the text, consumer incomes are assumed to be
log-normally distributed in the population. We estimated the parameters of this distribution using
percentiles of the US household income data obtained from the One Percent Public Use Microdata
Files of the 2000 Decennial Census. Mean monthly total income is approximately $ 4,700.
Distribution of Consumer Preferences. The distribution of consumers’ preference parameters νi = (αi , βi , γi ) is obtained in two steps. First we fix the parameter means, using information
from several sources. Telephia Customer Value Metrics (www.telephia.com) reports 2005-Q1 cell
phone use averaged 679 minutes nationally. Discounting back at their estimated 5% p.a. growth
rate implies average use of 600 minutes during 2002-2003. In the absence of overages, our demand

27

specification has 600 = ᾱ + γ̄ ȳ, where the bars denote averages. We set γ̄ = 0.065 so as to produce an average income elasticity of 0.5, which is comparable to income elasticities reported in
other telecommunications studies (see text). This elasticity implies ᾱ is approximately 300 minutes per month. We then set the mean price coefficient β̄ so that the reservation price for usage is
$1.50/minute. At a (uniform) price of $0.40/minute this implies a mean price elasticity of −0.36.
Consistent with prior econometric work, the distribution of the parameters (αi , βi , γi ) are assumed to be normal and independent across consumers and parameters (see, e.g., Iyengar 2005).
We estimate the variances by matching the model’s moments to six sample consumption moments.
Four moments are average consumption (in minutes) for the four 2002 plans (which are 450, 630,
900, and 1170 minutes per month). Two additional moments are the standard deviation of overall
usage (300 minutes per month) and an overage frequency of 0.20. These six sample consumption
moments are based on related cell plan use statistics reported in Iyengar (2005).
Last, in our simulations we also impose, if needed, a constraint that an individual’s price coefficient must yield quasi-concave utility at 1,000 minutes. This issue arises because a linear demand specification does not necessarily yield quasi-concave utility for all possible values of income
and demand elasticities and because the support of these parameters is unbounded (this is a wellknown problem with linear demand models; see Hausman 1981). For the parameters we employ,
however, this problem is rarely encountered in our simulations.

28

References
Bolmquist, S. (1983) “The Effect of Income Taxation on the Labor Supply of Married Men in Sweden.” Journal of Public Economics 22: 169-97.
Blundell, R. and T. MaCurdy (1999) “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Approaches.” Chapter
27 in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics Vol. 3. Amsterdam: NorthHolland.
Blundell, R., C. Meghir, and E. Symons (1988) “Labor Supply Specification and the Evaluation of
Tax Reforms.” Journal of Public Economics 36: 23-52.
Burtless, G., and J.A. Hausman (1978) “The Effect of Taxation on Labor Supply: Evaluating the
Gary Negative Income Tax Experiment.” Journal of Political Economy 86: 1103-30.
Creedy, J. and A. Duncan (2002) “Behavioral Microsimulation with Labor Supply Responses.” Journal of Economic Surveys 16(1): 1-39.
Creedy, J. and G. Kalb (2005) “Measuring Welfare Changes in Labor Supply Models.” The Manchester School 73(6): 664-85.
DeBorger, B. (1989) “Estimating the Welfare Implications of In-Kind Government Programs: A
General Numerical Approach.” Journal of Public Economics 38: 215-26.
Diamond, P., and D. McFadden (1974) “Some Uses of the Expenditure Function in Public Finance.”
Journal of Public Economics 3: 3-21.
Dubin, J. and D. McFadden (1984) "An Econometric Analysis of Residential Appliance Holdings
and Consumption.” Econometrica 52: 345-62.
Fullerton, D. and L. Gan (2004) “A Simulation-Based Welfare Loss Calculation for Labor Taxes with
Piecewise-Linear Budgets.” Journal of Public Economics 88: 2339-59.
Gao, M., A. Hyytinen, and O. Toivanen (2005) “Demand for Mobility: Evidence from a Real-World
Pricing Experiment.” Discussion Paper No. 43, Helsinki Center for Economic Research, University of Helsinki.
Geweke, J. (1996) “Monte Carlo Simulation and Numerical Integration.” Chapter 15 in H.M. Amman, D.A. Kendrick, and J. Rust, eds., Handbook of Computational Economics, Vol. 1. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Hausman, J.A. (1981) “Exact Consumer Surplus and Deadweight Loss.” American Economic Review
71: 662-676.
Hausman, J.A. (1983) “Stochastic Problems in the Simulation of Labor Supply.” In M. Feldstein,
ed., Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hausman, J.A. (1985) “The Econometrics of Nonlinear Budget Sets.” Econometrica 53: 1255-82.
Hausman, J.A. (2000) “Efficiency Effects on the US Economy from Wireless Taxation.” National Tax
Journal 53: 733-9.
Ingraham, A., and G. Sidak (2004). “Do States Tax Wireless Services Inefficiently? Evidence on the
Price Elasticity of Demand.” Virginia Tax Review 24(2): 249-62.
Iyengar, R. (2005) “A Structural Demand Analysis for Wireless Services under Nonlinear Pricing
Schemes.” Working Paper, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Judd, K.L. (1999) Numerical Methods in Economics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Lambrecht, A., K. Seim and B. Skiera (2005) “Does Uncertainty Matter? Consumer Behavior under
Three-Part Tariffs.” Manuscript, Univ. of Pennsylvania, Department of Business and Public
Policy.
Latham, R. (1980) “Quantity Constrained Demand Functions.” Econometrica 48(2): 308-14.
McFadden, D. (1999) “Computing Willingness To Pay in Random Utility Models.” Chapter 15 in J.
Moore, R. Riezman, and J. Melvin, eds., Trade, Theory, and Econometrics: Essays in Honor of John S.
Chipman. London: Routledge.
Maddock, R. (1989) “Welfare Analysis with Rising Block Pricing.” Resources and Energy 11(4): 32936.
Moffitt, R. (1986) “The Econometrics of Piecewise-Linear Budget Constraints: A Survey and Exposition of the Maximum Likelihood Method.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 4(3):
317-28.
Moffitt, R. (1990) “The Econometrics of Kinked Budget Constraints.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
4: 119-39.
Neary, J.P., and K. W.S. Roberts (1980) “The Theory of Household Behavior Under Rationing." European Economic Review 13:25-42.
Rappoport, P., J. Alleman, and L.D. Taylor (2004) “Household Demand for Wireless Telephony:
An Empirical Analysis.” Working Paper, Columbia Institute for Tele-Information, Columbia
University.
Reiss, P. and M. White (2005) “Household Electricity Demand, Revisited.” Review of Economic Studies 72: 853-83.
Roberts, K.W.S. (1979) “Welfare Effects of Nonlinear Pricing.” Economic Journal 89(353): 66-83.
Schwab, R.M. (1985) “The Benefits of In-Kind Government Programs.” Journal of Public Economics
27: 195-210.
Slesnick, D.T. (1998) “Empirical Approaches to the Measurement of Welfare.” Journal of Economic
Literature 36(4): 2108-65.
Stole, L. (2003) “Price Discrimination and Imperfect Competition.” Forthcoming in M. Armstrong
and R.H. Porter, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization Vol. 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Vartia, Y. (1983) “Efficient Methods of Measuring Welfare Change and Compensated Income in
Terms of Market Demand Functions.” Econometrica 51: 79-98.
Varian, H. (1989) “Price Discrimination.” Chapter 10 in R. Schmalensee and R.D. Willig, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization Vol. 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Wilson, R. (1993) Nonlinear Pricing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Marginal
Price
h(p,u0)
0

p0*

0
d (p* )

0

p (q)
1

d (p1* )
p1*
1
p (q)

q0

Quantity

F IGURE 1

Marginal
Price

h(p,u0)

0

ph

1

ph
s0(p)

0

pl

q(p,y+d0)
s1(p)

1

pl

0

k

0

q

F IGURE 2

1

k

Quantity

Marginal
Price

h(p,u0)

0

s (p)

p0h
0

p*

1

s (p)

1

ph
0
q(p,y+d )

p1*
p0l
p1l

0

k1

k

Quantity

F IGURE 3

Total
Price

Plan A

Plan B

FC

Plan C

FB
F

A

kA τ
A

τB

kB
F IGURE 4

Quantity

