                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      FLIGHT-TO-QUALITY OR FLIGHT-TO-LIQUIDITY?
                     EVIDENCE FROM THE EURO-AREA BOND MARKET

                                           Alessandro Beber
                                           Michael W. Brandt
                                          Kenneth A. Kavajecz

                                         Working Paper 12376
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12376


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




Beber is at HEC, University of Lausanne, Brandt is at the Fuqua School of Business, Duke University and
is also affiliated with the NBER, and Kavajecz is at the School of Business, University of Wisconsin -
Madison. We gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments from seminar participants at Notre Dame
University, University of North Carolina, and the University of Wisconsin. We have also benefitted greatly
from the comments of Shane Corwin, Joel Hasbrouck, Paul Schultz and Richard Sheehan. All remaining
errors are our own. Address correspondence to Kenneth Kavajecz, School of Business, University of
Wisconsin – Madison, 975 University Avenue, Madison, Wisconsin 53706. Phone: (608) 265-3494 or
kkavajecz@bus.wisc.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Alessandro Beber, Michael W. Brandt and Kenneth A. Kavajecz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Flight-to-Quality or Flight-to-Liquidity? Evidence From the Euro-Area Bond Market
Alessandro Beber, Michael W. Brandt and Kenneth A. Kavajecz
NBER Working Paper No. 12376
July 2006
JEL No. G0, G12

                                            ABSTRACT

Do bond investors demand credit quality or liquidity? The answer is both, but at different times and
for different reasons. Using data on the Euro-area government bond market, which features a unique
negative correlation between credit quality and liquidity across countries, we show that the bulk of
sovereign yield spreads is explained by differences in credit quality, though liquidity plays a
non-trivial role especially for low credit risk countries and during times of heightened market
uncertainty. In contrast, the destination of large flows into the bond market is determined almost
exclusively by liquidity. We conclude that credit quality matters for bond valuation but that, in times
of market stress, investors chase liquidity, not credit quality.


Michael W. Brandt
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Box 90120
One Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
mbrandt@duke.edu
1.         Introduction

In times of economic distress, we often observe investors rebalance their portfolios toward less
risky and more liquid securities, especially in fixed income markets. This phenomenon is
commonly referred to as a flight-to-quality and a flight-to-liquidity, respectively. While the
economic motives of these two phenomena are clearly distinct from each other, empirically
disentangling a flight-to-quality from a flight-to-liquidity is difficult because, as Ericsson and
Renault (2006) show in the context of the U.S. corporate bond market, these two attributes of a
fixed income security (credit quality and liquidity) are usually positively correlated. For
example, U.S. Treasuries have less credit risk and are more liquid than corporate bonds. When
we observe investors reduce their corporate bond holdings and increase their Treasury holdings it
is therefore unclear whether they do so because of credit or liquidity concerns.

           The goal of our paper is to determine empirically the extent to which investors are
concerned about credit quality and liquidity unconditionally, as well as conditional on times of
heightened market uncertainty or rebalancing activity. We accomplish this by studying yield
spreads and orderflow in the Euro-area government bond market which exhibits a strong and
unique negative relation between credit quality and liquidity, as opposed to the strong positive
association found in U.S. debt markets. To appreciate this difference, consider that the credit
quality of sovereign debt increases with a country’s fiscal discipline (i.e., lower deficit/debt to
GDP ratio). At the same time the liquidity of sovereign bonds depends on the quantity of
outstanding debt which, holding the size of the economy constant, decreases with a country’s
fiscal discipline. Italy’s sovereign debt, for example, is among the most liquid but also most
risky in the Euro-area government bond market. This negative association between credit quality
and liquidity is the key aspect of our data that allows us to empirically disentangle flights-to-
quality and flights-to-liquidity.

           More specifically, we study the yield spreads (relative to a common Euro-LIBOR yield
curve) and orderflow for 10 Euro-area countries with active sovereign debt markets. We use the
MTS interdealer fixed income securities data, a relatively new dataset containing Euro-area
government security wholesale transactions and limit order books.1 These data have two
advantages. First, all the fixed income securities therein are based on the actions of the same

1
    The MTS data are essentially the European equivalent of the U.S. GovPX data.


                                                          1
European Central Bank, thereby isolating the credit quality and liquidity differences across
countries. Second, as will become apparent later, we can construct precise measures of liquidity
for these data, in contrast to what is generally possible to obtain for fixed income securities. In
addition to the MTS data, we utilize data from the sovereign credit default swap (CDS) market to
obtain an exogenous estimate of credit quality for each of the countries in the sample.

         Our main empirical finding is that investors care about both credit quality and liquidity,
but they do so at different times and for different reasons. We document that the bulk of
sovereign yield spreads is explained by differences in credit quality, though liquidity plays a
non-trivial role especially for low credit risk countries and during times of heightened market
uncertainty. When we investigate flights directly, we find that the destination of large flows into
(as well as out of) the bond market is determined almost exclusively by liquidity. Furthermore,
when we condition on periods of large flows into or out of the bond market, liquidity explains a
substantially greater proportion of sovereign yield spreads, consistent with a heightened impact
of order flow on bond prices. We conclude from this evidence that, while credit quality matters
for bond valuation, in times of market stress, investors chase liquidity, not credit quality.2

         The question of whether investors are more concerned with credit quality or liquidity is
crucial for academics, practitioners, and policy makers alike. For academics, our results point to
specific avenues that are likely to be fruitful in improving our current term structure models by
providing a better understanding of cross-market dynamics and the sources of risk premia. For
practitioners, understanding the implications of credit quality and liquidity on fixed income
securities aid in both firm-level issuance decisions as well as trading strategies of fixed income
portfolio managers. Finally, our work is important to policy makers, whose objective is the
viability of the markets, because it suggests ways to mitigate ‘peak-load’ problems induced by
flights into and out of financial markets as was seen during the Russian debt crisis in 1998.

         Section 2 discusses the related literature. Section 3 describes our data and methodology.
Section 4 reports our empirical results and Section 5 concludes.




2
  It is important to note that our analysis of flights is specific to the choice of securities within a single asset class –
Euro area government bonds, and does not necessarily apply to movements across asset classes. We restrict our
analysis to the government bond market because we cannot empirically characterize with the same level of detail the
rebalancing activities across asset classes.


                                                             2
2.      Related literature

Our study is related to three separate segments of the finance literature. First, our analysis is
related to research studying the set of sovereign debt markets operating within the European
Monetary Union. This collection of work has focused primarily on the determinants of yield
changes or of yield spreads within and across European Union countries. Geyer, Kossmeier, and
Pichler (2004) and Menkveld, Cheung, and de Jong (2005) employ factor models in their
analysis while Codogno, Favero and Missale (2003) and Favero, Pagano and Von Thadden
(2005) relate yield spreads to movements in U.S. debt markets. Other research involving the
European Union bond markets focuses on the properties of orderflow and trading costs (Cheung,
de Jong, and Rindi, 2003) or on determining which fixed income securities act as the benchmark
for a given maturity (Dunne, Moore, and Portes, 2003). While our analysis is related to the
above research by virtue of studying a common set of European Union fixed income markets,
our analysis focuses instead on the extent to which credit and liquidity concerns jointly
determine yields and net orderflow (flights) in European bond markets.

        Our analysis is also naturally related to the literature on credit risk. Early work by Collin-
Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001) found that changes in yield spreads were not associated
with natural credit risk factors or standard proxies for liquidity. In contrast, more recent work by
Duffie, Pedersen, and Singleton (2003) and Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) argue that both
credit and liquidity concerns are critical components of yield spreads. Specifically, Longstaff,
Mithal, and Neis (2005) use, like us, information from credit default swaps to obtain direct
measures of the size of default and non-default components in corporate spreads. While they
find the majority of the yield spread is due to default risk, the non-default spread component is
substantial, time-varying and related to bond-specific and macroeconomic illiquidity.

        Finally our work is also related to the burgeoning literature on the importance of
liquidity. While there is little debate that the liquidity of a security affects its price, see for
example, Amihud and Mendelson (1986) and Chordia, Roll and Subrahmanyam (2000), the
debate has shifted toward determining whether the level of liquidity, the change in liquidity
(liquidity risk), or both, have an impact on security prices. Goldreich, Hanke and Nath (2004)
and Longstaff (2004) provide evidence that the level of liquidity is priced through the
comparison of carefully chosen samples of on and off-the-run paired Treasury securities and



                                                    3
Treasury and RefCorp securities respectively. Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) argue instead that
liquidity risk, the possibility that securities will become illiquid precisely when traders want to
exit their positions, is the important factor priced in asset returns. In addition to this empirical
work, there are three closely related theoretical models which provide some guidance to the role
of liquidity in our empirical study: Vayanos (2004), Acharya and Pedersen (2005) and Ericsson
and Renault (2006). The empirical implications of these models are: (1) preference for liquidity
is time-varying and increasing with volatility, (2) the correlation between similar assets increases
with liquidity, and (3) illiquid assets are more sensitive to the common liquidity factor.

           The critical difference between the papers on credit quality and liquidity cited above and
our work is their exclusive focus on pricing/spreads versus our joint focus on pricing and trading
activity/orderflow. We show that different attributes of securities have a differing importance for
investors when they price them unconditionally and when they price them during times of high
liquidity demands (flights). This analysis speaks more generally to the question of which
attributes of securities are priced conditional on market stress and is thus closer to the
perspective of pricing liquidity risk, i.e. the effect of liquidity on pricing when liquidity is likely
to be most needed.



3.         Data and variable construction

3.1.       Data

We use intraday European bond quotes and transactions from the MTS interdealer markets for
our study. The MTS data include over 750 individual fixed income securities, approximately
88% are issued by Treasuries and local governments, 5% are quasi-government securities issued
by national and international public institutions, and 7% are structured securities, consisting
mainly of asset-backed and covered fixed income obligations. The data we use spans security
trading in 10 European Union member countries: Austria, Belgium, Finland, France Germany
Greece, Italy, The Netherlands, Portugal and Spain.3 The sample period for our study is April
2003 (corresponding to the beginning of the MTS dataset) to December 2004.




3
    While we also have information on Irish securities, the data are too sparse for inclusion in our analysis.


                                                             4
        The trading of MTS securities occurs on two separate platforms, domestic and
benchmark. The domestic platform lists government securities for each of the respective
European countries in the dataset. The benchmark platform trades European benchmark bonds,
i.e. newly issued bonds with a minimum issue size.4 Note that the benchmark bonds can be
traded on both the domestic and benchmark platforms. According to a study of the European
bond market by the European Central Bank, the market share of the MTS platforms among the
electronic trading systems for bonds in Europe in 2003 was equal to 74% in terms of daily
average turnover.5

        The MTS dataset contains a host of security identification information such as the issuing
country, maturity, coupon, etc., as well as trade and quote information. For the trade
information, the dataset contains the date and time of all trades, a buy/sell indicator and the trade
price and size. Furthermore, the quote information includes the best bid and offer prices as well
as the price and corresponding depth at each of the next two best bid and ask prices on the limit
order book. These data allow us to construct yield quotes, liquidity measures and net orderflow
(the difference between buyer and seller initiated volume) for each security.

        We supplement the MTS data with information about sovereign credit risk from Lombard
Risk, an independent valuation service currently owned by Fitch Rating Inc. The data are a
compilation of daily surveys of key credit default swap (CDS) market makers for the 3, 5, 7 and
10-year maturities for each country. The data include the date, issuer (in our case, the country),
currency of the debt, maturity and the mean and standard deviation (across market makers) of the
CDS spread specified in basis points.6

        We restrict our attention to plain coupon securities in order to minimize the impact of
confounding effects related to special fixed income features. Specifically, we exclude securities
with floating rate coupons, securities issued in non-euro currencies, securities originating from a
coupon-stripping program, inflation- or index-linked securities (OAI and TEC), and securities



4
  Note that both the benchmark (EuroMTS) and domestic platforms are wholesale markets where the minimum
trading size is 2.5 million euros.
5
  This statistic is based on average daily turnover in 2003 reported by the European Central Bank (2004).
6
  We obtain CDS data for all the countries and maturities in our sample, except for Netherlands at the 3-year and 7-
year horizon. For more information concerning our credit default swap data, please see
http://www.lombardrisk.com/Solutions/Data/ValuspreadCreditHistoricData/index.htm.


                                                          5
traded prior to issue (when issued). Our final dataset consists of plain coupon sovereign
securities from the 10 countries for which we have both CDS and MTS information.

3.2.    Variable construction

We partition our MTS securities along two different dimensions. The first dimension is quite
naturally the sovereign yield curve underlying each security. Thus, we separate the MTS
securities by country and by benchmark status. The second dimension is the remaining time-to-
maturity of a security, which we split into four categories: 2.5-3.5 years, 4.5-5.5 years, 6.5-7.5
years and 9.5-10.5 years. The rationale for these four maturity categories is that both our credit
quality data (CDS) and our yield curve benchmark (which will be discussed later) explicitly
quote securities at these maturities. We acknowledge that another common dimension used to
partition fixed income securities, which we do not use explicitly, is how recently a security was
issued or its seasonedness. Our rationale for not separating securities on this dimension is that
the status of benchmark security is binding on seasonedness, since benchmark securities must be
issued or “tapped” within the previous two years. Thus, our benchmark securities are effectively
on-the-run securities by definition. The result is a partition of the MTS securities by domestic
versus benchmark status and four maturity categories (3, 5, 7 and 10-years) for each country.

        Consistent with the focus of our empirical analysis, we need to construct four crucial sets
of variables for each country/maturity: sovereign yield spreads, credit variables, liquidity
variables and fund flows which we use to identify flights. We obtain the appropriate sovereign
bond yields at the standard reference maturities (3, 5, 7, and 10-years) in two steps. First, for
each country and each day in our sample, we fit a zero-coupon yield curve to the coupon bond
prices quoted in the last two hours of trading.7 We use the Nelson and Siegel (1987) exponential
functional form as a convenient approach to model the zero-coupon yield curve. For all countries
and days in our sample, we have enough observations to obtain a very accurate fit. In fact, the
average absolute yield error for each bond is always below half of a basis point. The second step
is to transform each country’s zero-coupon yield curve into a par-bond yield curve. This
procedure has the intuitive appeal of expressing yields as coupons of bonds selling at par and




7
We exclude from the analysis the bonds with less than two weeks of residual time to maturity, because
measurement errors in these cases can induce substantial distortions in yield curve fitting.


                                                        6
fulfills a practical need to express yields on the same basis as our benchmark curve (the fixed leg
of an interest rate swap – see below) for comparison purposes.

       The calculation of yield spreads necessitates the choice of a benchmark for comparison
(sovereign yield spread relative to what). Given the results of Dunne, Moore, and Portes (2003),
that the benchmark security within the MTS data varies by maturity and is not always the lowest
yield for a given maturity, we refrain from using one of the countries to act as the benchmark.
Instead we choose to calculate yield spreads using the Euro-swap curve as our benchmark which
is a procedure common to other recent papers in the literature (see for example, McCauley
(2002), Hull, Predescu, and White (2004) and Blanco, Brennan, and Marsh (2005)). Collectively
they argue that government bonds are less than an ideal proxy for the unobservable risk-free rate,
because of differential taxation treatment, repo specials, and scarcity premia. Moreover, the
advantages of the Euro-swap benchmark are that it is a bellwether market that is highly liquid,
carries relatively little counterparty risk (1 to 2 basis points for 6 months on an AA issuer
according to Duffie and Huang (1996)), and provides explicit quotes for the 3, 5, 7 and 10-year
maturities. Thus, our yield spread variables are calculated by subtracting the Euro-swap
(constant maturity of fixed leg) yield from the sovereign (constant maturity) par-bond yield for
each country/maturity category.

       We use the Lombard Risk credit default swap data to calculate our credit variables.
Recall that the Lombard data provide explicit credit quality quotes for the 3, 5, 7 and 10-year
maturities. These data offer an important advantage in that we measure directly the observed
term structures of sovereign credit default swap rates for each country, as opposed to estimating
credit quality with low frequency national account variables like the ratio of public deficit to
GDP. We note that there are occasionally missing observations in the daily time-series of CDS
data. However, even in the worst case, at least one observation per week is available and we do
not detect distinct patterns of missing data over time or for specific countries. We thus use linear
interpolation techniques to obtain a complete set of daily estimates of credit quality for all
countries at the different maturities.

       The difficulty of working with the notion of liquidity is that there is no universally held
definition. To address this issue we consider four different measures to capture the liquidity of
the securities in our sample. Our first liquidity measure is the effective bid-ask spread which is



                                                  7
defined as the spread between the transaction price and the midpoint of the quoted bid-ask spread
at the time of the transaction. Average quoted depth, defined as the average of the depth posted
at the best bid and best ask prices quoted in millions of euros, is our second liquidity measure.
Our third measure is cumulative limit order book depth, where we sum the depth posted at the
three best price points on both the buy and sell side of the limit order book and average the two
sides together. Our final liquidity measure is a liquidity index as in Bollen and Whaley (1998),
which is equal to the average quoted depth divided by the percentage bid-ask spread.

       Our measure of fund flows, or flights, for each country/maturity is the daily net orderflow
scaled by the net orderflow for the bond market as a whole. Scaling the net orderflow by total
net orderflow provides the economically pertinent interpretation that our flight variable is a
percentage allocation of funds among the various countries. Net orderflow for a given maturity is
calculated using the MTS data by summing the volume of buyside transactions each day for that
maturity, summing the volume of sellside transactions each day for that maturity and netting the
two by taking their difference (buy volume less sell volume). Net orderflow for the bond market
as a whole is computed analogously by summing the net orderflow for each country.

       Table 1 contains sample summary statistics related to the number of securities, average
trading volume, sovereign yield, credit default swap spread as well as effective bid-ask spread
and quoted depth broken out by country and maturity. Notice that there is a fair amount of
variation in the credit default spreads and liquidity variables across the countries in our sample.
The heterogeneity in these variables will play a central role in our empirical results. In addition,
while Germany, France and Italy tend to have the highest number of issues in the dataset, they
report vastly different trading volumes, with Italy displaying the largest volume.

       As a foray into our empirical analysis we present the raw cross-sectional correlation
coefficients between our average credit measure and the various averages of our liquidity
measures for each maturity on the benchmark platform. Table 2 shows that the effective spread
is negatively related to the default swap spread, that is, as the effective spread decreases, the
credit spread increases. The positive coefficients for the depth variables and the liquidity index
suggest that as they each increase, the credit spread also increases. Therefore taken together, the
results suggest that as liquidity increases, whether via a narrow effective spread or increased
depth, credit quality decreases. This table highlights the unique characteristic of the European



                                                  8
bond market in that credit quality and liquidity are negatively related, making it a perfect
environment for disentangling their respective roles. Furthermore, the negative correlation
appears weakest for the 3-year maturity and strongest for longer maturities (peaking at the 7-year
maturity). Finally, of the four liquidity measures that we use, the liquidity index, which
incorporates both spread and depth information, has the strongest correlations with credit quality.



4.     Empirical results

Having established the negative relation between credit quality and liquidity, we turn our
attention to examining which attributes of a security bond investors care most about. We
accomplish this by first documenting the relative magnitude of credit quality and liquidity in
determining sovereign yield spreads unconditionally. We then test whether the relative
importance of these two characteristics changes in periods of heightened market uncertainty.
After our investigation of pricing, we shift our attention to trading activity (flights) by directly
analyzing the attributes of a security that investors take into account when moving funds into,
and out of, the bond market. Finally, we join the two perspectives together by partitioning the
yield spread into credit and liquidity components precisely during times of flights. The rationale
behind our empirical approach is to be careful to understand how flights affect, and are affected
by, changes in credit quality and liquidity.

4.1.   Unconditional yield spread decomposition

We regress the difference between the sovereign yield in country i and the Euro swap yield onto
differences in country i’s credit and liquidity measures from their respective cross-sectional
averages, pooling all the countries together for each separate maturity. Equation (1) details our
regression model,

        Sovereign Par Yield          − Euro Swap Yield =
                               i,t                      t
                                     α + β(CDS i,t − CDS AVE,t ) + δ(LIQ i,t − LIQ AVE,t ) + ε i,t   ( 1)

where CDSi,t is the credit default swap spread in country i during period t, LIQi,t is one of the
four liquidity measures for country i over period t, and CDSAVE,t and LIQAVE,t are the cross-
sectional averages of the CDSi,t and LIQi,t variables respectively during period t.




                                                      9
       The exact specification of our model warrants further discussion. While it is not
uncommon in the literature to regress yield spreads onto credit and liquidity variables, specifying
the credit and liquidity variables as differences from their cross-sectional averages is quite novel.
We justify this approach by acknowledging that credit risk and liquidity are relative concepts,
particularly in the context of flight-to-quality and flight-to-liquidity. Indeed, an investor
considering shifting funds from one asset to another necessarily cares about the relative credit
quality and liquidity of the two assets. Thus, we use the cross-sectional average of each of the
variables as an anchor point with which to measure the relative credit quality and liquidity of the
securities within our sample countries. The time-series behavior of these relative credit quality
and liquidity measures (credit and liquidity differentials) for Germany and Italy can be seen in
Figure 1, along with a sample of events that are likely to have triggered the sharpest changes.
Consistent with our earlier anecdotal evidence, Germany has higher than average credit quality
and Italy has lower than average credit quality; in contrast, Italy has higher than average liquidity
while Germany has lower than average liquidity. In addition, the figure reveals that the various
maturities behave differently, for example, the liquidity differential is more variable both at the
end of the sample period and for shorter maturities. Lastly, the credit and liquidity differentials
seem to respond to country-specific events. Our empirical results will demonstrate further that
harnessing the information embedded in the cross-section of countries in this way offers
substantial explanatory power.

       We estimate the unconditional regression in Equation (1) for the 3, 5, 7, and 10-year
maturities using each of our four liquidity measures. White heteroschedastic consistent standard
errors are shown in parentheses, and with one exception all coefficients are significant at the 1%
level. Table 3 reveals that the regression model has significant explanatory power with adjusted
R2 ranging from a low of 22% at the short end of the curve to a high of 57% for the longer
maturities. The success of the regression model reinforces the importance of the cross-section or
relative credit and liquidity concepts in explaining sovereign yield spreads.

       Consistent with intuition as well as with the previous literature, the credit differential has
a positive impact on the sovereign yield spread which suggests that a lower credit quality
increases the yield spread. The magnitude of the credit coefficients suggest that a 100 basis
point credit differential above the average is associated with an increase in the sovereign yield
spread of between 62 and 96 basis points, depending on the maturity and liquidity variable used.


                                                 10
       The liquidity differential is also important in explaining the sovereign yield spread. The
positive coefficient on the effective spread and the negative coefficients on the depth variables
and liquidity index suggest that higher liquidity is associated with a lower yield spread. In
contrast to the credit differential; however, the economic impact of the liquidity differential is
muted the longer is the maturity. As an example, a one Euro increase in the effective bid-ask
spread is associated with a 231 and 17 basis point increase in the 3-year and 10-year sovereign
yield spread respectively. Moreover, the impact of a 100 million Euro increase in quoted depth
on the 3 and 10-year sovereign yield spread corresponds to a decrease of 11 and 1 basis point,
respectively. Lastly, in comparing the various liquidity measures, while each measure captures
the bonds’ liquidity, the liquidity index appears to fit the data the best, most likely because it
incorporates both price and depth information.

       The sign and significance of the constant may appear surprising at first glance, as it
suggests that sovereign yields may actually be below the Euroswap yield; however, this is a
result of having two different benchmarks (with different credit and liquidity properties) on
either side of the regression equation. In particular, the constant accounts for the difference
between the credit and liquidity inherent in the Euroswap market and the average credit risk and
liquidity in the cross-section.

       It is important to highlight that the responses to credit quality and liquidity differ based
on maturity. In untabulated results, we estimated the model pooling all countries and maturities
together (effectively constraining the coefficients to be identical across maturities). While the
signs and significance levels are the same as reported in Table 3, the adjusted R2 of the
constrained specification are substantially smaller (18%).

       Just as the pooled time-series regression results in Table 3 are striking, so too are the
model’s implications for the cross-section of countries. Table 4 displays the contribution that
both the credit and liquidity components provide to the sovereign yield spread for each country.
The credit contribution for country i is constructed by taking the average credit differential
across time for country i and multiplying it by the relevant credit differential coefficient estimate
from Table 3; the liquidity contribution is computed analogously. The proportion figures are
calculated by dividing the absolute value of the respective contribution (credit or liquidity) by the
sum of the absolute value of the credit and liquidity contributions; thus, the sum of the credit and



                                                  11
liquidity proportions will be one by construction (see Equation 2). Note that the proportion
figures express the impact of credit and liquidity on the variation in yield spreads explained by
the regression in Equation (1), rather than the actual yield spread.

            Credit Contribution i = βˆ (CDS i,t − CDS AVE ,t )
         Liquidity Contribution i = δˆ( LIQi,t − LIQ AVE ,t )
                                                    Credit Contribution i
              Credit Proportion i =                                                                (2)
                                      Credit Contribution i + Liquidity Contribution i
                                                   Liquidity Contribution i
           Liquidity Proportion i =
                                      Credit Contribution i + Liquidity Contribution i


The contribution and proportion figures provide complementary information about the relation
between credit quality, liquidity and yield spreads. The contribution figures detail the direction
and magnitude of credit quality and liquidity, while the proportion figures weigh the relative
impact of the two on the sovereign yield spreads. Correspondingly, a country’s contribution
figures can be positive or negative depending on how that country’s credit quality or liquidity
compares to the cross-sectional average. By adding a country’s contribution figures (along with
the constant) we can calculate the average yield spread for that country. Interestingly, there are
many countries/maturities with negative sovereign yield spreads owing to the convenience yield
of holding government issued securities.8

         A review of Table 4 shows that unconditionally credit quality makes up the majority of
the sovereign yield spread for most countries with liquidity playing a substantially smaller role, a
result that is consistent with Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005). Indeed, the grand average of
the proportion figures reveals that credit quality makes up 89% while liquidity is 11%. Beyond
the grand average it is important to understand the high degree of heterogeneity in the
contribution and proportion figures across countries. A comparison of these figures for Germany
and Italy demonstrates the wide range of results. For example, consider the liquidity index
regression for the 10-year note, the German contributions for credit and liquidity are -0.0010 and
0.0008 respectively, implying an average yield spread of -0.92 basis points (-0.90 -0.10 +0.08).9


8
  Supporting evidence for our average sovereign spread estimates can be found on the MTS yield report which is
calculated using Euro-government benchmark references as of 11:00 CET daily and located at
http://www.mtsgroup.org/newcontent/data/ at “EuroMarket at a Glance”.
9
  The contribution figures are multiplied by 100 to facilitate reading; therefore, a contribution of 0.01 is equivalent
to 1 basis point.


                                                            12
The corresponding contribution figures for Italy are 0.0487 and -0.0017 for credit and liquidity
respectively thereby implying an average yield spread of 3.8 basis points (-0.90 +4.87 -0.17).
The proportion figures for the two countries show similar divergent results. The German
proportion figures are 0.57 and 0.43 for credit and liquidity respectively while for Italy they are
0.97 and 0.03. These results are consistent with anecdotal evidence; Germany, known for high
credit quality, has a substantial portion of the yield spread due to liquidity while Italy, known for
high liquidity, has the overwhelming majority of its yield spread due to credit concerns.

       Another interesting aspect bore out in Table 4 is that there are large differences between
credit and liquidity proportions for the short and long end of the yield curve. Notice that at the 3
and 5-year maturities there are a number of countries, Belgium, France, Germany and Spain,
which have liquidity proportions greater than 0.5. In contrast, there are no countries, with the
exception of two instances for Germany, which have liquidity proportions greater than 0.5 for the
7 and 10-year maturities. Our results suggest that credit quality has both a larger impact and is
more important for longer maturities. We believe this result occurs quite naturally given that
changes in credit quality are a long-term concern related to changes in fiscal discipline, which in
turn is associated with changes in the political/governmental landscape. Given there is likely to
be much more uncertainty about the political landscape and fiscal discipline 7 and 10 years into
the future, credit quality becomes a more dominant part of the yield spread at longer horizons.

       These results are important to our understanding of the primitive forces underlying flights
between assets. An important contribution of our paper is documenting a number of cross-
sectional results related to credit quality and liquidity, as they reveal the force and direction of
the ‘wind gusts’ behind flights. First, yield spreads are explained by the credit quality and
liquidity of the assets relative to the credit quality and liquidity of feasible alternatives in the
cross-section. Second, there is tremendous heterogeneity across countries and maturities in the
magnitude, direction and impact of credit quality and liquidity, which to this point has not been
appreciated in the literature. Third, as we will point out in the next section, this relation is time-
varying and depends on the level and nature of uncertainty in the marketplace.




                                                   13
4.2.   Conditional yield spread decomposition

Beyond our analysis of the unconditional relation between credit quality, liquidity and sovereign
yield spreads, we seek to understand how this relation is altered in the face of changes to the
market environment. In particular, we investigate various forms of uncertainty, broadly defined,
that are guided by both previous academic work and established market trading behavior. In
section 4.4 we extend the analysis by specifically conditioning on flights, defined as unusually
large capital flows into or out-of the Euro-area bond market.

       While many researchers have argued that liquidity is an important consideration when
pricing assets, the exact form liquidity takes is still a matter of debate. Pastor and Stambaugh
(2003) argue that liquidity risk, namely the possibility that liquidity may be scarce precisely
when a market participant wants to exit a position, is the critical aspect of liquidity that is priced.
Following the work of Pastor and Stambaugh (2003), we investigate whether liquidity risk is a
factor which changes the relative trade-off between credit quality and liquidity for determining
yield spreads. Specifically, we condition our analysis on time periods in which market liquidity,
as proxied by one of our four liquidity measures, is below its time-series median. From a
liquidity risk standpoint, this focuses the analysis on precisely the worst case scenario, i.e., when
liquidity in the Euro-area bond market is low and exiting a position is more expensive.

         Another uncertainty that we consider is perceived risk in the equity markets. It is not
uncommon to hear discussions in the academic or financial press describing a flight out of
equities and into fixed income markets when the perceived risk in equity markets rises (e.g.,
Connolly, Stivers, and Sun, 2005; Underwood, 2006). Given this well-established description of
capital flows between these two markets, we consider how the relation between credit quality
and liquidity changes when equity markets are perceived to be unusually volatile. We consider
two separate measures of perceived equity market volatility, the VIX and VSTOXX indices. The
Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) volatility index (VIX) is a measure of U.S. equity
market volatility which is constructed using both call and put implied volatilities from S&P500
index options. The VSTOXX is a similar volatility index for European equity markets that is
constructed using implied option prices written on the DJ Euro STOXX 50 index. For each
separate volatility index our conditional analysis considers periods where the index is above its
respective time-series median.



                                                  14
        Lastly, we also consider the impact of perceived volatility internal to the Euro-area bond
market, namely, volatility related to interest rates. Theoretical work by Vayanos (2004) and
Acharya and Pedersen (2005) argue that volatility within a market causes that market to value
liquidity relatively more. In the face of high market volatility, there may be a higher probability
of altering, rebalancing or exiting a position altogether, this in turn puts trading costs at the
forefront if market liquidity is time-varying. We proxy for interest rate volatility by conditioning
on periods where the implied volatility of a 30-day constant maturity swaption (written on a 10-
year Euroswap contract) is above its time-series median.10

        Our conditional analysis entails repeating the base regression analysis conducted above,
i.e., equation (1), having first conditioned the sample on periods of low bond market liquidity,
high equity market volatility, or high interest rate volatility. Tables 5 and 6 present our
conditional results; however, in the interest of parsimony we present results for the liquidity
index only, although the results from the other liquidity measures are both qualitatively and
quantitatively similar and are available on request. As before, all the coefficients in the
conditional regressions (Table 5) are statistically significant at the 1% level and the signs are
consistent with those in the unconditional regressions (Table 3). Recall that the positive
coefficient on the credit differential implies that lower credit quality is associated with a higher
sovereign yield spread and the negative coefficient on the liquidity differential implies that
higher liquidity is associated with a lower sovereign yield spread. Moreover, the adjusted R2 are
in general similar across the unconditional and conditional regressions with the conditional
regressions producing slightly lower R2 for the 3-year maturity and slightly higher R2 for 5, 7
and 10-year maturities. When the model is compared under the various conditioning criteria,
conditioning on a high VIX index appears to fit the short end of the curve best while
conditioning on high interest rate volatility fits the long end of the curve best. Although, it is
clear that no one conditioning set stands out as superior since the R2 across the conditional
regressions are roughly the same.

        By most statistical measures the unconditional and conditional regressions are very
similar; however, the interesting aspect of the comparison is the economic difference in the size


10
  As a robustness check we have also conducted the conditional analysis using the lowest quartile for liquidity and
the highest quartile for volatility measures. The results are both qualitatively and quantitatively similar to those
using the median and are available upon request.


                                                         15
of the respective coefficients. For all conditioning regressions, the size of the coefficient on the
credit differential is substantially smaller than the coefficient from the unconditional regression
for all maturities but the 10-year. This suggests that the impact of credit quality on the sovereign
yield spread is lower when we condition on periods of uncertainty. When we compare the
coefficients on the liquidity differential we see that, with one exception, the absolute value of the
coefficient is larger, and dramatically so for the 7 and 10-year maturities. Therefore, consistent
with a muted impact of credit quality, the impact of liquidity on the sovereign yield spread is
substantially increased, particularly on the long-end of the yield curve. Overall, these
conditional regressions suggest that the relation between credit quality and liquidity not only
varies by country and maturity, it varies through time in response to changes in the level of
uncertainty.

       Table 6 displays the conditional results broken out by country which leads to a number of
interesting insights. It is immediately clear that the liquidity contribution and corresponding
proportion figures are much larger for a number of countries. Closer inspection reveals that
while there are some differences across conditioning sets, there are noteworthy differences
across maturities. In particular, the fraction of countries across the four conditional regressions
that register an increase in the liquidity proportion are 1/3, 2/3, 3/4 and 1 for the 3, 5, 7 and 10-
year maturities respectively. Therefore, consistent with the results in Table 5, liquidity has a
much larger impact on the sovereign yield spread during periods of high uncertainty, especially
on the long-end of the curve. Our interpretation of this result is that mobility (the ability to shift
funds quickly and cheaply) takes precedence over a trader’s valuation concerns during periods of
uncertainty. Furthermore, a revealed preference argument suggests that the potential costs
associated with investing in an illiquid, creditworthy asset is higher than the costs associated
with investing in a liquid, yet less creditworthy, asset during volatile market periods.

4.3.   Flights

It is clear that the conditional yield spread decomposition points to an increased importance of
liquidity during periods of perceived market uncertainty. One explanation of this phenomenon is
that when investors defensively rebalance their portfolio toward less risky assets in response to a
perceived temporary increase in uncertainty, short-term liquidity and transaction costs concerns
become relatively more important and long horizon credit risk becomes relatively less important.



                                                  16
        To explicitly test this explanation, we now directly analyze flights, or large movements of
funds, into and out of the Euro area bond market as well as between different countries and
maturities. Our direct analysis of flights necessitates an orderflow measure as well as a way of
identifying flights from other fund flows. Given that discussions of flight-to-quality and flight-
to-liquidity are often heard surrounding financial crises such as currency devaluations, the
Russian bond default of 1998, and the Long-Term Capital Management debacle, one way that
would be quite natural is to look for evidence of funds moving between markets surrounding
these events. However, we do not take this tact in our analysis for two reasons. From a practical
perspective, these crisis events are very infrequent, and it is difficult to identify specific
exogenous events leading up to flights. More importantly from a conceptual perspective, we
think about the temporary rebalancing activities hypothesized above as a broader phenomena
than simply trading behavior surrounding dramatic events. In addition, our approach allows us
to identify flights in a systematic fashion thereby allowing for a better understanding of the
catalyst underlying the flights.

        Rather than identifying events which may cause flights, we classify flights by identifying
periods where there are large positive or large negative total bond market orderflow.
Specifically, we classify a flight into the bond market as any day in which the daily net orderflow
was in the top quartile of positive net orderflow and analogously we define a flight out of the
bond market as any day in which the daily net orderflow was in the bottom quartile of negative
net order flow.11 Our focus on large absolute orderflow mitigates the confounding effects of
trading behavior unassociated with flights, for example, portfolio rebalancing by European
central banks, exogenous mutual fund inflows and redemptions, inventory management, etc.
Given these behaviors are largely independent, they are likely to offset and have little impact on
our flight periods; however, to the extent that they remain, they simply make it more difficult for
us to obtain significant results.

        After we identify our flight periods we examine the financial news headlines
corresponding to those periods using Factiva. In general, the recurring news on days of relevant
net bond market order flow describes either optimism or pessimism about economic growth


11
  As a robustness check the analysis was also estimated using the median instead of above and below the extreme
quartiles. The results display the same signs and significance levels, although the R2s, notwithstanding the higher
number of observations are lower.


                                                         17
associated with the release of investor confidence numbers.12 Other frequent headlines are
related to European Central Bank statements about inflation and interest rates. By matching our
chosen days with these significant news events we are confident that our classification procedure
has identified flights; moreover, the link to these news events provides a context with which the
reader can better interpret our results. The core part of our flight analysis entails re-estimating
our base regression (Equation 1) for each maturity, replacing the original dependent variable
(sovereign yield spreads) by the share of the net bond market orderflow that goes into a specific
country. We are able to analyze each maturity class separately because a preliminary
investigation shows that flights into or out-of the bond market do not target specific maturity
ranges, since the null hypothesis of net bond market orderflow targeting the four maturity classes
equally can never be rejected at conventional statistical levels (results not reported).

        In addition, we segment the regression based on the direction of the flight as well as the
horizon over which we aggregate orderflow. This partition is based on the conjecture that there
may be fundamental differences between flights into and out of the bond market related to the
asset characteristics being sought and the urgency of the transaction. For example, given the
results of the previous sections, we suspect that liquidity will be demanded more aggressively for
flights into the bond market, while the trading behavior surrounding flights out of the bond
market is unclear. Similarly, we suspect that flights into the bond market are likely to occur very
quickly while flights out of the bond market may be transacted over a longer horizon (lower
frequency) since there is less urgency to complete the funds transfer. Therefore, our base
regression is estimated separately for flights into the bond market and out of the bond market,
where flights into (out of) the bond market are identified as the top (bottom) quartile of positive
(negative) bond market net order flow, as well as on a daily and weekly basis, where the credit
and liquidity differentials and orderflow are aggregated on a 1 day and 5 day horizon
respectively.

        Lastly, the proportional nature of the dependent variable warrants further examination
from an econometric standpoint. The usual non-negativity and unity constraints are not an issue

12
   Examples of recurrent headlines on positive bond market net orderflow days are: “Investor optimism fades…”,
“No new jobs, no recovery…”, “European stock adrift…”.
Examples of headlines on negative net bond market order flow are: “Optimistic expectations contrast with weak
current conditions…”, “France Leaving Econ Stagnation…”, “Euro zone business and consumer confidence are
finally starting to improve…”.


                                                       18
in our setting, since net orderflow can be negative for some countries and, as a result, the
proportion can also be greater than one for some other countries. However, in each period, the
sum of the proportions for all countries needs to add up to one. Since the two regressors, credit
and liquidity differentials, have mean zero by construction, we restrict the intercept to be equal to
0.10 (given 10 countries), so that the add-up constraint is always satisfied.

        Table 7 presents the orderflow results, as before, we present the results for the liquidity
index only.13 It is worth reviewing that orderflow moving into more liquid assets (flight-to-
liquidity) would show up as positive coefficients on the liquidity differential. Similarly,
orderflow moving into assets with high credit quality (flight-to-quality) would manifest itself
with negative coefficients on the credit differential.

        Beginning with the results for the flights into the bond market at the daily frequency, we
see strong evidence of flight-to-liquidity as the coefficients for liquidity are significant at the 1%
level for all maturities. The coefficients on the credit differential are also significant; however,
interestingly their signs suggest a ‘flee-from’ rather than a ‘flight-to’ quality. To be clear, we do
not believe orderflow is actually moving away from high credit quality assets, rather our
methodology has basically set up a ‘horse race’ between the two characteristics, credit quality
and liquidity, and the results clearly show that liquidity dominates. The economic significance
of the results is also substantial, as an example, the results for the 10-year maturity suggest that a
country with an average credit quality and a liquidity index one standard deviation above the
average is associated with an average share of 13% of total bond market inflow.

        The results for flights out of the bond market at the daily frequency are similar in that the
coefficients on both the credit and liquidity differential are positive and in general, significant.
The sign of the coefficients have the same interpretation as before, since now the dependent
variable has both a negative denominator and a negative numerator for the countries that are
targets of outflows. Therefore, conditional on a flight out of the bond market the results suggest
that investors exiting the bond market are abandoning relatively more liquid and credit risky
securities, which reinforces the idea that investors prize the transaction cost component both
when they enter and exit the bond market.


13
 The results from the other liquidity measures are both qualitatively and quantitatively similar and are available
upon request.


                                                         19
        When we compare results at the daily and weekly horizons, for flights into the bond
market, credit and liquidity differentials explain very little at the weekly horizon, while for
flights out of the bond market the results at the daily horizon also obtain at the weekly horizon
and with greater explanatory power.14 This suggests that bond market inflows occur at a
relatively high frequency, being completed within a few days. In contrast, bond market outflows
occur at a lower frequency taking a week or more to complete. These results mesh well with
intuition as flights into the bond market are likely to be executed with some urgency when
exiting a more volatile market, such as the equity markets, and flights out of the bond market are
likely to be executed cautiously when entering a riskier market.

        Lastly, we also reran the analysis constraining the constant to reflect the null hypothesis
of market capitalization proportions for fund flows, rather than the null hypothesis that each
country receives an equal proportion (10%, given 10 countries). This could be for example the
outcome of a bond asset allocation strategy with weights based on relative bond market
capitalization. The results, (not shown), are both quantitatively and qualitatively similar to those
in Table 7.

4.4.    Pricing Conditional on Flights

The evidence provided thus far shows that, in times of market stress, (1) liquidity becomes
relatively more important for bond pricing and (2) the destination of large flow of funds into the
bond market is determined almost exclusively by liquidity. In this section, we study whether
bond pricing depends more heavily on liquidity precisely during periods of large shifts of funds
into or out-of the bond market. This is a natural extension of our analysis given the evidence in
the existing literature on the effects of order flow on bond yields (e.g., Brandt and Kavajecz,
2004). Thus, we bring our analysis full circle by explicitly linking a bond’s price/yield, credit
and liquidity components, and orderflow. We thus examine the relation between sovereign yield
spreads, credit quality, and liquidity during days where we observe large net orderflow into and




14
  As a robustness check, we have also conducted the same empirical analysis with net orderflow computed at a 2, 3,
and 4 day horizon. An increasing horizon determines a monotonic decrease in explanatory power for flows into the
bond market and a monotonic increase in the explanatory power for flows out-of the bond market. These results are
available upon request.


                                                       20
out-of the bond market.15 We also investigate the same relations at the weekly horizon motivated
by the timing asymmetry between flights into and out-of the bond market documented in Table
7.

        Table 8 presents the results; due to space considerations only the liquidity index and the
10-year maturity are shown. In general, our findings are very similar to the unconditional results
of Table 3, except that the coefficients on liquidity are about twice the unconditional magnitude.
Specifically, Panel A shows that liquidity becomes relatively more important on days of large
bond market inflows or outflows. Panel B shows the results for the weekly horizon. At this
lower frequency, liquidity is relatively more important for flights out-of the bond market,
consistent with the asymmetric timing results of Table 7. Although not shown, the corresponding
contribution and proportion measures show that liquidity explains a higher proportion of the
yield spread than the unconditional case for all countries, pointing to an unambiguous increase in
the importance of liquidity during flights.

        This evidence on pricing during flights links together a number of results that heretofore
has been addressed separately. First, we document that fixed income investors are concerned
with a specific set of security attributes, in our case credit quality and liquidity. Second, the
relative importance of these attributes is dependent on the market environment. Third, flights
(orderflow) respond to changes in the relative importance of credit quality and liquidity and
fourth, the price of fixed income securities are affected by flights (orderflow). In summary, our
results on the linkage of price, attributes and orderflow suggests that the fixed-income market is
characterized by traders that care not only about the long-horizon credit risk of a security but also
the liquidity of the security, especially during periods of market uncertainty. The heightened
demand for liquid securities during these periods manifests itself through both an increased
liquidity share of yield spreads and flights into more liquid securities.




15
  The conditioning threshold that defines large bond market net orderflow is the top quartile. However, we obtain
very similar results by conditioning on other thresholds, such as the bond market orderflow above the median or in
the top quintile.


                                                        21
5.     Conclusion

We determine empirically the extent to which fixed income investors are concerned about credit
quality and liquidity unconditionally, as well as conditional on times of heightened market
uncertainty. We accomplish this by studying yield spreads and orderflow in the Euro-area
government bond market, which exhibits a strong and unique negative relation between credit
quality and liquidity, as opposed to the strong positive association found in U.S. debt markets.

       Our main empirical finding is that investors demand both credit quality and liquidity, but
they do so at different times and for different reasons. We show that the bulk of sovereign yield
spreads is explained by differences in credit quality, though liquidity plays a non-trivial role
especially for low credit risk countries and during times of heightened market uncertainty.
However, the destination of large flows into (as well as out of) the bond market is determined
almost exclusively by liquidity. Furthermore, we document that during periods of large flows
into or out of the bond market, liquidity explains a substantially greater proportion of sovereign
yield spreads, consistent with a heightened impact of order flow on bond prices. This evidence
suggests that, while credit quality matters for bond valuation, in times of market stress, investors
chase liquidity, not to credit quality.
       Our joint focus on pricing and trading activity allows us to document that different
attributes of securities have a different importance for investors when they are priced
unconditionally versus when they are priced during times of high liquidity demand (flights).
Moreover, our findings speak to the larger issue of how a security’s risk premium changes with
the market trading environment, the security’s relative attributes, and flights.




                                                 22
                                              References

Acharya, Viral V. and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2005, Asset pricing with liquidity risk, Journal of
      Financial Economics 77, 375-410.
Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson, 1986, Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread, Journal of Financial
     Economics 17, 223-249.
Blanco, Roberto, Simon Brennan and Ian Marsh, 2005, An empirical analysis of the dynamic
       relation between investment-grade bonds and credit default swaps, Journal of Finance
       60, 2255-2281.
Bollen, N. P. and Robert Whaley, 1998, Are teenies better?, Journal of Portfolio Management
       25, 10-24.
Brandt, Michael and Kenneth Kavajecz, 2004, Price discovery in the U.S. Treasury market: The
       impact of orderflow and liquidity on the yield curve, Journal of Finance 59, 2623-2654.
Cheung, Yiu C., Frank de Jong, and Barbara Rindi, 2005, Trading European sovereign bonds:
      The microstructure of the MTS trading platform, Working paper, University of
      Amsterdam.
Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2000, Commonality in liquidity, Journal of
      Financial Economics 56, 3-28.
Codogno, Lorenzo, Carlo Favero and Alessandro Missale, 2003, Yield spreads on EMU
      government bonds, Economic Policy 503-532.
Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Robert S. Goldstein, and J. Spencer Martin, 2001, The determinants of
       credit spread changes, Journal of Finance 56, 2177-2207.
Connolly, Robert A., Christopher T. Stivers, and Licheng Sun, 2005, Stock market uncertainty
      and the stock-bond return relation, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40,
      161-194.
Duffie, Darrell and Ming Huang, 1996, Swap rates and credit quality, Journal of Finance 51,
        921-949.
Duffie, Darrell, Lasse Pedersen, and Ken Singleton, 2003, Modeling sovereign yield spreads: A
        case study of Russian debt, Journal of Finance 58, 119-159.
Dunne, Peter G., Michael J. Moore, and Richard Portes, 2003, Defining benchmark status: An
      application using Euro-area bonds, NBER Working paper 9087.
Ericsson, Jan and Oliver Renault, 2006, Liquidity and credit risk, Journal of Finance,
       forthcoming.
European Central Bank, 2004, The euro bond market study, Staff Study, Deutsche Bundesbank,
      ECB, Banque de France and Banca d’Italia.
Favero, Carlo, Marco Pagano and Ernst-Ludwig Von Thadden, 2005, Valuation, liquidity and
       risk in government bond markets, IGIER Working paper 281.




                                               23
Geyer, Alois, Stephan Kossmeier, and Stefan Pichler, 2004, Measuring systematic risk in EMU
       government yield spreads, Review of Finance 8, 171-197.
Goldreich, David, Bernd Hanke and Purnendu Nath, 2005, The price of future liquidity: Time-
       varying liquidity in the U.S. Treasury market, Review of Finance 9, 1-32
Hull, John, Mirela Predescu and Alan White, 2004, The relationship between credit default swap
        spreads, bond yields, and credit rating announcements, Journal of Banking and Finance
        28, 2789-2811.
Longstaff, Francis A., 2004, The flight-to-liquidity premium in U.S. Treasury bond prices,
      Journal of Business 77, 511-526.
Longstaff, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis, 2005, Corporate yield spreads: Default risk
      or liquidity? New evidence from the credit-default swap market, Journal of Finance 55,
      2213-2253.
McCauley, Robert, 2002, Panel: Implications of declining treasury debt. International market
     implications of declining treasury debt, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 34, 952-
     966.
Menkveld, Albert J., Yiu C. Cheung, and Frank de Jong, 2005, Euro-area sovereign yield
     dynamics: The role of order imbalance, Working paper, University of Amsterdam.
Nelson, C.R. and A. F. Siegel, 1987, Parsimonious modeling of yield curves, Journal of Business
       60, 473-489.
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns,
        Journal of Political Economy 111, 642-685.
Underwood, Shane, 2006, The cross-market information content of stock and bond order flow,
      Working paper, Rice University.
Vayanos, Dimitri, 2004, Flight to quality, flight to liquidity, and the pricing of risk, NBER
      Working paper 10327.




                                                24
                                                                         Table 1
                                                                Sample Summary Statistics

This table presents summary statistics for our sample securities. N is the number of individual securities in each country/maturity category. Volume represents
the average daily trading volume expressed in millions of euros. Par Yld is the average of the par bond yield. CDS is the average credit default swap spread
expressed in basis points. Eff Sprd is the average effective bid-ask spread and Depth is the average quoted depth for each country/maturity expressed in millions
of euros.

                                               3-Year                                                                     5-Year
   Country           N       Volume      Par Yld     CDS        Eff Sprd     Depth              N       Volume       Pr Yld     CDS        Eff Sprd     Depth
                             (€ Mil)       (%)       (bps)                  (€ Mil)                     (€ Mil)       (%)       (bps)                  (€ Mil)
   Austria            4       28.01       2.83       2.69       0.0082       30.99               4       25.02        3.41      3.68       0.0104       25.04
  Belgium            8        37.66       2.82       3.65       0.0072       36.03              7        38.45        3.40      4.88       0.0102       31.63
  Germany            41       31.54       2.86       3.55       0.0125       22.39              33       28.90        3.44      5.23       0.0150       21.48
   Spain              9       56.61       2.82       3.01       0.0071       35.43              10       31.50        3.41      4.61       0.0083       39.11
  Finland             3       65.76       2.81       2.43       0.0068       34.00               2       30.83        3.37      3.62       0.0095       27.33
   France            19       27.54       2.83       3.22       0.0071       31.04              21       29.34        3.40      4.69       0.0110       32.07
   Greece             7       39.45       2.87       8.35       0.0072       27.91              4        38.22        3.48     11.19       0.0088       23.92
    Italy            28       87.09       2.83       5.93       0.0062       31.94              20       98.97        3.41      8.85       0.0067       33.73
 Netherlands          6       58.79       2.82                  0.0068       30.99               6       32.23        3.39      2.76       0.0101       29.07
  Portugal            7       74.29       2.84       4.87       0.0067       36.03               3       32.68        3.43      7.04       0.0084       31.68


                                               7-Year                                                                    10-Year
                     N       Volume      Par Yld     CDS        Eff Sprd     Depth              N       Volume      Par Yld    CDS         Eff Sprd     Depth
                             (€ Mil)       (%)       (bps)                  (€ Mil)                     (€ Mil)       (%)      (bps)                   (€ Mil)
   Austria            2       20.62       3.81       4.66        0.0135      19.85               2       28.60       4.17      5.93        0.0132       21.33
  Belgium            3        27.88       3.80       5.81        0.0097      23.03              7        44.36       4.17      6.95        0.0119       26.01
  Germany            22       28.86       3.84       6.78        0.0238      19.76              12       30.73       4.20       8.32       0.0136       19.61
   Spain              6       23.96       3.81       6.24        0.0140      23.48              14       38.87       4.18      7.24        0.0198       22.89
  Finland             1       27.77       3.78       4.25        0.0114      22.79               1       33.22       4.16      4.96        0.0160       18.86
   France            14       23.75       3.80       5.75        0.0360      15.26              10       36.32       4.16      7.35        0.0104       26.84
   Greece             3       30.42       3.90      13.55        0.0101      19.39              4        53.92       4.30      16.70       0.0114       20.11
    Italy            10      123.54       3.83      11.43        0.0078      23.88              5       183.90       4.22      14.11       0.0093       23.88
 Netherlands          3       19.39       3.79                   0.0118      22.40               4       56.66       4.17      7.11        0.0119       22.25
  Portugal            2       36.48       3.83       8.62        0.0114      23.51               2       49.36       4.21      10.35       0.0154       23.11
                                            Table 2
                        Correlation between Credit Quality and Liquidity

This table provides the correlation between the average country credit risk and various measures of average
country bond liquidity on the Benchmark platform. A country’s credit risk is measured by the average
credit default swap (CDS) spread quoted for each country/maturity. Liquidity variables are measured as the
country average for bonds with remaining time to maturity centered on the horizon of the CDS plus and
minus 6 months.
                                                        Liquidity Variables
                            Effective                                Liquidity Index =   Cumulative Limit
                            Bid-Ask           Depth at the best    ⎛ Quoted Depth ⎞ Order Book Depth
      Horizon                Spread              Bid or Ask        ⎜⎜                 ⎟⎟
                                                                 ⎝ Quoted Spread ⎠
      3-year                0.0358                0.1214                0.0922               0.2626
      5-year                -0.1163               0.3005                0.3839               0.4245
      7-year                -0.1983               0.6375                0.7394               0.5643
      10-year               -0.1573               0.2171                0.4357               0.2692
                                          Table 3
         Unconditional Relation between Yield Spreads, Credit Quality, and Liquidity

This table contains the results of the following unconditional regression:

   Sovereign Par Yield i ,t − EuroSwap Yield t = α + β (CDS i ,t − CDS AVE ,t ) + δ ( LIQ i ,t − LIQ AVE ,t ) + ε i ,t
Sovereign Par Yieldi,t, CDSi,t and LIQi,t represent the par yield, credit default swap, and liquidity estimates
for the given maturity within country i over period t. CDSAVE,t and LIQAVE,t are the corresponding cross-
sectional averages at time period t. The EuroSwap yieldt is the constant maturity fixed leg yield for the
given maturity over period t. White heteroschedastic consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses
and *** denotes significance at the 1% level.

                                                                 Liquidity Variables
                                                                             Liquidity Index =
                                    Effective          Depth at the best ⎛ Quoted Depth ⎞ Cumulative Limit
                                    Bid-Ask               Bid or Ask       ⎜⎜                 ⎟⎟    Order Book
Variables                            Spread                                 ⎝ Quoted Spread ⎠          Depth
                                                           3-Year
Constant                        -0.001266***          -0.001211***        -0.001216***           -0.001212***
                                (0.000006)            (0.000004)          (0.000004)             (0.000004)
Credit differential             0.006774***           0.006240***           0.006593***              0.006642***
                                (0.000242)            (0.000226)            (0.000218)               (0.000226)
Liquidity differential          0.023112***           -0.000011***          -0.020961***             -0.000003***
                                (0.001313)            (0.000001)            (0.000770)               (0.0000000)
Adjusted R2                     0.2578                0.2685                0.3235                   0.2376
                                                           5-Year
Constant                        -0.000558***          -0.000469***          -0.000475***             -0.000466***
                                (0.000005)            (0.000008)            (0.000005)               (0.000005)
Credit differential             0.007278***           0.007263***           0.007723***              0.007365***
                                (0.000324)            (0.000212)            (0.000274)               (0.000135)
Liquidity differential          0.010076***           -0.000009***          -0.021627***             -0.000003***
                                (0.001432)            (0.000001)            (0.001541)               (0.0000000)
Adjusted R2                     0.2150                0.2506                0.2738                   0.2478
                                                           7-Year
Constant                        -0.000083***          -0.000072***          -0.000065***             -0.000067***
                                (0.000013)            (0.000008)            (0.000006)               (0.000007)
Credit differential             0.008703***           0.008702***           0.009624***              0.008861***
                                (0.000219)            (0.000219)            (0.000207)               (0.000135)
Liquidity differential          0.002844***           -0.000006***          -0.029363***             -0.000002***
                                (0.000885)            (0.000002)            (0.003019)               (0.0000001)
Adjusted R2                     0.3810                0.3985                0.4256                   0.4028
                                                           10-Year
Constant                        -0.000090***          -0.000090***          -0.000090***             -0.000090***
                                (0.000005)            (0.000005)            (0.000005)               (0.000005)
Credit differential             0.008424***           0.008494***           0.008598***              0.008564***
                                (0.000138)            (0.000137)            (0.000138)               (0.000135)
Liquidity differential          0.001720***           -0.000001             -0.006293***             -0.000001***
                                (0.000486)            (0.000001)            (0.001985)               (0.0000001)
Adjusted R2                     0.5682                0.5673                0.5686                   0.5715
                                                                           Table 4
                                                 Explanatory Power of Credit Quality and Liquidity by Country

  This table shows the explanatory power of the credit and liquidity differential on the magnitude of the yield spread on a country by country basis. After
  estimating the following regression: Sovereign Par Yield i ,t − EuroSwap Yield t = α + β (CDS i ,t − CDS AVE ,t ) + δ ( LIQ i ,t − LIQ AVE ,t ) + ε i ,t , we compute for each
  country (i) the contribution to, and proportion of, the yield spread owing to credit and liquidity as below. The contribution figures are multiplied by 100 to
  facilitate reading; therefore, a contribution of 0.01 is equivalent to 1 basis point.
                                   Credit Contributi on = βˆ (CDS − CDS
                                                         i             i ,t        ) and Liquidity Contributi on = δˆ ( LIQ − LIQ
                                                                                        AVE ,t                        i           i ,t )    AVE ,t
               Credit Proportion i = Credit Contributi on i ( Credit Contributi on i + Liquidity Contributi on i ) and Liquidity Proportion i = 1 − Credit Proportion i


                       Effective Spread                               Quoted Depth                             Liquidity Index                              Cum. LOB Depth
                  Contribution       Proportion                 Contribution     Proportion               Contribution      Proportion                  Contribution   Proportion
 Country        Credit    Liquid     Cdt    Liq               Credit    Liquid   Cdt    Liq             Credit    Liquid    Cdt    Liq                 Cdt      Liquid Cdt    Liq
                                                                                   3-Year
  Austria      -0.0082     0.0027      0.75    0.25          -0.0078 -0.0004 0.95 0.05                 -0.0082     0.0013      0.86      0.14        -0.0083   -0.0035    0.70   0.30
 Belgium       -0.0054     0.0026      0.68    0.32          -0.0045 -0.0053 0.46 0.54                 -0.0048     -0.0078     0.38      0.62        -0.0048   -0.0044    0.52   0.48
 Germany       -0.0031     0.0162      0.16    0.84          -0.0028 0.0082     0.26 0.74              -0.0030     0.0145      0.17      0.83        -0.0030   0.0078     0.28   0.72
  Spain        -0.0071     0.0022      0.76    0.24          -0.0064 -0.0061 0.51 0.49                 -0.0067     -0.0065     0.51      0.49        -0.0068   -0.0071    0.49   0.51
 Finland       -0.0133     0.0022      0.86    0.14          -0.0120 -0.0044 0.73 0.27                 -0.0127     -0.0054     0.70      0.30        -0.0128   -0.0013    0.91   0.09
  France       -0.0052     0.0030      0.63    0.37          -0.0047 -0.0013 0.79 0.21                 -0.0050     0.0022      0.69      0.31        -0.0050   0.0011     0.82   0.18
  Greece       0.0296      0.0029      0.91    0.09          0.0262    0.0028   0.90 0.10              0.0277      0.0038      0.88      0.12        0.0279    -0.0012    0.96   0.04
   Italy       0.0130      0.0008      0.94    0.06          0.0121    -0.0022 0.85 0.15               0.0128      -0.0070     0.65      0.35        0.0129    -0.0044    0.75   0.25
 Portugal      0.0058      0.0021      0.73    0.27          0.0056    -0.0053 0.51 0.49               0.0059      -0.0061     0.49      0.51        0.0060    -0.0003    0.95   0.05

                                                                                              5-Year
  Austria      -0.0133     0.0036      0.79    0.21          -0.0136          -0.0009      0.94 0.06   -0.0144     -0.0001     1.00      0.00        -0.0138   -0.0045    0.75   0.25
 Belgium       -0.0064     0.0038      0.63    0.37          -0.0066          -0.0093      0.42 0.58   -0.0071     -0.0090     0.44      0.56        -0.0067   -0.0111    0.38   0.62
 Germany       -0.0011     0.0131      0.08    0.92          -0.0013          0.0018       0.43 0.57   -0.0014     0.0064      0.18      0.82        -0.0014   0.0022     0.39   0.61
  Spain        -0.0053     0.0028      0.66    0.34          -0.0055          -0.0127      0.30 0.70   -0.0059     -0.0140     0.30      0.70        -0.0056   -0.0138    0.29   0.71
 Finland       -0.0135     0.0042      0.76    0.24          -0.0132          -0.0035      0.79 0.21   -0.0141     -0.0030     0.83      0.17        -0.0134   -0.0027    0.83   0.16
  France       -0.0045     0.0046      0.50    0.50          -0.0052          -0.0087      0.37 0.63   -0.0055     -0.0083     0.40      0.60        -0.0052   -0.0071    0.42   0.58
  Greece       0.0427      0.0035      0.92    0.08          0.0422           -0.0012      0.97 0.03   0.0448      -0.0014     0.97      0.03        0.0427    -0.0028    0.94   0.06
   Italy       0.0246      0.0012      0.95    0.05          0.0244           -0.0092      0.73 0.27   0.0259      -0.0154     0.63      0.37        0.0247    -0.0103    0.71   0.29
Netherlands    -0.0145     0.0052      0.74    0.26          -0.0134          -0.0072      0.65 0.35   -0.0142     -0.0037     0.79      0.21        -0.0136   -0.0065    0.68   0.32
 Portugal      0.0109      0.0037      0.75    0.25          0.0113           -0.0051      0.69 0.31   0.0121      -0.0031     0.80      0.20        0.0115    -0.0054    0.68   0.32
                                                                     Table 4, Continued
                                                 Explanatory Power of Credit Quality and Liquidity by Country

  This table shows the explanatory power of the credit and liquidity differential on the magnitude of the yield spread on a country by country basis. After
  estimating the following regression: Sovereign Par Yield i ,t − EuroSwap Yield t = α + β (CDS i ,t − CDS AVE ,t ) + δ ( LIQ i ,t − LIQ AVE ,t ) + ε i ,t , we compute for each
  country (i) the contribution to, and proportion of, the yield spread owing to credit and liquidity as below. The contribution figures are multiplied by 100 to
  facilitate reading; therefore, a contribution of 0.01 is equivalent to 1 basis point.
                                   Credit Contributi on = βˆ (CDS − CDS
                                                         i             i ,t        ) and Liquidity Contributi on = δˆ ( LIQ − LIQ
                                                                                    AVE ,t                            i           i ,t )    AVE ,t
               Credit Proportion i = Credit Contributi on i ( Credit Contributi on i + Liquidity Contributi on i ) and Liquidity Proportion i = 1 − Credit Proportion i


                       Effective Spread                               Quoted Depth                             Liquidity Index                              Cum. LOB Depth
                  Contribution       Proportion                 Contribution     Proportion               Contribution      Proportion                  Contribution   Proportion
 Country        Credit    Liquid     Cdt    Liq               Credit    Liquid   Cdt    Liq             Credit    Liquid    Cdt    Liq                 Cdt      Liquid Cdt    Liq
                                                                                   7-Year
  Austria      -0.0257     0.0017      0.94    0.06          -0.0251 -0.0037 0.87 0.13                 -0.0278     -0.0061     0.82      0.18        -0.0256   -0.0034    0.88   0.12
 Belgium       -0.0090     0.0004      0.96    0.04          -0.0086 -0.0014 0.86 0.14                 -0.0095     -0.0041     0.70      0.30        -0.0087   0.0007     0.92   0.08
 Germany       -0.0043     0.0049      0.47    0.53          -0.0048 -0.0028 0.63 0.37                 -0.0053     0.0042      0.56      0.44        -0.0049   -0.0032    0.60   0.40
  Spain        -0.0148     0.0020      0.88    0.12          -0.0143 -0.0039 0.79 0.21                 -0.0158     -0.0019     0.89      0.11        -0.0146   -0.0063    0.70   0.30
 Finland       -0.0254     0.0014      0.95    0.05          -0.0258 -0.0037 0.88 0.12                 -0.0285     -0.0069     0.81      0.19        -0.0262   -0.0051    0.84   0.16
  France       -0.0116     0.0074      0.61    0.39          -0.0122 0.0001     0.99 0.01              -0.0135     0.0055      0.71      0.29        -0.0125   0.0026     0.83   0.17
  Greece       0.0543      0.0011      0.98    0.02          0.0541    -0.0025 0.96 0.04               0.0598      -0.0066     0.90      0.10        0.0551    -0.0026    0.95   0.05
   Italy       0.0375      0.0004      0.99    0.01          0.0369    -0.0050 0.88 0.12               0.0408      -0.0161     0.72      0.28        0.0375    -0.0086    0.81   0.19
 Portugal      0.0118      0.0010      0.92    0.08          0.0107    -0.0028 0.79 0.21               0.0119      -0.0046     0.72      0.28        0.0109    -0.0036    0.75   0.25

                                                                                          10-Year
  Austria       -0.0212    -0.0007     0.97    0.03          -0.0214           0.0002   0.99 0.01      -0.0216      0.0006      0.97     0.03        -0.0215     0.0014   0.94   0.06
 Belgium        -0.0147    -0.0004     0.97    0.03          -0.0149          -0.0004   0.98 0.02      -0.0151     -0.0013      0.92     0.08        -0.0150    -0.0023   0.86   0.14
 Germany        -0.0010     0.0015     0.41    0.59          -0.0010           0.0001   0.90 0.10      -0.0010      0.0008      0.57     0.43        -0.0010     0.0006   0.63   0.37
  Spain         -0.0112     0.0015     0.88    0.12          -0.0113          -0.0002   0.99 0.01      -0.0114      0.0006      0.95     0.05        -0.0114    -0.0012   0.90   0.10
 Finland        -0.0314    -0.0009     0.97    0.03          -0.0316           0.0010   0.97 0.03      -0.0320      0.0026      0.93     0.07        -0.0319     0.0048   0.87   0.13
  France        -0.0120    -0.0002     0.98    0.02          -0.0121          -0.0005   0.96 0.04      -0.0122     -0.0014      0.90     0.10        -0.0122    -0.0027   0.82   0.18
  Greece         0.0695     0.0004     0.99    0.01          0.0701            0.0001   1.00 0.00      0.0710      -0.0003      1.00     0.00        0.0707      0.0010   0.99   0.01
   Italy         0.0477    -0.0001     1.00    0.00           0.0481          -0.0002   1.00 0.00       0.0487     -0.0017      0.97     0.03        0.0485     -0.0019   0.96   0.04
Netherlands     -0.0418    -0.0005     0.99    0.01          -0.0422          -0.0000   1.00 0.00      -0.0427      0.0002      1.00     0.00        -0.0425     0.0004   0.99   0.01
 Portugal        0.0161    -0.0005     0.97    0.03           0.0162          -0.0001   1.00 0.00       0.0164      0.0001      1.00     0.00        0.0163     -0.0000   1.00   0.00
                                            Table 5
            Conditional Relation between Yield Spreads, Credit Quality, and Liquidity

This table contains the results of the following conditional regression:

   Sovereign Par Yield i ,t − EuroSwap Yield t = α + β (CDS i ,t − CDS AVE ,t ) + δ ( LIQ i ,t − LIQ AVE ,t ) + ε i ,t
Sovereign Par Yieldi,t, CDSi,t and LIQi,t represent the par yield, credit default swap, and liquidity estimates
for the given maturity within country i over period t. CDSAVE,t and LIQAVE,t are the corresponding cross-
sectional averages at time period t. The EuroSwap yieldt is the constant maturity fixed leg yield for the
given maturity over period t. White heteroschedastic consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses
and *** denotes significance at the 1% level.

                                                                   Conditioning on
                                      Low                                                                   High
                                     Market                 High                    High                Interest Rate
Variables                           Liquidity               VIX                   VSTOXX                  Volatility
                                                           3-Year
Constant                        -0.001216***          -0.001223***          -0.001223***             -0.001218***
                                (0.000006)            (0.000006)            (0.000006)               (0.000006)
Credit differential             0.005338***           0.005125***           0.005279***              0.004834***
                                (0.000273)            (0.000260)            (0.000268)               (0.000260)
Liquidity differential          -0.023831***          -0.025103***          -0.024439***             -0.027128***
                                (0.001726)            (0.001446)            (0.001470)               (0.001705)
Adjusted R2                     0.2851                0.3185                0.3045                   0.3094
                                                           5-Year
Constant                        -0.000559***          -0.000518***          -0.000526***             -0.000519
                                (0.000015)            (0.000010)            (0.000011)               (0.000012)
Credit differential             0.006073***           0.005731***           0.005791***              0.005714***
                                (0.000345)            (0.000297)            (0.000310)               (0.000287)
Liquidity differential          -0.018439***          -0.029918***          -0.026977***             -0.025310***
                                (0.002858)            (0.002296)            (0.002613)               (0.002345)
Adjusted R2                     0.2549                0.3185                0.2768                   0.3020
                                                           7-Year
Constant                        -0.000034***          -0.000044***          -0.000046***             -0.000017
                                (0.000006)            (0.000010)            (0.000010)               (0.000012)
Credit differential             0.007828***           0.008039***           0.008027***              0.007859***
                                (0.000207)            (0.000252)            (0.000252)               (0.000241)
Liquidity differential          -0.047113***          -0.051767***          -0.049462***             -0.047340***
                                (0.005251)            (0.005074)            (0.004947)               (0.004896)
Adjusted R2                     0.4787                0.4592                0.4493                   0.4745
                                                           10-Year
Constant                        -0.000079***          -0.000075***          -0.000080***             -0.000042***
                                (0.000006)            (0.000006)            (0.000006)               (0.000006)
Credit differential             0.008776***           0.008883***           0.008843***              0.009121***
                                (0.000170)            (0.000174)            (0.000168)               (0.000168)
Liquidity differential          -0.028827***          -0.023233***          -0.023670***             -0.033318***
                                (0.003226)            (0.003222)            (0.003181)               (0.003239)
Adjusted R2                     0.5852                0.5898                0.5957                   0.6161
                                                                         Table 6
                                         Conditional Explanatory Power of Credit Quality and Liquidity by Country

  This table shows the explanatory power of the credit and liquidity differential on the magnitude of the yield spread on a country by country basis. After
  estimating the following regression: Sovereign Par Yield i ,t − EuroSwap Yield t = α + β (CDS i ,t − CDS AVE ,t ) + δ ( LIQ i ,t − LIQ AVE ,t ) + ε i ,t , we compute for each
  country (i) the contribution to, and proportion of, the yield spread owing to credit and liquidity as below. The contribution figures are multiplied by 100 to
  facilitate reading; therefore, a contribution of 0.01 is equivalent to 1 basis point.
                                   Credit Contributi on = βˆ (CDS − CDS
                                                         i             i ,t        ) and Liquidity Contributi on = δˆ ( LIQ − LIQ
                                                                                        AVE ,t                        i           i ,t )    AVE ,t
               Credit Proportion i = Credit Contributi on i ( Credit Contributi on i + Liquidity Contributi on i ) and Liquidity Proportion i = 1 − Credit Proportion i


                    Low Market Liquidity                                High VIX                               High VSTOXX                             High Interest Rate Volatility
                  Contribution    Proportion                    Contribution     Proportion               Contribution   Proportion                     Contribution       Proportion
 Country        Credit    Liquid  Cdt    Liq                  Credit    Liquid   Cdt    Liq             Credit    Liquid Cdt    Liq                    Cdt      Liquid    Cdt      Liq
                                                                                    3-Year
  Austria      -0.0060     -0.0011     0.85    0.15          -0.0065 0.0001     0.99 0.01              -0.0066     -0.0001     0.98      0.02        -0.0055   -0.0019    0.74   0.26
 Belgium       -0.0048     -0.0035     0.58    0.42          -0.0044 -0.0051 0.46 0.54                 -0.0044     -0.0049     0.47      0.53        -0.0044   -0.0035    0.55   0.45
 Germany       -0.0029     0.0124      0.19    0.81          -0.0030 0.0149     0.17 0.83              -0.0030     0.0147      0.17      0.83        -0.0030   0.0151     0.17   0.83
  Spain        -0.0064     -0.0181     0.26    0.74          -0.0062 -0.0165 0.27 0.73                 -0.0064     -0.0157     0.29      0.71        -0.0060   -0.0197    0.23   0.77
 Finland       -0.0124     -0.0021     0.86    0.14          -0.0116 -0.0042 0.73 0.27                 -0.0120     -0.0043     0.74      0.26        -0.0114   -0.0021    0.85   0.15
  France       -0.0051     -0.0012     0.81    0.19          -0.0054 0.0001     0.99 0.01              -0.0056     0.0002      0.96      0.04        -0.0053   -0.0012    0.81   0.19
  Greece       0.0267      0.0052      0.84    0.16          0.0249    0.0068    0.79 0.21             0.0257      0.0066      0.80      0.20        0.0245    0.0071     0.77   0.23
   Italy       0.0095      -0.0056     0.63    0.37          0.0087    -0.0044 0.67 0.33               0.0086      -0.0041     0.68      0.32        0.0080    -0.0050    0.62   0.38
 Portugal      0.0048      0.0072      0.40    0.60          0.0035    -0.0016 0.69 0.31               0.0038      -0.0017     0.69      0.31        0.0037    -0.0020    0.64   0.36

                                                                                              5-Year
  Austria      -0.0102     -0.0023     0.81    0.19          -0.0111          -0.0002      0.99 0.01   -0.0112     -0.0001     0.99      0.01        -0.0106   -0.0004    0.96   0.04
 Belgium       -0.0067     -0.0087     0.43    0.57          -0.0058          -0.0132      0.30 0.70   -0.0058     -0.0120     0.32      0.68        -0.0058   -0.0115    0.34   0.66
 Germany       0.0006      0.0010      0.38    0.62          -0.0001           0.0052      0.01 0.99   0.0000       0.0047     0.01      0.99        -0.0004   0.0034     0.10   0.90
  Spain        -0.0025     -0.0153     0.14    0.86          -0.0047          -0.0218      0.18 0.82   -0.0046     -0.0196     0.19      0.81        -0.0041   -0.0198    0.17   0.83
 Finland       -0.0151     -0.0014     0.91    0.09          -0.0133          -0.0025      0.84 0.16   -0.0135     -0.0023     0.86      0.14        -0.0139   -0.0009    0.94   0.06
  France       -0.0048     -0.0127     0.27    0.73          -0.0047          -0.0195      0.19 0.81   -0.0048     -0.0179     0.21      0.79        -0.0052   -0.0187    0.22   0.78
  Greece       0.0397      -0.0010     0.98    0.02          0.0360           -0.0007      0.98 0.02   0.0366      -0.0006     0.98      0.02        0.0362    -0.0006    0.98   0.02
   Italy       0.0171      -0.0076     0.69    0.31          0.0181           -0.0144      0.56 0.44   0.0179      -0.0126     0.59      0.41        0.0172    -0.0114    0.60   0.40
Netherlands    -0.0122     -0.0042     0.74    0.26          -0.0118          -0.0067      0.64 0.36   -0.0119     -0.0066     0.64      0.36        -0.0109   -0.0051    0.68   0.32
 Portugal      0.0088      -0.0126     0.41    0.59          0.0100           0.0026       0.79 0.21   0.0100      0.0025      0.80      0.20        0.0113    0.0037     0.75   0.25
                                                                   Table 6, Continued
                                         Conditional Explanatory Power of Credit Quality and Liquidity by Country

  This table shows the explanatory power of the credit and liquidity differential on the magnitude of the yield spread on a country by country basis. After
  estimating the following regression: Sovereign Par Yield i ,t − EuroSwap Yield t = α + β (CDS i ,t − CDS AVE ,t ) + δ ( LIQ i ,t − LIQ AVE ,t ) + ε i ,t , we compute for each
  country (i) the contribution to, and proportion of, the yield spread owing to credit and liquidity as below. The contribution figures are multiplied by 100 to
  facilitate reading; therefore, a contribution of 0.01 is equivalent to 1 basis point.
                                   Credit Contributi on = βˆ (CDS − CDS
                                                         i             i ,t        ) and Liquidity Contributi on = δˆ ( LIQ − LIQ
                                                                                        AVE ,t                        i           i ,t )    AVE ,t
               Credit Proportion i = Credit Contributi on i ( Credit Contributi on i + Liquidity Contributi on i ) and Liquidity Proportion i = 1 − Credit Proportion i


                    Low Market Liquidity                                High VIX                               High VSTOXX                             High Interest Rate Volatility
                  Contribution    Proportion                    Contribution     Proportion               Contribution   Proportion                     Contribution       Proportion
 Country        Credit    Liquid  Cdt    Liq                  Credit    Liquid   Cdt    Liq             Credit    Liquid Cdt    Liq                    Cdt      Liquid    Cdt      Liq
                                                                                   7-Year
  Austria      -0.0222     -0.0118     0.65    0.35          -0.0241 -0.0119 0.67 0.33                 -0.0242     -0.0114     0.68      0.32        -0.0231   -0.0116    0.67   0.33
 Belgium       0.0040      -0.0025     0.61    0.39          -0.0103 -0.0053 0.66 0.34                 -0.0105     -0.0050     0.68      0.32        -0.0002   -0.0116    0.02   0.98
 Germany       -0.0029     -0.0020     0.59    0.41          -0.0028 0.0007     0.80 0.20              -0.0027     0.0005      0.84      0.16        -0.0029   -0.0014    0.67   0.33
  Spain        -0.0094     -0.0195     0.33    0.67          -0.0110 -0.0125 0.47 0.53                 -0.0110     -0.0118     0.48      0.52        -0.0095   -0.0169    0.36   0.64
 Finland       -0.0262     -0.0099     0.72    0.28          -0.0260 -0.0115 0.69 0.31                 -0.0263     -0.0110     0.70      0.30        -0.0266   -0.0096    0.74   0.26
  France       -0.0126     0.0019      0.87    0.13          -0.0124 0.0029     0.81 0.19              -0.0125     0.0026      0.83      0.17        -0.0127   0.0020     0.87   0.13
  Greece       0.0535      -0.0072     0.88    0.12          0.0538    -0.0077 0.87 0.13               0.0541      -0.0074     0.88      0.12        0.0532    -0.0070    0.88   0.12
   Italy       0.0289      -0.0151     0.66    0.34          0.0314    -0.0192 0.62 0.38               0.0310      -0.0183     0.63      0.37        0.0296    -0.0162    0.65   0.35
 Portugal      0.0080      -0.0074     0.52    0.48          0.0078    -0.0027 0.74 0.26               0.0081      -0.0020     0.80      0.20        0.0086    -0.0055    0.61   0.39

                                                                                             10-Year
  Austria      -0.0221      0.0025     0.90    0.10          -0.0223          0.0021       0.92 0.08   -0.0222      0.0021     0.91      0.09        -0.0229    0.0029    0.89   0.11
 Belgium       -0.0154     -0.0061     0.72    0.28          -0.0156          -0.0049      0.76 0.24   -0.0155     -0.0050     0.76      0.24        -0.0160   -0.0070    0.69   0.31
 Germany       -0.0011      0.0036     0.22    0.78          -0.0011          0.0029       0.27 0.73   -0.0011      0.0030     0.26      0.74        -0.0011    0.0042    0.21   0.79
  Spain        -0.0117      0.0026     0.82    0.18          -0.0118          0.0021       0.85 0.15   -0.0118      0.0022     0.84      0.16        -0.0121    0.0030    0.80   0.20
 Finland       -0.0327      0.0118     0.74    0.26          -0.0331          0.0095       0.78 0.22   -0.0329      0.0097     0.77      0.23        -0.0340    0.0136    0.71   0.29
  France       -0.0125     -0.0063     0.66    0.34          -0.0126          -0.0051      0.71 0.29   -0.0126     -0.0052     0.71      0.29        -0.0130   -0.0073    0.64   0.36
  Greece       0.0724      -0.0014     0.98    0.02          0.0733           -0.0012      0.98 0.02   0.0730      -0.0012     0.98      0.02        0.0753    -0.0017    0.98   0.02
   Italy       0.0497      -0.0079     0.86    0.14          0.0503           -0.0064      0.89 0.11   0.0501      -0.0065     0.89      0.12        0.0516    -0.0092    0.85   0.15
Netherlands    -0.0436      0.0009     0.98    0.02          -0.0441          0.0007       0.98 0.02   -0.0439      0.0007     0.98      0.02        -0.0453    0.0010    0.98   0.02
 Portugal      0.0167       0.0003     0.98    0.02          0.0170           0.0002       0.99 0.01   0.0169       0.0002     0.99      0.01        0.0174     0.0003    0.98   0.02
                                           Table 7
                 Relation between Net Orderflow, Credit Quality, and Liquidity

This table contains the results of the following conditional regression:

            Net Orderflow i,t
                                     = α + β (CDS i ,t − CDS AVE ,t ) + δ ( LIQi ,t − LIQ AVE ,t ) + ε i ,t
        ∑
            10
            i =1
                 Net Orderflow i t
Net Orderflowi,t, CDSi,t and LIQi,t represent the daily net orderflow, credit default swaps, and liquidity
estimates for the given maturity within country i over period t. CDSAVE,t and LIQAVE,t are the
corresponding cross-sectional averages at time period t. The intercept is restricted to be equal to 0.10 to
guarantee the add-up constraint. White heteroschedastic consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses
and *** denotes significance at the 1% level.

                                    Flights into Bond Market                Flights out of the Bond Market
                                Daily Relative    Weekly Relative          Daily Relative      Weekly Relative
                                 Order Flow         Order Flow              Order Flow           Order Flow
Variables
                                                        3-Year
Constant                     0.100000              0.100000             0.100000               0.100000
Credit differential          1.052116**            0.531097             1.364640***            1.525500*
                             (0.509315)            (1.129030)           (0.435174)             (0.956943)
Liquidity differential       0.000039**            0.000004             0.000021               0.000053
                             (0.000017)            (0.000031)           (0.000017)             (0.000037)
Adjusted R2                  0.0219                0.0028               0.0193                 0.0430
                                                        5-Year
Constant                     0.100000              0.100000             0.100000               0.100000
Credit differential          1.005941***           0.705913             1.161905***            1.240522**
                             (0.344639)            (0.696261)           (0.271539)             (0.523814)
Liquidity differential       0.000111***           0.000024             0.000123***            0.000125***
                             (0.000022)            (0.000043)           (0.000018)             (0.000037)
Adjusted R2                  0.1008                0.0190               0.1167                 0.1422
                                                        7-Year
Constant                     0.100000              0.100000             0.100000               0.100000
Credit differential          1.521246***           1.327866***          1.498395***            1.652711***
                             (0.264495)            (0.433643)           (0.273926)             (0.495547)
Liquidity differential       0.000199***           0.000126***          0.000096**             0.000114*
                             (0.000030)            (0.000042)           (0.000044)             (0.000070)
Adjusted R2                  0.1965                0.1211               0.0777                 0.1401
                                                       10-Year
Constant                     0.100000              0.100000             0.100000               0.100000
Credit differential          0.729417**            -0.647845            0.682337***            0.884258**
                             (0.285290)            (0.509452)           (0.203988)             (0.390730)
Liquidity differential       0.000112***           0.000076             0.000150***            0.000190***
                             (0.000025)            (0.000053)           (0.000031)             (0.000057)
Adjusted R2                  0.0493                0.0237               0.0677                 0.1443
                                           Table 8
      Yield Spreads, Credit Quality, and Liquidity Conditional on Large Net Orderflow

This table contains the results of the following conditional regression:

   Sovereign Par Yield i ,t − EuroSwap Yield t = α + β (CDS i ,t − CDS AVE ,t ) + δ ( LIQ i ,t − LIQ AVE ,t ) + ε i ,t
Sovereign Par Yieldi,t, CDSi,t and LIQi,t represent the par yield, credit default swap, and liquidity estimates
for the given maturity within country i over period t. CDSAVE,t and LIQAVE,t are the corresponding cross-
sectional averages at time period t. The EuroSwap yieldt is the constant maturity fixed leg yield for the
given maturity over period t. Panel A and B show the results conditional on large daily and weekly net
orderflow, respectively. White heteroschedastic consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses and
*** denotes significance at the 1% level.

                                             Panel A: Daily Order Flow

                                                                   Conditioning on
                                                 Large                 Large                  Large
                                               Absolute               Positive              Negative
           Variables                         Bond Market            Bond Market           Bond Market
                                             Net Orderflow         Net Orderflow          Net Orderflow
                                                                       10-Year
           Constant                         -0.000048***          -0.000046***          -0.000038***
                                            (0.000010)            (0.000021)            (0.000020)
           Credit differential              0.008828***           0.008851***           0.009342***
                                            (0.000285)            (0.000597)            (0.000566)
           Liquidity differential           -0.011402***          -0.010107***          -0.011432***
                                            (0.004585)            (0.004510)            (0.005709)
           Adjusted R2                      0.5727                0.5784                0.5976


                                            Panel B: Weekly Order Flow

                                                                   Conditioning on
                                                 Large                 Large                  Large
                                               Absolute               Positive              Negative
           Variables                         Bond Market            Bond Market           Bond Market
                                             Net Orderflow         Net Orderflow          Net Orderflow
                                                                       10-Year
           Constant                         -0.000062***          -0.000053***          -0.000073***
                                            (0.000004)            (0.000006)            (0.000006)
           Credit differential              0.008900***           0.008555***           0.009203***
                                            (0.000126)            (0.000188)            (0.000166)
           Liquidity differential           -0.012801***          -0.007224***          -0.018888***
                                            (0.002063)            (0.002811)            (0.003007)
           Adjusted R2                      0.5768                0.5496                0.6077
                                                                                                Figure 1
                                                                 Time-series of Credit and Liquidity Differentials for Germany and Italy

The credit and liquidity differentials are the difference between the German and Italian CDS and liquidity
measures and the cross-sectional average at each point in time. The markers, A-H, represent the following
periods and events: (A) July 2003, the European Union asked the Italian government to reduce its
"structural deficit" by 0.5 pct of GDP and to cut the public debt. (B) January 2004, the European Union
finds Italy's stability program scarcely credible, due to a scenario of over optimistic growth and budgetary
measures that were too imprecise. (C) November 2004, European Union Commission is 'Worried' About
Italy Deficit Outlook. (D) August 2003, European Union says Germany can still bring its public deficit
back within strict European Union guidelines next year. (E) September 2003, the German central bank
warns that the German public deficit will break the ceiling laid down in the European Stability Pact for the
third year in a row. (F) November 2004, the International Monetary Fund and the German central bank
express their skepticism that the German government will be able to reach its deficit target. (G) March
2004, German government first quarter new borrowing exceeds redemptions by a record 20 billions euros,
with 16 billions topping up the 10-year maturity. (H) May 2004, the European bond market awaits cheaper
new three-year and ten-year Italian bonds to be auctioned at the end of the week.

                                                                                                                      Credit Differential 3-year                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Liquidity Differential 3-year

                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2100


                 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1600


                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1100
 basis points




                 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (C)                                     600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mqi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (H)
                                                                                                                      (B)
                 2                         (A)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         100

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (F)
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -400                                                                                                                    (G)
                                                                 (D)          (E)


                -2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -900



                -4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1400
                     4/2/2003

                                5/2/2003

                                           6/2/2003

                                                      7/2/2003

                                                                   8/2/2003

                                                                                 9/2/2003

                                                                                             10/2/2003

                                                                                                          11/2/2003

                                                                                                                        12/2/2003

                                                                                                                                        1/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                     2/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                  3/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                               4/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                            5/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                          6/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12/2/2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       11/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12/2/2004
                                                                                                                      Credit Differential 5-year                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Liquidity Differential 5-year

                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2300


                 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1800


                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1300

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (H)
 basis points




                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       800
                                                                                                                                    (B)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mqi




                                                            (A)

                 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     300

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (F)
                                                                               (D) (E)
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (G)

                -2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -700



                -4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1200
                     4/2/2003

                                5/2/2003

                                           6/2/2003

                                                      7/2/2003

                                                                   8/2/2003

                                                                                9/2/2003

                                                                                            10/2/2003

                                                                                                         11/2/2003

                                                                                                                       12/2/2003

                                                                                                                                      1/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                   2/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                3/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                             4/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                          5/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                       6/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12/2/2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       11/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12/2/2004
                                                                                              Figure 1, Continued
                                                                    Time-series of Credit and Liquidity Differentials for Germany and Italy

The credit and liquidity differentials are the difference between the German and Italian CDS and liquidity
measures and the cross-sectional average at each point in time. The markers, A-H, represent the following
periods and events: (A) July 2003, the European Union asked the Italian government to reduce its
"structural deficit" by 0.5 pct of GDP and to cut the public debt. (B) January 2004, the European Union
finds Italy's stability program scarcely credible, due to a scenario of over optimistic growth and budgetary
measures that were too imprecise. (C) November 2004, European Union Commission is 'Worried' About
Italy Deficit Outlook. (D) August 2003, European Union says Germany can still bring its public deficit
back within strict European Union guidelines next year. (E) September 2003, the German central bank
warns that the German public deficit will break the ceiling laid down in the European Stability Pact for the
third year in a row. (F) November 2004, the International Monetary Fund and the German central bank
express their skepticism that the German government will be able to reach its deficit target. (G) March
2004, German government first quarter new borrowing exceeds redemptions by a record 20 billions euros,
with 16 billions topping up the 10-year maturity. (H) May 2004, the European bond market awaits cheaper
new three-year and ten-year Italian bonds to be auctioned at the end of the week.

                                                                                                                               Credit Differential 7-year                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Liquidity Differential 7-year

                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2100


                 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1600


                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (C)
                                                      (A)
 basis points




                 4                                                                                                                               (B)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (H)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mqi




                 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100


                                                                                 (D)            (E)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (F)                                                                                                                                                                              (G)
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -400



                -2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -900



                -4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1400
                     4/2/2003

                                5/2/2003

                                           6/2/2003

                                                         7/2/2003

                                                                      8/2/2003

                                                                                     9/2/2003

                                                                                                    10/2/2003

                                                                                                                   11/2/2003

                                                                                                                                     12/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                     1/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                    2/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                    3/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                    4/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         11/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12/2/2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      9/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12/2/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         11/2/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12/2/2004
                                                                                                                               Credit Differential 10-year                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Liquidity Differential 10-year

                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2100


                 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (C)                                       1600


                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1100

                                                      (A)                                                                                    (B)
 basis points




                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mqi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (H)
                 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100

                                                                                  (D) (E)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (F)                                                                                                                                                                                     (G)
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -400



                -2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -900



                -4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1400
                     4/1/2003

                                5/1/2003

                                           6/1/2003

                                                        7/1/2003

                                                                     8/1/2003

                                                                                   9/1/2003

                                                                                                 10/1/2003

                                                                                                                11/1/2003

                                                                                                                                 12/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                 1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                2/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                               3/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                               4/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                               5/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12/1/2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12/1/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11/1/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12/1/2004




                                                                                                                                                      Germany                                  Italy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Germany                                 Italy
