                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    FIFTY MILLION VOTERS CAN’T BE WRONG:
              ECONOMIC SELF-INTEREST AND REDISTRIBUTIVE POLITICS

                                             Jacob L. Vigdor

                                         Working Paper 12371
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12371


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




I am grateful to Philip Cook, James T. Hamilton, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, and seminar participants at the
University of California-Berkeley, Indiana University-Bloomington, and Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis for helpful comments on an earlier draft, and to Jason Blevins for exceptional
research assistance. Remaining errors are the author' s responsibility. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Jacob L. Vigdor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fifty Million Voters Can’t Be Wrong: Economic Self-Interest and Redistributive Politics
Jacob L. Vigdor
NBER Working Paper No. 12371
July 2006
JEL No. D31, D72, H31

                                             ABSTRACT

Why do voters at the lower end of the socioeconomic spectrum support political candidates who
generally disfavor redistributive policies? Existing explanations often presume that voters are
explicitly acting in opposition to their economic self-interest, or that they hold persistently optimistic
expectations regarding the probability of moving into the upper ranks of the income distribution.
This paper provides an alternative economic explanation. When voters evaluate their well-being by
making relative utility comparisons, support for redistribution depends not only on absolute income
but on one' s status relative to a reference group. When reference groups are defined geographically,
support depends on exposure to higher-income neighbors. The predictions of the model are
supported by empirical evidence drawn from county-level election returns in 1980 and 2000, and by
individual-level polling data following the 2000 election.


Jacob L. Vigdor
Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jacob.vigdor@duke.edu
         [T]hose segments of the working class that have been hardest hit by the big economic
         changes of recent years are the very ones that vote Republican in the greatest numbers.

                  – Thomas Frank, What’s the Matter with Kansas?

         If in polished countries the lowest of the people are rude and uncivil, it is not merely
         because they are poor and ignorant, but because... they are in daily contact with rich and
         enlightened men. The sight of their own hard lot and their weakness, which is daily
         contrasted with the happiness and power of some of their fellow creatures, excites in
         their hearts at the same time the sentiments of anger and of fear: the consciousness of
         their inferiority and their dependence irritates while it humiliates them...In those places
         where the rich and powerful are assembled together, the weak and the indigent feel
         themselves oppressed by their inferior condition.

                  – Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America [emphasis added]

1. Introduction

         In the most straightforward economic model of policy-making, voters below the mean

level of income support efforts to redistribute income, and those above the mean do not (Meltzer

and Richard, 1981). Moreover, increases in the variance of the income distribution should

increase demand for redistribution (Alesina and Rodrik, 1994; Persson and Tabellini, 1994).

With this model explicitly or implicitly in mind, a number of commentators have puzzled over

the demonstrated tendency for below-average income American households to vote for national

candidates representing the less redistributive party, even in an era of increasing inequality.1

Figure 1 displays basic trends associated with this puzzle: income inequality rose steadily in two

periods during the twentieth century, in the 1920s and after 1980. The first period witnessed a

remarkable increase in support for the Democratic part. While voter support for Democratic

presidential candidates has been trending upward during the latter period, the increase is much

less dramatic.


1Glaeser (2005) notes a similar puzzle apparent in cross-national data on income inequality and redistribution,
which shows a negative relationship.

                                                          1
        The most commonly advanced explanations for the lack of a voter response to inequality

maintain that Republican strategists have managed to make the electorate forget about their own

economic self-interest, by focusing their attention on issues of “values” or other nonpecuniary

matters. Economists have also explained American apathy toward redistribution as a product of

expectations regarding upward mobility (Benabou and Ok 2001a; Alesina and La Ferrara 2001).

This paper proposes an alternative explanation: that the failure of rational voter models to

explain electoral outcomes reflects not voters’ disregard for their own self-interest, but social

scientists’ failure to correctly model it.

        A growing body of empirical evidence suggests that individuals’ evaluation of their own

well-being depends not only on their absolute level of consumption, but on their consumption

relative to others (Frank, 1985; Tomes, 1986; Easterlin, 2001; McBride, 2001; see Frey and

Stutzer, 2002 for a review of the economic literature on subjective valuation of well-being).

Evidence also suggests that individuals often use geographically localized comparison groups as

a means of gauging their relative standing (Ferrer-i-Carbonell, 2004; Luttmer, 2005; Stutzer,

2004). In a model incorporating this form of benchmarking, support for redistribution should

covary positively with the degree of socioeconomic heterogeneity in a local area. To the extent

that local income distributions inform voters’ expectations regarding the likelihood that their

own income will rise, this prediction directly opposes that of the upward-mobility-expectation

hypothesis.

        This paper develops a formal political economy model where agents vote for negative

income tax-type proposals and utilize both absolute and relative measures of consumption to

evaluate their well-being. The model generates predictions for the case where voters form



                                                  2
reference groups geographically, or by comparing themselves to others of similar socioeconomic

stature. The paper tests the empirical predictions of this model using county-level election data

merged to county-level Census demographic and socioeconomic data for 1980 and 2000, as well

as individual-level polling data. The potential for endogenous sorting of voters into communities

with varying income profiles is addressed by isolating the transitory component of variation in

the income distribution, which presumably drives demand for redistribution more than it

influences sorting decisions.

       Results conform with the predictions of the model. Voters, particularly those at the low

end of the income distribution, are more likely to support Democratic candidates when they

reside in heterogeneous communities. Moderate-income voters increase their support for

redistributive candidates as their neighbors shift from low- to high-income. There is some

evidence that high income voters tendency to vote altruistically increases with their exposure to

the poor. Finally, there is some evidence that voters with an “economic reference group”

consisting primarily of households with lower income than their own – those on the steeply

downward-sloping portion of the income distribution – exhibit the least support for Democratic

candidates.

       Thus, while non-economic factors may hold great importance for some voters, the

socioeconomic profile of many so-called “Red states” coincides well with the profile of

communities expected to disfavor redistribution under the revised definition of economic self-

interest. These states are by and large homogeneous, with neither large centers of poverty nor

wealthy enclaves. A large fraction of residents fall in that portion of the income distribution

where the density of households just below them exceeds the density of households just above



                                                 3
them. The potential utility gains from redistributive policy, particularly along the margins where

current political debates focus, are small for this group. These findings carry implications both

for the design of optimal redistributive policy and for the tailoring of political messages to the

electorate.

         Section 2 reviews current and historical evidence on voting and income inequality.

Section 3 presents a model of voter support for redistribution when utility depends on relative

consumption. Section 4 describes the empirical strategy and data. Section 5 presents results, and

Section 6 concludes.


2. Voting, Income Inequality, and Other Trends in America

         Figure 1 plots the share of all voters supporting the Democratic candidate in every

presidential election between 1896 and 2004.2 Points in the time series are color-coded to

signify whether the incumbent ran for re-election, and if so whether the incumbent was a

Democrat.3 Figure 1 also plots a basic indicator of income inequality, taken from Piketty and

Saez (2003): the share of income earned by individuals above the 90th percentile in the income

distribution. There are several noteworthy patterns in the graph. First, majority support for the

Democratic party is rare. Of the twenty-eight elections plotted, the Democratic candidate

received a majority of votes cast six times.4

         Four of the six instances where Democrats earned a majority of votes are associated with


2 Note that it is traditional in studies of voting patterns to restrict attention to one party’s share of the two-party vote
(e.g. Fair, 2002). This figure thus highlights the relative importance of third party candidates in certain elections,
such as 1992 when Ross Perot garnered a substantial share of the vote.
3 Incumbents generally have a strong advantage over challengers in elections. For an exploration of this
phenomenon, see Lee (2001).
4 By contrast, the Republican candidate received an absolute majority in fourteen of the twenty-eight elections. The
Democratic candidate was victorious in six of the eight elections where neither party’s candidate earned an absolute
majority – the exceptions being 2000 and 2004.

                                                             4
a single candidate, Franklin Roosevelt. Roosevelt’s initial election in 1932 marked a tremendous

reversal of fortune for the party, which had received less than one-third of the popular vote just

eight years before.5 As the time series show, this reversal of fortune followed upon the heels of a

noticeable increase in income inequality. Roosevelt’s election is often attributed to the onset of

the Great Depression, but note that income inequality remained at an elevated level through the

Depression, declining only after the nation’s entry into World War II.

         Democratic candidates’ success against Republican incumbents effectively reverted to

pre-Roosevelt era between 1956 and 1984, a period marked by relatively low and stable degrees

of income inequality.6 In the last two decades of the century, the share of income accruing to the

top decile rose again, and the time trend suggests a slight upward trend in support for Democratic

candidates, evident particularly when comparing elections with the same incumbency pattern.

Compared to the Roosevelt groundswell, however, this upward trend appears rather anemic. The

absence of a stronger move towards Democratic candidates in the face of growing inequality has

drawn both academic and popular attention, and is the puzzle at the heart of this paper.

         There are several more pieces to this puzzle. Figure 2 depicts a scatterplot relating

county-level voter support for the Democrat candidate, Al Gore, in the 2000 election to median

income in 1999, as reported in the 2000 Census. Traditional political economy models would

suggest a negative relationship between these two variables: counties with more poor residents

should display greater support for the candidate associated with stronger redistributive policies.

Instead, the correlation is modestly positive, as indicated by the least-squares regression line.7

5 A third party candidate, Robert LaFollette, received one-sixth of the popular vote in 1924.
6 The exception to this pattern is Carter’s election in 1976, which marked the first election after the Watergate
scandal and the first election where the incumbent was elected neither to the presidency or the vice presidency.
7 The regression line in Figure 2 reflects an unweighted least-squares specification. Weighting observations by
2000 population, or by the number of votes cast in the 2000 election, produces very similar results.

                                                          5
         Another widely noted political phenomenon of the past half-century is the transformation

of the deep South from a solidly Democratic to solidly Republican region. Democratic candidate

Adlai Stevenson received electoral votes from nine states in 1952; John Kerry won twenty states

in 2004. The set of states won by both candidates in their respective elections is empty.

Traditional explanations for the conversion of the South focus on the Democratic party’s

association with the Civil Rights movement, or with Republican attempts to court socially

conservative voters with essentially non-economic policy positions.

         A commonly stated hypothesis for the relatively weak support for redistributive policy in

the United States focuses on voters’ perceptions of the prospects for upward mobility (Alesina

and La Ferrara, 2001; Benabou and Ok, 2001a; Benabou and Tirole 2005). The weak voter

response to income inequality since 1980 might then be explained by a contemporaneous

increase in income mobility, or a change in voter perceptions of the potential future benefits of

inequality. Available evidence is not supportive of either trend. Benabou and Ok (2001b),

studying income mobility in the PSID, find little evidence of a structural change in mobility

patterns between the 1980s and 1990s. Evidence on attitudes towards inequality, collected by

the General Social Survey and summarized in Figure 3, show that Americans generally adopted

less favorable attitudes towards income inequality between the mid-1980s and mid-1990s. The

proportion of respondents answering “disagree” or “strongly disagree” to the statement “large

differences in income are necessary for America’s prosperity” increased from 37% in the earlier

period to 58% in the later period.8 Evidence presented below also argues against the upward-

mobility-expectation hypothesis, unless voter expectations of mobility covary negatively with
8 A similar shift in opinions can be seen in responses to the query “It is the responsibility of the government to
reduce the differences in income between people with high incomes and those with low incomes.” In the mid-
1980s, half of all respondents either disagreed or strongly disagreed with this statement. In the 1996 survey, this
proportion declined to 43%.

                                                          6
heterogeneity in the local income distribution.

        Finally, the increase in income inequality in the later part of the century was

accompanied, at least through 1990, by an increase in the economic segregation of the nation’s

cities and metropolitan areas (Jargowsky, 1995). While measurement problems render it difficult

to identify the trend in economic segregation prior to 1970, the principal demographic trend

associated with this increase – suburbanization – can be traced back to much earlier points in

time (Jackson, 1985). The tendency for voters to reside in increasingly homogeneous

communities thus may have reduced the particular effect of inequality noted by Tocqueville in

the passage quoted above, by leading them into less frequent contact with “rich and enlightened

men.”

        The interconnections between these various trends and observations are made in the

following section.



3. Who Supports Redistribution if Relative Consumption Matters?

        Previous research in public economic theory has established that when consumer welfare

depends at least to some extent on relative rather than absolute consumption, optimal tax and

transfer policies are more redistributive (Boskin and Sheshinski, 1978), optimal levels of public

good expenditures exceed the standard Samuelsonian level (Ng, 1987), and optimal fiscal

policies should be more countercyclical (Ljungqvist and Uhlig, 2000). Comparatively less

attention has been paid to the topic of voter behavior in this scenario. This section uses a basic

negative income tax model to analyze the effect of relative income comparsion on voters' support

for redistribution. With this conceptual framework, it is possible to link together and explain



                                                  7
many of the phenomena reported in the preceding section.

       As in Boskin and Sheshinski (1978), suppose that voters derive earn income y as a

function of their own (exogenous) ability n and an educational input x. The cost of acquiring x is

an increasing and concave function g(x). For simplicity, assume that y(n,x)=nx and g(x)=x2.

Voters are responsible for choosing a negative income tax policy that produces net-of-transfer-

and-educational-investment income y':

       (1) y ' = y−g  x  ,

which, substituting for y and g(x), can be expressed as

       (2)   y ' = n x−x 2 .

       In a model where only absolute consumption enters the utility function, the median voter

will select values of α, β, and x that maximize her net-of-transfer-and-education-investment

income subject to the balanced-budget constraint:

       (3)   I = ∑ ni x i ,
                   i


where i indexes the I individuals in the economy, and each individual xi is presumed to be chosen

optimally given β. In this framework, it is relatively straightforward to solve for the optimal

educational investment x. The first order condition is:

       (4)  n−2 x=0 ,

                                         n
which yields an optimal value for x as      . Substituting this solution into the balanced-
                                         2

budget constraint (3) and the objective function (2), and then solving (3) for α and substituting

into (2), yields an unconstrained maximization problem in a single variable, β:

             1               1 2 2
       (5)     ∑
             2I i
                      2   2
                  −  ni   n .
                             4


                                                 8
         First-order conditions provide the following solution for a voter's optimal choice of β:

                       ∑ n 2i
                        i

                       2I
         (6) =                .9
                    ∑ n i n2
                         2

                    i
                           −
                      I      2

Table 1 presents some simple results using this formulation. In a three-voter economy with

ability levels {0,0,1}, the median voter sets β=1/2. In an economy with ability levels {0,1,1},

second order conditions for a maximum do not hold, so the median voter selects the corner

solution β=1. These results are quite intuitive: when the median voter is below the mean

income, tax rates are set at a relatively high level, and when the median voter is above the mean

income, tax rates are set to zero. The third row of Table 1 presents the case where ability levels

are {0,1,2}. In this case, the median voter selects an intermediate value for β of 5/7.10

         As a straightforward way of introducing relative consumption into the model, suppose

that utility is a simple linear function of own consumption and that of a reference person.

Consumption of the reference person enters negatively, with a weight 0≤γ≤1. When γ=0,

relative consumption is not a concern. When γ=1, the impact of the reference person's

consumption on utility is equal and opposite to the effect of own consumption.11 Denoting a

voter's own ability as nj and the reference person's as nk, the single-variable objective function (5)

can be rewritten as:



9 Note that second-order conditions require that the denominator be positive for this solution to maximize the
objective function. An example of a situation where second-order conditions do not hold, and the solution in that
case, are discussed below.
10 In this case, note that the median voter ends up with a pre-transfer income below the mean, in spite of the fact
that her ability level equals the mean.
11 While this latter scenario may seem extreme, it is consistent with the empirical results recorded by Luttmer
(2005).

                                                          9
             1−              1 2 2  2 2
       (7)       ∑
              2I i
                       2   2
                   − n i   n j−  nk ,
                              4      4

and first-order conditions yield the following expression for the optimal β:

                                   ∑ n2i
                                    i
                       1−
            R                          2I
       (8)  =                                      .
                  1− ∑ n
                               2
                               i         2      2
                           i            n n
                                         j      k
                                   −      
                       I                2   2

       As expected, when γ=0 this reduces to (6). When γ=1, second-order conditions for a

maximum do not hold , leading to consequences described in more detail below. At intermediate

levels of γ, this altered formula yields the tax rate most preferred by each voter.

       The remaining rows of Table 1 illustrate how a voter's preferred level of β varies with

her own ability level, the reference person's ability level, and the extent to which relative rather

than absolute consumption matters for utility. In a three-voter economy with voter ability levels

{0,0,1}, the median voter's choice of β now depends on the value of γ and the identity of the

reference person. If the median voter refers to the other voter with ability level 0, the original

preferred net-of-tax rate β=1/2 is chosen at the minimum and any intermediate level of γ. When

γ=1, second order conditions fail to hold, and the voter becomes exactly indifferent between any

and all values of β.

       When the reference person is the individual with ability level 1, the median voter

continues to choose β=1/2 when relative comparisons do not matter, but reduces the value –

increasing the implied marginal tax rate – as interpersonal comparisons increase in importance.

At γ=1/2, the preferred β=1/5, and at γ=1, the preferred β=0. Intuitively, when the median

voter compares herself to the higher-ability consumer, an additional benefit from selecting high



                                                        10
tax rates comes into play, as the reduction in the income of the high-ability consumer raises

utility directly.

        Finally, note that the high-ability consumer always prefers the zero-redistribution β=1,

since the addition of interpersonal comparisons only increases the incentive to avoid transferring

income to others.

        In the three-voter economy with ability levels {0,1,2} and γ=1/2, the median voter

chooses β=5/16 when the reference person is the high-ability consumer. Note that this net-of-tax

rate is considerably smaller than in the model where only absolute consumption matters.12 When

the reference person is the low-ability consumer, the median voter chooses the no-redistribution

outcome β=1. Even though the median voter's absolute consumption level stands to increase

with a redistribution scheme, the greater benefits enjoyed by the low-ability consumer lead to a

reduction in overall utility.

        Overall, the model yields the following insights:

    •   Low-ability voters who care about relative consumption will favor stronger redistribution

        as the ability level of their reference group increases.

    •   Moderate-ability voters who care about relative consumption will favor stronger

        redistribution when their reference group is of higher ability, and weaker redistribution

        when their reference group is of lower ability.

    •   As interpersonal comparisons become more important to utility, the relative position of

        the voter and the reference group become more critical determinants of preferences for

        redistribution. In the extreme, when γ=1, voters with ability levels above the reference

        group favor state confiscation of all resources, voters with ability levels below the

12 Were the median voter to compare herself with another individual with n=1, the preferred   β would be 5/7,

                                                       11
        reference group favor zero redistribution, and voters with ability levels exactly equal to

        their reference group are exactly indifferent between any policy alternatives.



Introducing altruism

        While the model above posits that support for redistribution is driven primarily by self

interest, there is also ample evidence that voters behave altruistically toward the poor, albeit

often in a selective manner (Luttmer 2001). Altruistic behavior can be introduced

straightforwardly into the model above, by allowing the weight on others' consumption in the

utility function, γ, to be negative, and setting the reference person to be the poorest in the

group.13 It is straightforward to show that when γ is sufficiently negative, voters select tax rates

higher than they would in the absence of interpersonal comparisons. Moreover, median voters

acting on altruistic preferences select higher tax rates as the reference person's ability declines.14



A note on rank-order models

        When voters care about their rank in the income distribution, as in Layard (1980), the

introduction of relative consumption concerns into a negative income tax framework is

inherently uninteresting, as such a policy cannot influence rank orderings. Voters will continue

to base their support for redistribution on its effects on their absolute level of consumption.

        Two reasonable extensions of the above model could allow for rank-order concerns to

influence support for redistribution. First, the introduction of redistributive programs with

discrete eligibility cutoffs introduce the possibility of reversing some rankings in the income
13 This extension need not imply that high-income voters act purely out of altruistic care for the poor. Appeasement
in the classic Marxist sense could lead to very similar behavior.
14 As an example, consider communities with composition {0,2,2} and {1,2,2} when γ=-3. In the former case, the
    median voter selects β=15/19, and in the latter case β=33/35.

                                                        12
distribution, or at the very least compressing the rankings.15 This sort of program would receive

relatively low support from those who expect to fall just above the eligibility threshold.

         Second, suppose income in future periods is uncertain and follows a random walk, with

period-to-period innovations based on mean-zero independently distributed shocks, and that

voters are at least somewhat risk averse. If a voter's net transfer payment in period t is realized

before the shock to income in that period, then a negative income tax may increase the likelihood

of a rank reduction.16



Defining a reference group

         If voters determine their support for redistributive policy in part by gauging the impact it

would have on themselves relative to a reference group, the selection of reference groups by

individual voters plays a critical role in determining the total amount of redistribution in the

economy. As noted above, recent empirical evidence is consistent with the notion that

geography plays a strong role in reference groups (Ferrer-i-Carbonell, 2004; Luttmer, 2005;

Stutzer, 2004). When reference groups are geographic in nature, the model presented here

suggests that support for redistribution among the poor should be highest when the poor share

neighborhoods or regions with the wealthy. If the wealthy exhibit altruism of the sort discussed

above, then their support for redistribution should likewise increase with their exposure to the

poor. Poor or altruistic wealthy voters who live in homogeneous communities should exhibit the

least support for redistribution conditional on income. Middle-income voters should support

15 It is not uncommon for transfer programs to involve these types of discrete changes in benefits. For a discussion
of the economic implications, see Yelowitz (1995).
16 While this particular ordering of events may seem unintuitive, it could be compared to the awarding of tax
refunds for year t-1 roughly one-third of the way through year t, or to the awarding of ex post tax rebates such as
those enacted twice in the United States since 2001 (Shapiro and Slemrod, 2003).

                                                         13
redistribution when they share communities with the wealthy, but oppose it when they reside in

close proximity to the poor (unless they too exhibit altruism). These implications of the use of

geographic reference groups, coupled with the tendency toward greater economic segregation

noted in section 2 above, provides one possible explanation for the failure of increasing

inequality to inspire stronger support for redistribution among low-to-moderate income voters.

       Voters may use factors other than geographic proximity to form reference groups. One

possibility is that voters evaluate their well-being by comparing themselves to those of

comparable socioeconomic status, defined by occupation, education level, or income itself. In

such a case, the key to support for redistribution may lie in the shape of the probability density

function of the income distribution. Suppose individuals' reference groups consist of those

households with income within a finite range of their own. On the upward sloping portion of the

income distribution, mean income within reference groups tends to be higher than the voter's

own income. On the downward sloping portion, the opposite is true. On relatively flat portions,

reference group means tend to be close to the voter's own income.

       Figure 4 summarizes these predictions, utilizing an income distribution graph that bears

much resemblance to the actual distribution in the United States in recent decades. Perhaps the

most noteworthy prediction here is that opposition to redistribution will actually be stronger

amongst those on the steeply downward sloping portion of the income distribution than among

those in the comparatively flat upper tail.

       How does this framework link the economic and political trends observed during the

twentieth century? First, the sorting of Americans into more economically homogeneous

communities over time should have the effect of blunting the impact of income inequality on



                                                 14
support for redistribution. To the extent that counties with higher median incomes have greater

income heterogeneity, a cross-sectional relationship such as that plotted in Figure 2 is to be

expected.

        Second, changes in the shape of the American income distribution have placed a higher

fraction of the population in a situation where there exists a greater mass of households

immediately below them relative to above them. Figure 5 displays kernel density plots of the

family income distribution in the United States, based on decennial Census data, for 1940, 1960,

1980 and 2000.17 Relative to the plots in the first three years, the income distribution in 2000

features a much higher peak and considerably less mass in the upper tail. The majority of voters

now find themselves on a relatively steep downward-sloping portion of the income distribution,

in marked contrast to earlier decades.

        Finally, this framework can provide an explanation for the transference of Southern

political allegiance from the Democratic to Republican side with one additional assumption. In

the era of legal segregation, the reference groups of relatively poor white voters may have

consisted only of other whites. Along with ending most forms of legally enforceable racial

segregation, Civil Rights-era legislation may have changed the perceptions of these poor white

voters, leading them to consider African-Americans as part of their reference group. The model

presented in this section clearly predicts that the emergence of a new low-income reference

group should reduce support for redistribution among those of moderate income, so long as those

moderate income voters do not harbor altruistic sentiments toward the low-income group.



17 The kernel densities omit families in the top 1% of the income distribution, which are often topcoded, and those
   with negative or zero income. Densities have been rescaled to provide common support – the plots for years
   earlier than 2000 should not be construed to represent income in 2000 dollars.

                                                        15
4. Data and Methods

        The model outlined above promotes several testable implications. To the extent that

voters use relative consumption comparisons to judge their own well-being, and compare

themselves to those in close geographic proximity, then low-income voters will show greater

support in heterogeneous rather than homogeneous communities. Moderate-income voters will

show greater support when they share communities with wealthier neighbors, unless they are

highly altruistic. High-income voters, to the extent they are altruistic, will show greater support

in heterogeneous communities. To the extent that voters compare themselves to households of

similar socioeconomic status, rather than those in close proximity, support for redistribution

should follow the pattern outlined in Figure 4.

        The empirical tests reported in this paper make use of two data sources. The first is

voting data geographically aggregated to the county level, matched with county-level

demographic data derived from the US Census. Analyses using aggregated data are performed

using the last two presidential elections that coincided with Census enumerations, 1980 and

2000. The second data source is derived from two post-election polls conducted jointly by CBS

News and the New York Times in late November and mid-December 2000. Individual poll

responses, including the candidate voted for in the 2000 election, income, and other items, are

merged with county-level statistics on income and other indicators.

        When using individual-level data, the theoretical model described in the preceding

section can be operationalized as follows:
                                         J
(9)   Pr Y ijk=1= j  X ijk  Z k  ∑  jm s mk ,
                                        m =2
where the outcome variable Yijk represents support for a Democrat, Xijk is a vector characteristics



                                                   16
for individual i belonging to group j in community k, Zk is a vector of community characteristics,

and smk represents the share of individuals in community k who belong to group m. The intercept

parameter αj may take on different values for members of different groups. The parameter δjm

measures the change in voting patterns associated with a shift in the composition of the

population away from the omitted group category and into group m∈[2, J ] . Specifications

presented below will frequently impose constraints on the J(J-1) different parameters δjm.

       Following the logic of Vigdor (2002) and Vigdor (2004), equation (9) when aggregated

across individuals produces the following equation for the average probability of support for a

Democratic candidate in community k:
                     J                          J        J
(10) Pr Y k =1=∑  j s jk  Xijk  Z k ∑ ∑  jm smk s jk .
                    j =1                       j =1 m=2


Equation (10) makes clear that it is impossible to identify the full set of coefficients δjm without

imposing further parameter restrictions, as smksjk = sjksmk. An additional set of parameter

restrictions is required to avoid collinearity, since the sjk sum to one. One relatively

straightforward restriction is to presume that voters are influenced primarily by the share of their

own group in the population. With this restriction, equation (10) can be rewritten as the

following:
                      J                          J
(11)   Pr Y k =1=∑  j s jk  Xijk  Z k ∑  j s 2jk .
                     j =1                       j=1


With the additional assumption that the parameters δj are equal across groups, assuming a

common value δ, the equation takes the form
                      J                              J
       Pr Y k =1=∑  j s jk  Xijk  Z k  ∑ s jk .
                                                             2
(12)
                     j =1                            j=1




                                                      17
In this equation, the parameter δ is the coefficient on a Herfindahl-like index of income

homogeneity. In completely homogeneous communities, this variable takes on the value of one.

As communities become more heterogeneous, this variable takes on values closer to zero.

       The assumptions associated with moving from equation (10) to equation (12), though

straightforward, are not necessarily well aligned with theoretical predictions. Theory suggests,

for example, that moderate-income voters will respond differently to increases in the low-income

and high-income shares of the population. Equations (11) and (12) do not permit such a

heterogeneous response. It is also quite possible that low income voters' response to increased

income heterogeneity, rooted in decreased utility from interpersonal comparisons, is not of the

same magnitude as high income voters' response, which would be rooted in altruism. Equation

(11) allows these differential responses, while equation (12) does not. Empirical specifications

reported below will offer some versions of each of the above equations, with constraints

motivated by the theoretical discussion above applied to equation (10).

       Aggregated regressions, as well as some individual-level regressions, control for a

number of community characteristics. Controls for racial composition will capture the

established tendency for minority voters to support Democratic candidates. The racial group

shares will also be combined into a racial homogeneity index. Under assumptions analogous to

those described above, the coefficient on this index describes the typical voter's response to a

decrease in her group’s share of the population.

       Several covariates aim to capture the character of the community. Controls for the

percent of the population residing in urban areas proxy for the community’s density, while

possibly addressing specific policy concerns in rural areas such as access to government-owned



                                                   18
land. Controls for the percent of housing units built within the past decade, home ownership

rates, and the fraction of households who have lived in the same house for at least five years, will

capture the relative stability of the local population. Finally, specifications control for the

percent of residents who work as government employees, and as active-duty members of the

armed forces. Summary statistics for county-level regression covariates appear in Table 2.

         Individual-level regressions, in addition to controlling for some community-level average

characteristics, utilize covariates derived from the CBS/New York Times poll data. These

variables include categorical controls for educational attainment, race, marital status, whether

children are present in the respondent's household, and gender. The basic hypotheses outlined

above are tested with intervalled data by matching respondent's (intervalled) income reports to

Census data on the share of households with similar, higher, and lower incomes in the same

county. Summary statistics for these individual-level variables appear in Table 3.

         The potential for non-random sorting of individuals into communities of varying

heterogeneity is a serious concern for this analysis. Rather than reflect the impact of community-

level variables on voting patterns, the estimates might merely reveal the tendency for individuals

who care for those in different income brackets to also choose locations in proximity to such

individuals.18

         The strategy employed below to address this concern rests on two assumptions. First, to

the extent that households choose communities on the basis of income heterogeneity, they are

more concerned with permanent rather than transitory variation. Second, households’ attitudes

towards redistribution are driven by both permanent and transitory variation in their
18 Basic evidence that this is not the case can be derived from Rhode and Strumpf’s (2003) finding that within-
community heterogeneity has increased steadily over the past century or more. If such a movement reflected
stronger preferences for redistribution, one would expect it to be accompanied by increasing vote shares for political
parties favoring redistribution. As Figure 1 shows, this is clearly not the case.

                                                         19
community’s income distribution.19 Under these assumptions, selection effects will be associated

primarily with permanent variation in income heterogeneity, while treatment effects will

associate with both permanent and transitory variation. In some specifications, then, I will

employ a measure of “transitory” income heterogeneity: that portion of income heterogeneity

within a county that is orthogonal to lagged measures of the same variable.


5. Results

         Table 4 presents baseline regression results employing 2000 county-level voting data

merged to socioeconomic and demographic data from the 2000 Census. The first specification

reported is a basic bivariate model, revealing the strength of the unconditional linear relationship

between the income homogeneity index and Al Gore’s share of the two-party presidential vote.20

The relationship is negative and statistically significant, explaining about 1% of the underlying

variation in Gore’s share. The magnitude of the coefficient suggests that a one-standard

deviation increase in homogeneity predicts a 1.5 percentage point, or one-tenth standard

deviation, drop in support for the Democratic candidate. Applying the behavioral interpretation

discussed above, a percentage point increase in an individual’s own income group share is

associated with a 1.9 percentage point decline in the probability of supporting Gore.

         Referring to equation (12), the first estimated regression imposes the assumption that all

income categories have the same baseline propensity to vote for Gore (same value of α).

Controlling for group shares, as in the second specification, relaxes this assumption. The

magnitude of the estimated coefficient on the homogeneity index increases substantially in this
19 Empirical evidence suggests that individuals do respond positively to transitory income shocks suffered by
members of their community. See, for example, Hungerman (forthcoming).
20 In contrast to Figure 1, which used national-level data on the Democrat’s share of all votes, these specifications
show Gore’s share of the two-party vote, primarily because of cross-state variation in the number of third-party
candidates on the ballot.

                                                          20
specification. A standard deviation increase in homogeneity now predicts a 5 percentage point

drop in support for Gore.

         The third specification incorporates the county-level covariates described in the

preceding section. Here, the estimated impact of income homogeneity largely reverts to its

initial level. A number of included covariates show significant relationships with voting

patterns. Almost universally, higher nonwhite shares predict greater support for the Democratic

party. Racial heterogeneity, by contrast, predicts less support. This pattern can be given an

interpretation analogous to that motivated by equation (12) above: nonwhite groups show

evidence of a greater propensity to support redistribution, but all groups’ support increases when

their share of the population increases. This pattern is consistent with Luttmer’s (2001) finding

that support for welfare spending increases when local welfare recipients are drawn

disproportionately from one’s own racial category.

         Communities that are more highly urbanized, slower-growing, with fewer homeowners

and fewer single-family detached housing units are more likely to support the Democratic party.

One possible explanation for this finding is that older, denser urban communities are more likely

to bring the rich and poor in close contact with one another. This possibility will be evaluated

below.

         Controlling for income, race, and community characteristics, there are few significant

associations between a county’s employment distribution and voting patterns. The principal

exception to this concerns individuals on active duty military: counties with a significant military

presence are more likely to vote Republican.

         In addition to predictions regarding the impact of county-level income homogeneity, the



                                                 21
model outlined in section 3 suggested a potentially nonlinear relationship between household

income and support for redistribution. This prediction could be tested using the coefficients on

the various income category variables included in the second and third regressions in Table 2. In

practice, the coefficients on these fifteen variables are imprecisely estimated, perhaps because

they are jointly highly correlated. Rather than report these coefficients, the fourth regression in

Table 2 collapses income categories into three. The first category, those with incomes below

$25,000 per year in 1999, corresponds to the group on the upward-sloping portion of the 1999

income distribution, as evident in Figure 5, which is drawn from Census microdata. The second

category, those with incomes below $25,000 and $75,000, identifies households on the steeply

sloped portion of the income distribution. Those with incomes above $75,000 are considered to

be in the tail of the distribution, and form the omitted category in Table 4.

       The fourth regression indeed shows a nonlinear relationship between income and support

for redistribution. Adopting the behavioral interpretation outlined in the preceding section, it

implies that the highest income group has the greatest propensity to vote for Democrats,

followed by the lowest group. The group on the steep portion of the income distribution, as

predicted, shows the greatest evidence of opposition to redistribution. Collapsing the fifteen

income categories into three has only a modest impact on the model’s fit, as indicated by the R-

squared statistic. This specification change also has the impact of reducing the estimated

relationship between income homogeneity and support for Al Gore. A one-standard deviation

increase in homogeneity now predicts a 0.8 percentage point decline in support. In this

specification, civilian government employees appear as a significant positive predictor of support

for the Democratic party.



                                                 22
       The final specification in Table 4 introduces state fixed effects, which force the

remainder of the coefficients in the model to be identified on the basis of within-state variation.

While allowing state-specific intercepts appreciably improves the model’s fit, impact on most

estimated coefficients is relatively unremarkable. This model does, however, estimate a

relationship between income and support for Al Gore more consistent with the prediction offered

above: low-income voters now show the highest propensity to support the Democratic candidate,

followed by high-income voters. Including state fixed effects leads to a slight strengthening of

the estimated relationship between income homogeneity and opposition to the Democratic party.

       The impact of income homogeneity on voting need not be uniform across all

communities or among all types of voters. In sparsely populated areas, heterogeneity in the

income distribution may be insufficient to guarantee frequent contact between individuals from

different points in the socioeconomic spectrum, implying that county-level measures of

heterogeneity poorly reflect the composition of an individual's reference group. Moreover, the

model above indicates that moderate income voters will react differently to increases in the share

of high and low income voters, and more generally that the reaction to heterogeneity can differ

among voters with different incomes. Table 5 offers evidence on these hypothesized sources of

heterogeneity in the effect of homogeneity.

       The first specification in Table 5 shows that the effect of income homogeneity is

essentially zero in completely rural counties. The link between the income distribution and

voting patterns is strongest in urban areas, consistent with the notion that rural environments are

not conducive to the creation of geographically-based reference groups, at least when counties

serve as the relevant geographic unit.



                                                 23
       The second regression estimates a version of equation (11) above, rather than equation

(12). Following the interpretation outlined above, the individual controls for squared group

share terms allows the impact of a percentage point increase in group share on that group’s

propensity to support Al Gore to vary across groups. The controls on the linear group share

terms reveal groups’ baseline propensity to support that candidate. Consistent with predictions

and earlier results, the middle-income group representing the steeply downward sloping portion

of the income distribution continues to display the least support for the redistributive party. The

sensitivity of voter support to group share varies considerably across groups. Evidence suggests

that both low-income and high-income voters become less likely to support redistribution as their

share of the county population increases. The opposite pattern emerges for the middle income

group – as their share of the population increases, they become more likely to support

redistribution. This would be expected if the primary source of variation in the middle group's

share is changes in the proportion in the low income group.

       The final specification in Table 5 estimates a version of equation (10), imposing several

parameter constraints: adopting the behavioral interpretation of coefficients, these constraints

imply that low-income voters do not distinguish between middle and high income groups, and

that high income voters do not vary their behavior with the income composition of their local

area. This last constraint effectively rules out altruism as a motivation for the voting patterns of

the wealthy. Relative to the prior specification, then, the constraint that has been relaxed is the

one restricting moderate income voters to respond equally to increases in the high and low

income shares of the population. This constraint is clearly inconsistent with the model presented

in Section 3, and results clearly show a significant difference. In the place of the squared middle



                                                 24
income group share, the specification introduces interactions between middle and low group

shares, and between middle and high group shares.

       Under the various assumptions underlying a behavioral interpretation of these results,

moderate income voters are significantly less likely to support the redistributive party as the

share of low income voters increases in their county. Shifts between the moderate and high

income categories have no significant impact on the voting behavior of the middle income group.

Note also that evidence suggests that low income voters continue to support redistributive

candidates most fervently when they form a small share of the population.

       To this point, analysis has treated the degree of income homogeneity in a county as an

exogenous feature to which voters respond. This is obviously not the most accurate

conceptualization of the variable. Rather, income homogeneity is determined in part by a

process of household spatial sorting, which may lead individuals with greater distaste for

members of other groups to both sort into homogeneous areas and vote against candidates

associated with policies that imply the sharing of resources across groups. In this scenario,

exogenously changing the degree of heterogeneity in any one area would not necessarily lead to

any change in voting behavior.

       Some of the variation in income homogeneity across counties is driven by transient,

idiosyncratic factors: manufacturing plant shutdowns, corporate restructurings and the like.

Under the presumption that household sorting processes are unlikely to respond to these transient

sources of variation, estimates based on this source of variation have the potential to circumvent

any bias associated with endogenous sorting processes. To implement this strategy, income

homogeneity data for 1980 and 2000 were merged into a single dataset, and the following



                                                 25
regression equation was estimated:

Income homogeneity2000 =             0.073      +     0.145*Income homogeneity1980
                                    (0.001)           (0.007)

The regression equation has 3,116 observations; the raw correlation between the two variables is

0.34. Residuals from this regression are then employed as measures of the degree of income

homogeneity that appears transitory, rather than permanent, in nature.

         Table 6 reports coefficients of regression models identical to the ones reported in Table 4,

except the standard measure of homogeneity is replaced with this residual measure. Across

specifications, the coefficient on this measure is slightly closer to zero than the equivalent

coefficient in Table 4. This pattern is consistent with the notion that endogenous sorting of more

generous individuals into more diverse areas biases coefficients away from zero. The magnitude

of the bias, at least as revealed by this procedure, is relatively small. Consider the coefficient

estimates in the final columns of both tables. While the original parameter estimate suggests that

a standard deviation increase in homogeneity leads to a 0.9 percentage point decrease in support

for Gore, this corrected version implies an effect of 0.7 percentage points. The variation in

parameter estimates is well within one standard error.

         The estimates presented in preceding tables can be used to infer patterns in individual

behavior only under a set of assumptions: that individual voters' propensity to support

Democratic candidates is a linear function of group shares, and that the slope coefficients

describing this relationship obey a number of parameter restrictions. As a check on these

assumptions, Table 7 presents the results of linear probability model regression specifications

that utilize individual-level data, rather than geographic aggregates.21 The primary advantage of

21 Probit specifications produce qualitatively similar results. The linear models are presented for ease of
   interpretation and comparability with the aggregated results above.

                                                         26
individual data is that they permit an assessment of whether aggregation bias severely

contaminates the estimates derived in county-level regressions. The primary drawback of these

analyses is small sample size: only two voter polls conducted in 2000 recorded information on

the candidate supported by the respondent in the presidential election, respondent's income, and

respondent's county of residence. The estimation sample used in Table 7 pools these two polls.

         The first specification utilizes only three control variables: indicators for whether

respondents fell into two of three basic income categories available in the poll data (between

$30,000 and $75,000, and over $75,000), and a county-level control for the share of residents in

the respondent's county who belonged to the same income group.22 Results indicate a monotonic

negative relationship between income category and the propensity to vote for Al Gore.

Controlling for income category, individuals who reside in counties where a higher proportion of

households fall into their income category are significantly less likely to support the Democratic

candidate. Adopting a behavioral interpretation, the results suggest that a one-percentage-point

increase in group share produces an 0.47 percentage point reduction in the probability of voting

for Gore. A one-standard deviation increase in this measure predicts a 4.7 percentage point drop

in this probability. Thus while from a behavioral perspective this coefficient appears smaller

than the analogous estimates derived from county-level specifications, the effect size as

traditionally measured is considerably larger here.23

         The second specification in Table 7 controls for the share of voters in higher and lower

income categories, relative to the respondent. Holding voters' own income category constant,
22 The original polling data report income in five categories; they have been collapsed here in a manner that most
   closely matches the categorizations used in the county-level regressions. Standard errors in these specifications
   have been adjusted for clustering at the county/income category level. The 1,278 individuals included in the
   sample belong to 901 different clusters.
23 From a behavioral perspective, the inequality of results could also be explained by the use of different income
   cagetory definitions in the individual-level and geographically aggregated specifications.

                                                         27
support for Al Gore increases significantly with the share of households in higher income

categories. Using a behavioral interpretation, increasing the share of the population with higher

incomes by 1 percentage point increases the probability of voting for Gore by 0.66 percentage

points. There is also a positive coefficient on the share of households in lower income

categories, consistent with altruistic motives for some voters, though that estimate is not

significantly different from zero. Comparing the coefficients on the lower and higher income

share variables shows the impact for moderate-income voters of switching neighbors directly

from the lower to higher income category. As expected, the greater magnitude of the high-

income-share coefficient implies that support for redistribution increases in that scenario. Note

that with these two controls in place, the coefficients on income category indicators become

indistinguishable from zero.

       The last two specifications in Table 7 introduce growing numbers of additional covariates

into the specification. These additional covariates are sufficient to eliminate the statistical

significance of the income share variables, though point estimates continue to suggest that voters

become more favorably disposed toward redistribution as their neighbors become richer. The

individual-level covariates produce largely intuitive effects: support for the Democratic party is

strongest among the less educated, racial minorities, the childless, women, and the divorced or

never-married. Upon introducing the community-level characteristics employed in Table 4, the

coefficient on the share-of-population-with-lower income variable becomes negative and

insignificant, and the coefficient on the share-of-population-with-higher income is reduced to

half its initial magnitude, with a t-statistic of roughly 1.5. In the end, the individual-level data

produces results fully consistent with the theoretical model, and effect sizes that are substantial



                                                  28
from an absolute perspective. The ultimate lack of statistical significance, however, does limit

the corroborative value of these results.

        The presidential election of 2000 was in many respects highly unusual. Can these results

be generalized to a more “typical” election? Table 8 reports the results of regression

specifications identical to those in Table 4, using county-level voting data from the 1980 election

matched to Census socioeconomic and demographic information from that year. Whereas the

2000 election was unbearably close, the 1980 election was something of a landslide, with Ronald

Reagan winning election with a margin of nearly ten percentage points. Democratic candidate

Jimmy Carter won electoral votes from only five states, three of which lie below the Mason-

Dixon line.24 Although the elections of 1980 and 2000 were won by candidates from the same

party, in other respects they present mark contrasts with one another.

        The results reveal important differences in patterns of support for Carter and Gore in

elections separated by twenty years. Carter enjoyed comparatively weaker support in counties

with sizable nonwhite populations and stronger support in counties with a large share of

manufacturing employment. Racially homogeneous counties tended to side with Gore but

against Carter. Sixteen years before a Democratic president declared an end to the “era of big

government,” government employees showed much stronger support for Carter, relative to the

support shown to Gore two decades later.

        In contrast to these striking differences, the effect of income homogeneity on support for

Carter is significant and negative in all specifications except the simple bivariate model. While

coefficient magnitudes are generally reduced relative to their counterparts in Table 4, it should

be noted that the standard deviation of the income homogeneity index is significantly larger in

24 Carter also won electoral votes from the District of Columbia.

                                                        29
the 1980 data. A good portion of this difference can be attributed to the use of finer income

categorizations in the 1980 Census, rather than any true difference in the variance of income

distributions across counties. The impact of a one-standard-deviation increase in income

homogeneity on support for Carter, based on the fixed effects specification in the table’s last

column, is a decline of 1 percentage point – nearly identical to the effect size indicated by the

equivalent specification in Table 4.25


         6. Conclusions

         Thomas Frank’s popular book What’s the Matter With Kansas posits that the Republican

party has effectively convinced working-class Americans to vote against their economic self-

interest. Up to this point, the best explanation available in the economic literature for the same

phenomenon rests on an untenable hypothesis – that Kansans have higher expectations for

upward income mobility than other voters, even though the income distribution in that state is

decidedly compact. This paper offers a new explanation for voting patterns in late-twentieth

century America, inspired by an established yet growing body of research identifying relative

consumption as an important determinant of individual well-being. The model developed in this

paper, empirically supported by county and individual-level empirical evidence on voting

patterns in 1980 and 2000, suggests that low- and moderate-income voters are less supportive of

redistribution when they evaluate their well-being by comparing themselves to other low-income

households. High-income voters also appear to support redistribution more fervently when

residing in heterogeneous communities, possibly because exposure to the poor breeds either true


25 In an unreported specification matching that used in the third column of Table 5, the 1980 data reveal a
   continued tendency for moderate-income voters to be more supportive of Democratic candidates as the
   population shifts from lower- to higher-income voters.

                                                         30
altruism or a self-interested desire to appease the masses.

         Can this relativistic view of economic self-interest truly explain what a social scientist

might term the “Kansas effect?” Table 9 provides some insight as to the relative explanatory

power of income homogeneity and voters’ position in the income distribution. The table begins

by listing actual Democrat vote shares for each of the 50 states and the District of Columbia.

The second column shows a predicted value for each state based on a county-level regression

controlling for exactly five variables: the low- and middle-income shares as defined in Table 4,

the low-income group share squared, an interaction between the low- and middle-income shares,

and an interaction between the middle- and high-income shares.26 The third column indicates

whether this prediction correctly forecasts the winner of the state's electoral votes in 2000. The

third column shows the proportion of the state’s deviation from the national average that can be

explained by this simple model. This parsimonious model generates correct predictions in 34 of

51 states, including Kansas.

         . For comparative purposes, the final column reports the predicted values from a more

complete regression that adds the additional control variables employed in Table 4. The

predicted values listed in boldface type show situations where the complete model corrects an

erroneous forecast made by the simple model. There are seven such instances, of a possible

seventeen, almost entirely in Southern states. Of the remaining ten states, nine supported Gore in

spite of predictions to the contrary: these are states with a progressive reputation including

Minnesota, Oregon, and Vermont. The model thus suggests that a book title with greater support

from a political economy model would be “What's the matter with Maine?”

         Ex-post political prognostication aside, these results also provide further evidence to

26 This regression is weighted by the number of votes cast in the election.

                                                         31
support prior theoretical work on the optimal structure of taxation, expenditure, and

redistributive policy when relative consumption, or an individual’s position in the consumption

distribution, determines an individual’s subjective well-being. Further research on the nature of

such relative preferences may play an important role both in the design of superior policies, and

the production of more preferable policy platforms. For example, a finding that absolute

consumption is a primary determinant of utility up to some subsistence level would suggest a

rational ceiling for transfer levels. The more exact determination of individuals’ reference

groups, and the discovery of means of changing those reference groups, could yield important

insights regarding methods of improving individuals’ perceptions of their own well-being with

minimal cost outlays. Of course, paternalistic arguments in favor of traditional policies can

always be made in opposition to considerations of relativity in utility functions. History

suggests, however, that the candidate who can offer the most appealing menu of policies to the

greatest share of voters will have a natural advantage in getting those policies enacted.




                                                32
References

Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara “Preferences for Redistribution in the Land of Opportunities.”
NBER Working Paper #8267.

Alesina, A. and D. Rodrik (1994) “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics v.109 pp.465-490.

Benabou, R. and E.A. Ok (2001a) “Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution: The
POUM Hypothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics v.116 pp.447-487.

Benabou, R. and E.A. Ok (2001b) “Mobility and Progressivity: Ranking Income Processes
According to Equality of Opportunity.” NBER Working Paper #8431.

Benabou, R. and J. Tirole (2005) “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics.” NBER
Working Paper #11208.

Boskin, M. and E. Sheshinski (1978) “Optimal Redistributive Taxation When Individual Welfare
Depends on Relative Income.” Quartery Journal of Economics v.92 pp.589-601.

Easterlin,R.A. (2001) “Income and Happiness: Towards a Unified Theory.” Economic Journal
v.111 pp.465-84.

Fair, R.C. (2002) Predicting Presidential Elections and Other Things. Stanford University
Press.

Ferrer-i-Carbonell, A. (2004) “Income and Well-being: An Empirical Analysis of the
Comparison Income Effect.” Forthcoming, Journal of Public Economics.

Frank, R.H. (1985) Choosing the Right Pond: Human Behavior and the Quest for Status.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Frank, T. (2004) What's the Matter with Kansas? How Conservatives Won the Hearth of
America. New York: Metropolitan Books.

Frey, B.S. and A. Stutzer (2002) “What Can Economists Learn f rom Happiness Research?”
Journal of Economic Literature v.40 pp.402-35.

Glaeser, E.L. (2005) “Inequality” NBER Working Paper #11511.

Hungerman, D. (2005) “Are Church and State Substitutes? Evidence from the 1996 Welfare
Reform.” Forthcoming, Journal of Public Economics.




                                               33
Jargowsky, P. (1995) “Take the Money and Run: Economic Segregation in U.S. Metropolitan
Areas”

Jackson, K.T. (1985) Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Layard, R. (1980) “Human Satisfactions and Public Policy” Economic Journal v.90 pp.737-50.

Lee, D.S. (2001) “The Electoral Advantage to Incumbency and Voters’ Valuation of Politicians’
Experience: A Regression Discontinuity Analysis of Elections to the U.S. House.” NBER
Working Paper #8441.

Ljungqvist, L. and H. Uhlig (2000) “Tax Policy and Aggregate Demand Management under
Catching Up with the Joneses.” American Economic Review v.90 pp.356-66.

Luttmer, E.F.P. (2001) “Group Loyalty and the Taste for Redistribution.” Journal of Political
Economy v.109 pp.500-528.

Luttmer, E.F.P. (2005) “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics v.120 pp.963-1002.

McBride, M.T. (2001) “Relative-Income Effects on Subjective Well-Being in the Cross-section.”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization v.45 pp.251-278.

Meltzer, A. and S. Richard (1981) “A Rational Theory of the Size of Government.” Journal of
Political Economy v.89 pp.914-927.

Ng, Y. (1987) “Relative-Income Effects and the Appropriate Level of Public Expenditure.”
Oxford Economic Papers v.39 pp.293-300.

Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (1994) “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?” American Economic
Review v.84 pp.600-621.

Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2003) “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics v.118 pp.1-39.

Rhode, P. and K. Strumpf (2003) “Assessing the Importance of Tiebout Sorting: Local
Heterogeneity from 1850 to 1990.” American Economic Review v.93 pp.1648-1677.

Shapiro, M. and J. Slemrod (2003) “Consumer Responses to Tax Rebates.” American Economic
Review v.92 pp.381-96.

Stutzer, A. (2004) “The Role of Income Aspirations in Individual Happiness.” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization v.54 pp.89-110.


                                               34
Tocqueville, A. (1835) Democracy in America. Translated and edited by H.C. Mansfield and D.
Winthrop, 2000. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Tomes, N. (1986) “Income Distribution, Happiness and Satisfaction: A Direct Test of the
Interdependent Preferences Model.” Journal of Economic Psychology v.7 pp.425-446.

Vigdor, J.L. (2002) “Interpreting Ethnic Fragmentation Effects.”Economics Letters, v.75 pp.271-
276.

Vigdor, J.L. (2004) “Community Composition and Collective Action: Analyzing Initial Mail
Response to the 2000 Census.” Review of Economics and Statistics v.86 pp. 303-312.

Yelowitz, A. (1995) “The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply and Welfare Participation: Evidence
From Eligibility Expansions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics v.110 pp.909-939.




                                              35
             Table 1: Examples derived from the theoretical model
Population                γ                Median voter's      Median voter's optimal
                                          reference person              β
  0,0,1                   ---                    ---                    1/2
  0,1,1                   ---                    ---                     1
  0,1,2                   ---                    ---                    5/7
  0,0,1                 0≤γ<1                     0                     1/2
  0,0,1                   1                       0                   0≤β≤1
  0,0,1                   0                       1                     1/2
  0,0,1                  1/2                      1                     1/5
  0,0,1                   1                       1                      0
  0,1,2                  1/2                      2                    5/16
  0,1,2                  1/2                      0                      1




                                     36
                Table 2: County-level summary statistics, 2000 dataset (N=3,113)
Variable                                    Mean         Std. Dev.     Minimum      Maximum
Gore’s share of two-party vote              0.502          0.132         0.069        0.905
Income homogeneity index                    0.079          0.007         0.069        0.235
Percent Black                               0.117          0.130           0          0.861
Percent Asian                               0.033          0.047           0          0.462
Percent American Indian                     0.008          0.027           0          0.937
Percent Pacific Islander                    0.001          0.006           0          0.109
Percent Other Race                          0.046          0.060           0          0.398
Percent Multiracial                         0.024          0.018           0          0.293
Percent Hispanic                            0.105          0.134           0          0.981
Racial homogeneity index                    0.663          0.188         0.266          1
Percent of housing built in past 10         0.326          0.149         0.049        0.870
years
Owner-occupancy rate                        0.673          0.108         0.195        0.895
Percent single-family detached houses       0.613          0.142         0.003        0.942
Percent of households residing in           0.545          0.072         0.154        0.806
same house five years ago
Percent employed in manufacturing           0.142          0.070           0          0.486
Percent employed by government              0.149          0.050         0.061        0.691
Percent active-duty military                0.005          0.016           0          0.617
Percent of households with incomes          0.359          0.097         0.061        0.692
below $24,999
Percent of households with incomes          0.501          0.054         0.274        0.648
between $25,000 and $74,999
Note: Unit of observation is the county or county-equivalent; observations are weighted by
votes cast in the 2000 Presidential election.




                                              37
         Table 3: Summary statistics for individual-level regression covariates (N=1,287)
Variable                                  Mean         Std. Dev.      Minimum       Maximum
Income between $30k and $75k              0.518            ---            0                 1
Income over $75k                          0.250            ---            0                 1
Own income group's share in               0.378          0.103          0.050          0.737
county of residence
Share in lower income categories in       0.254          0.231            0            0.823
county of residence
Share in higher income categories         0.368          0.271            0            0.950
in county of residence
Black                                     0.087            ---            0                 1
Asian                                     0.012            ---            0                 1
Other race                                0.036            ---            0                 1
High school graduate                      0.056            ---            0                 1
Some college                              0.246            ---            0                 1
College graduate                          0.255            ---            0                 1
Postgraduate education                    0.155            ---            0                 1
Widowed                                   0.096            ---            0                 1
Divorced                                  0.132            ---            0                 1
Separated                                 0.015            ---            0                 1
Never married                             0.160            ---            0                 1
Children present in household             0.383            ---            0                 1
Female                                    0.596            ---            0                 1
Voted for Gore in 2000 election           0.485            ---            0                 1
Note: Unit of observation is the individual voter. Data sources are CBS/New York Times polls
taken in November and December 2000, ICPSR studies #3231 and 3238.




                                               38
                                     Table 4: Basic regression results, 2000 data
Independent variable                                Dependent variable: Gore’s share of the two-party vote
Income homogeneity index                   -1.88            -7.58           -2.33          -1.109            -1.256
                                          (0.327)          (0.319)         (0.328)        (0.270)            (0.258)
Percent Black                               —                   —           0.572          0.556              0.607
                                                                           (0.031)        (0.031)            (0.028)
Percent Asian                               —                   —           0.685          0.526              0.726
                                                                           (0.070)        (0.066)            (0.064)
Percent American Indian                     —                   —           0.377          0.328              0.367
                                                                           (0.059)        (0.059)            (0.053)
Percent Pacific Islander                    —                   —           -6.58          -6.26              7.99
                                                                           (0.523)        (0.517)            (1.27)
Percent Other Race                          —                   —           0.115          0.084              0.085
                                                                           (0.069)        (0.069)            (0.068)
Percent Multiracial                         —                   —           3.327          3.418              2.23
                                                                           (0.216)        (0.216)            (0.236)
Percent Hispanic                            —                   —           0.071          0.060              0.139
                                                                           (0.027)        (0.027)            (0.025)
Racial homogeneity index                    —                   —           0.383          0.357              0.257
                                                                           (0.030)        (0.030)            (0.028)
Percent urban                               —                   —           0.057          0.076              0.075
                                                                           (0.011)        (0.010)            (0.009)
Percent of housing units built in last      —                   —           -0.227         -0.204            -0.069
ten years                                                                  (0.019)        (0.018)            (0.020)
Home ownership rate                         —                   —           0.070          -0.021            -0.029
                                                                           (0.036)        (0.033)            (0.033)
Percent single-family detached              —                   —           -0.289         -0.286            -0.166
housing                                                                    (0.017)        (0.017)            (0.017)
Percent living in same house five           —                   —           0.219          0.318              0.351
years ago                                                                  (0.041)        (0.039)            (0.043)
Percent employed in manufacturing           —                   —           -0.037         0.017             -0.065
                                                                           (0.029)        (0.028)            (0.027)
Percent employed by government              —                   —           0.028          0.102              0.107
                                                                           (0.041)        (0.039)            (0.036)
Percent active-duty military                —                   —           -0.436         -0.630            -0.589
                                                                           (0.096)        (0.094)            (0.079)
Percent with incomes below 24,999           —                   —            —             -0.126             0.071
                                                                                          (0.024)            (0.027)
Percent with incomes $25,000-               —                   —            —             -0.259            -0.264
$74,999                                                                                   (0.043)            (0.042)
Detailed income categorizations?            No               Yes             Yes            No                 No
State fixed effects?                        No                  No           No             No                Yes
N                                          3,113            3,113           3,113          3,113             3,113
 2
R                                          0.011            0.402           0.682          0.672             0.786
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Unit of observation is the county or county equivalent; observations are
weighted by number of votes cast in the 2000 presidential election.



                                                           39
                 Table 5: Testing for heterogeneity in the effect of homogeneity
                                                              Dependent variable:
Independent variable                                    Gore’s share of the two-party vote
Income homogeneity index                               0.084            —               ---
                                                      (0.423)
Income homogeneity* percent urban                      -2.11            —               ---
                                                      (0.527)
“Low” income group share                               0.059          -0.083          2.125
                                                      (0.027)        (0.161)         (0.260)
“Middle” income group share                            -0.247         -2.437          0.075
                                                      (0.042)        (0.507)         (0.081)
“Low” income group share squared                        —             -0.662          -1.766
                                                                     (0.195)         (0.227)
“Middle” income group share squared                     —             1.407             ---
                                                                     (0.464)
“High” income group share squared                       —             -1.104            ---
                                                                     (0.170)
“Middle” income group share * “Low”                     ---             ---           -2.512
income group share                                                                   (0.552)
“Middle” income group share * “High”                    ---             ---           -0.303
income group share                                                                   (0.429)

Table 2, last column controls (incl. State FE)         Yes             Yes             Yes

N                                                     3,113           3,113           3,113
    2
R                                                     0.787           0.789           0.789
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Unit of observation is the county or county equivalent;
observations are weighted by number of votes cast in the 2000 presidential election.




                                                 40
                       Table 6: Addressing the potential for endogenous sorting
Independent variable                   Dependent variable: Gore’s share of the two-party vote
Income homogeneity index,            -1.41        -7.42        -2.24        -1.017       -1.112
orthogonalized to 1980              (0.351)      (0.344)      (0.324)      (0.269)      (0.251)
income homogeneity index

Detailed income categories?            No          Yes          Yes          No           No
Additional community                   No           No          Yes          Yes         Yes
covariates?
Basic income categories?               No           No          No           Yes         Yes
State fixed effects?                   No           No          No           No          Yes

N                                    3,103        3,103        3,103        3,103        3,103
    2
R                                    0.005        0.388        0.682        0.672        0.786
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Unit of observation is the county or county equivalent;
observations are weighted by number of votes cast in the 2000 presidential election.




                                                 41
                             Table 7: Estimating the model with individual-level data
Independent Variable                           Dependent variable: Individual voted for Gore in 2000 election
Income between $30,000 and 75,000               -0.157            -0.031             0.023            0.061
                                               (0.034)            (0.074)           (0.072)          (0.088)
Income above $75,000                            -0.310            -0.085             0.024            0.096
                                               (0.046)            (0.125)           (0.123)          (0.051)
Own income group's share in county of           -0.472              ---                 ---            ---
residence                                      (0.181)
Share in lower income categories in               ---              0.320             0.107            -0.027
county of residence                                               (0.197)           (0.187)          (0.199)
Share in higher income categories in              ---              0.656             0.347            0.304
county of residence                                               (0.204)           (0.195)          (0.206)
High school graduate                              ---               ---              -0.092           -0.092
                                                                                    (0.051)          (0.051)
Some college                                      ---               ---              -0.108           -0.113
                                                                                    (0.052)          (0.053)
College graduate                                  ---               ---              -0.074           -0.079
                                                                                    (0.057)          (0.058)
Postgraduate education                            ---               ---              -0.080           -0.094
                                                                                    (0.063)          (0.064)
Black                                             ---               ---              0.477            0.473
                                                                                    (0.042)          (0.047)
Asian                                             ---               ---              0.158            0.147
                                                                                    (0.124)          (0.126)
Other race                                        ---               ---              0.195            0.188
                                                                                    (0.065)          (0.065)
Widowed                                           ---               ---              0.006            -0.007
                                                                                    (0.054)          (0.054)
Divorced                                          ---               ---              0.095            0.097
                                                                                    (0.048)          (0.048)
Separated                                         ---               ---              0.172            0.150
                                                                                    (0.112)          (0.112)
Never Married                                     ---               ---              0.105            0.150
                                                                                    (0.036)          (0.112)
Children in household                             ---               ---              -0.091           -0.082
                                                                                    (0.027)          (0.027)
Female                                            ---               ---              0.066            0.065
                                                                                    (0.027)          (0.027)
Community-level characteristics                   No                No                  No             Yes
N                                               1,278             1,278             1,278             1,278
 2
R                                               0.038             0.040             0.169             0.180
Note: Estimates are derived from linear probability models. Standard errors in parentheses. Community-level
characteristics include share of respondent's race, percent employed in manufacturing industries, percent single-
family detached houses, percent of housing built in the past ten years, percent urban, percent owner-occupied,
percent residing in the same house five years ago, percent civilian government employees, percent employed in the
armed forces.




                                                         42
                                     Table 8: Basic regression results, 1980 data
Independent variable                               Dependent variable: Carter’s share of the two-party vote
Income homogeneity index                   0.460            -2.00           -1.103          -0.664        -0.410
                                          (0.124)          (0.169)         (0.243)         (0.195)        (0.175)
Percent Black                               —                  —            0.191           0.108         -0.093
                                                                           (0.036)         (0.034)        (0.035)
Percent Asian                               —                  —            0.601           0.333          0.688
                                                                           (0.185)         (0.187)        (0.172)
Percent American Indian                     —                  —            -0.152          -0.212        -0.164
                                                                           (0.069)         (0.070)        (0.065)
Percent Pacific Islander                    —                  —            -0.257          -0.006         0.792
                                                                           (0.202)         (0.205)        (0.266)
Percent Other Race                          —                  —           0.113            -1.02             -0.106
                                                                           (1.77)          (1.80)             (1.70)
Percent Hispanic                            —                  —            -0.032          -0.092        -0.048
                                                                           (0.026)         (0.025)        (0.026)
Racial homogeneity index                    —                  —            -0.021          -0.059        -0.268
                                                                           (0.029)         (0.028)        (0.028)
Percent urban                               —                  —            0.014           0.026          0.026
                                                                           (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.005)
Percent of housing units built in last      —                  —            0.011           -0.031        -0.017
ten years                                                                  (0.015)         (0.014)        (0.016)
Home ownership rate                         —                  —            -0.118          -0.106        -0.043
                                                                           (0.028)         (0.028)        (0.027)
Percent single-family detached              —                  —            -0.060          -0.061        -0.030
housing                                                                    (0.016)         (0.016)        (0.019)
Percent living in same house five           —                  —            0.076           0.076          0.073
years ago                                                                  (0.009)         (0.008)        (0.010)
Percent employed in manufacturing           —                  —            0.155           0.193          0.111
                                                                           (0.024)         (0.023)        (0.023)
Percent employed by government              —                  —            0.321           0.344          0.286
                                                                           (0.037)         (0.035)        (0.034)
Percent active-duty military                —                  —            -0.008          -0.106        -0.157
                                                                           (0.045)         (0.044)        (0.039)
Percent with incomes below $4,999           —                  —             —              0.753          0.752
                                                                                           (0.057)        (0.060)
Percent with incomes $5,000-                —                  —             —              0.146          0.244
39,999                                                                                     (0.055)        (0.051)
Detailed income categorizations?            No               Yes             Yes             No                No
State fixed effects?                        No                 No            No              No                Yes
N                                          3,104            3,104           3,102          3,102              3,102
 2
R                                          0.004            0.275           0.455          0.428              0.598
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Unit of observation is the county or county equivalent; observations are
weighted by number of votes cast in the 2000 presidential election.




                                                          43
                       Table 9: Can the “new” economic self-interest model explain support for Gore in 2000?
State                      Actual value Value predicted by basic income      Correct prediction?    Value predicted by full model
                                                category model
Alabama                        42.5                    51.5                          No                         46.4
Arkansas                       47.2                    45.7                          Yes                        40.9
Arizona                        47.5                    49.0                          Yes                        42.1
California                     56.4                    57.3                          Yes                        56.6
Colorado                       45.5                    45.8                          Yes                        44.4
Connecticut                    59.3                    59.0                          Yes                        56.4
District of Columbia           90.5                    70.5                          Yes                        92.2
Delaware                       56.9                    49.4                          No                         50.8
Florida                       49.998                   50.1                          No                         48.4
Georgia                        44.0                    49.1                          Yes                        44.8
Hawaii                         59.8                    54.6                          Yes                        63.7
Iowa                           50.2                    41.6                          No                         43.7
Idaho                          29.1                    42.4                          Yes                        40.3
Illinois                       56.2                    50.0                          Yes                        53.7
Indiana                        42.0                    45.1                          Yes                        44.4
Kansas                         38.9                    42.2                          Yes                        44.3
Kentucky                       42.3                    49.8                          Yes                        43.4
Louisiana                      46.1                    54.4                          No                         52.0
Massachusetts                  64.7                    59.2                          Yes                        59.3
Maryland                       58.5                    46.6                          No                         57.9
Maine                          52.7                    44.3                          No                         43.8
Michigan                       52.4                    50.5                          Yes                        51.1


                                                                44
                 Table 9: Can the “new” economic self-interest model explain support for Gore in 2000?
State                Actual value Value predicted by basic income      Correct prediction?    Value predicted by full model
                                          category model
Minnesota                51.3                    44.4                          No                         47.3
Missouri                 48.3                    44.8                          Yes                        44.8
Mississippi              41.3                    50.1                          No                         47.0
Montana                  36.4                    42.9                          Yes                        43.2
North Carolina           43.6                    46.8                          Yes                        42.0
North Dakota             35.3                    41.1                          Yes                        44.2
Nebraska                 34.5                    42.3                          Yes                        43.0
New Hampshire            49.3                    45.9                          Yes                        46.3
New Jersey               58.1                    57.1                          Yes                        59.6
New Mexico               50.0                    49.8                          No                         46.8
Nevada                   48.1                    46.8                          Yes                        41.5
New York                 62.8                    58.5                          Yes                        64.1
Ohio                     48.0                    48.2                          Yes                        49.3
Oklahoma                 38.9                    47.0                          Yes                        49.2
Oregon                   50.2                    46.1                          No                         46.6
Pennsylvania             52.1                    48.6                          No                         54.4
Rhode Island             65.6                    55.2                          Yes                        56.7
South Carolina           41.8                    48.4                          Yes                        45.6
South Dakota             38.4                    40.9                          Yes                        42.5
Tennessee                48.1                    47.8                          Yes                        43.5
Texas                    39.0                    51.3                          No                         43.8
Utah                     28.3                    42.2                          Yes                        38.9


                                                          45
                      Table 9: Can the “new” economic self-interest model explain support for Gore in 2000?
State                      Actual value Value predicted by basic income       Correct prediction?    Value predicted by full model
                                                category model
Virginia                       45.8                     43.6                          Yes                         46.6
Vermont                        55.4                     44.6                          No                          45.1
Washington                     52.8                     47.8                          No                          48.3
Wisconsin                      50.1                     42.9                          No                          46.2
West Virginia                  46.7                     48.5                          Yes                         44.6
Wyoming                        29.0                     43.6                          Yes                         44.1
Note: Predictions are based on county-level regressions employing number of votes cast in the 2000 election as weights.




                                                                46
Figure 1: Income inequality and voting patterns, 1896-2004


                                                             47
                      1            .8
        Share voting for Gore 2000
               .4     .2
                      0   .6




                                        0   20000         40000           60000   80000
                                                    Median Income in 1999

Figure 2: The bivariate relationship between county median income and Gore's share of the two-
party vote, 2000.




                                                         48
Figure 3: Responses to “Large differences in income are necessary for America's prosperity,” General Social Survey

                                                                49
Figure 4: Support for redistribution across the income distribution when individuals define
reference groups as symmetric income bands.




                                               50
                  .000015
                      .00001
                Density
         5.000e-060




                                0                  100000                200000                  300000   400000
                                                                  Total family income
                                                                      1940                   1960
                                                                      1980                   2000
                               Dollar values have been rescaled to give all densities common support.




Figure 5: The income distribution in the United States, 1940-2000. Densities omit famlies with
nonpositive income and the top 1% of the distribution in each year. The 1940 density uses
family wage and salary income rather than total family income. Dollar values are not inflation-
corrected; values have been rescaled to match the support of the 2000 income distribution.




                                                                         51
