                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION, GOVERNANCE,
                           AND THE EVOLUTION OF THE HOME BIAS

                                            Bong-Chan Kho
                                             René M. Stulz
                                           Francis E. Warnock

                                          Working Paper 12389
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12389


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




Respectively, Seoul National University; Ohio State University, ECGI and NBER; University of Virginia,
IIIS and NBER. We are grateful to Ji-Woong Chung, Jin-Woo Kim, Carrie Pan and Francesca Silvestrini for
research assistance. We thank Craig Doidge for providing us with cross-listing data. We are grateful to Heitor
Almeida, John Ammer, Menzie Chinn, Andrew Karolyi, Philip Lane, José Viòals, Daniel Wolfenson, and
the participants of a seminar at Ohio State, at the BIS Annual Conference, and at the ECB Conference on
Financial Globalization for comments. Warnock thanks the Darden School Foundation for generous support.

©2006 by Bong-Chan Kho, René M. Stulz and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Globalization, Governance, and the Evolution of the Home Bias
Bong-Chan Kho, René M. Stulz and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 12389
July 2006
JEL No. F36, F30, G32, G30, G11, G15

                                           ABSTRACT

Despite the disappearance of formal barriers to international investment across countries, we find
that the average home bias of U.S. investors towards the 46 countries with the largest equity markets
did not fall from 1994 to 2004 when countries are equally weighted but fell when countries are
weighted by market capitalization. This evidence is inconsistent with portfolio theory explanations
of the home bias, but is consistent with what we call the optimal insider ownership theory of the
home bias. Since foreign investors can only own shares not held by insiders, there will be a large
home bias towards countries in which insiders own large stakes in corporations. Consequently, for
the home bias to fall substantially, insider ownership has to fall in countries where it is high. Poor
governance leads to concentrated insider ownership, so that governance improvements make it
possible for corporate ownership to become more dispersed and for the home bias to fall. We find
that the home bias of U.S. investors decreased the most towards countries in which the ownership
by corporate insiders is low and countries in which ownership by corporate insiders fell. Using
firm-level data for Korea, we find that portfolio equity investment by foreign investors in Korean
firms is inversely related to insider ownership and that the firms that attract the most foreign
portfolio equity investment are large firms with dispersed ownership.


Bong-Chan Kho                                         Francis E. Warnock
College of Business Administration                    Darden Business School
Seoul National University                             University of Virginia
Sinlim-Dong, Kwanak-Ku                                Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
Seoul 151-742, Korea                                  and NBER
bkho@snu.ac.kr                                        warnockf@darden.virginia.edu

René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
1. Introduction

       Fifty years ago, investing in foreign securities was almost impossible for most investors.

Typically, their country forbade them to do so or, equivalently, made it impossible for them to

obtain foreign currency to pay for foreign securities. Moreover, the countries in which they would

have wanted to invest almost always did not allow them do so. As a result, capital markets in

most countries were essentially completely segmented. Since then, explicit barriers to

international investment have been brought down and, for the largest and most developed

countries, largely eliminated. To use the analogy of Friedman (2005), when one focuses on

explicit barriers, the financial world has become flat when one looks at developed countries and

has become flatter when one considers emerging markets.

       Since the early 1990s, after a wave of liberalizations in emerging markets, stock markets

from developed countries as well as from a large number of emerging countries have been open

to foreign investors. The neo-classical model of portfolio choice predicts that, under these

circumstances, investors hold portfolios that are well-diversified internationally, so that risk is

shared across countries efficiently and capital flows where it can be used most profitably. 1

Instead, capital does not appear to flow where neo-classical models predict it could be used most

profitably (see Lucas, 1990) and investors still hold portfolios that are overweighted in the

securities of the country they come from. In other words, the home bias is still with us, even

though what used to be the main argument for the existence of such a bias, formal barriers to

international investment, has not been important since the early 1990s for most countries with

functioning stock markets. Consequently, the financial world is much flatter de jure than de facto,

which limits the sharing of risks internationally and prevents capital from flowing where neo-

classical models suggest it would have the highest return.

       In this paper, we investigate how the home bias has evolved since the end of the equity

market liberalization wave of the beginning of the 1990s, why the home bias is still with us and

1
    See Lewis (1999) and Karolyi and Stulz (2003) for reviews of the literature.
what financial globalization means for the home bias.2 The traditional approach to explaining the

home bias, which we call the portfolio approach, focuses on investors’ portfolio demands and

identifies reasons why investors have different demands for home country securities compared to

foreign securities. Four such reasons have played a dominant role in the literature: (1) explicit

barriers to international investment, (2) hedging motives, (3) differential access to information,

and (4) behavioral biases. We review this literature in the next section. However, except for

behavioral biases, the reasons for the home bias advanced by this literature cannot explain the

magnitude of the home bias. Further, the impact of explicit barriers to international investment

and differential access to information has fallen over time, so that some of these explanations for

the home bias suggest a decreasing, if not disappearing, home bias.

    The portfolio approach makes the critical assumption that there is no optimal ownership

structure for firms. Yet, there is a considerable literature on the determinants of insider ownership

in corporations. That literature predicts that insider ownership should be more concentrated when

agency problems between those who control corporations and outside investors are stronger.

These agency problems are stronger when the institutions that protect investors in a country are

poorer.3 If foreign investors have a strong home bias towards a country (so that they underweight

that country’s equities in their portfolio strongly) and it remains optimal for insiders to have large

ownership stakes in corporations in that country, it is not possible for the home bias towards that

country to fall sharply as long as foreign investors are not corporate insiders. To consider a

simple example, in 2004, France represented 4.75% of the world market portfolio. If investors

were mean-variance optimizers, there were no barriers to international investment, there were no

information asymmetries and each country’s stock market wealth equals its equity market


2
  As Burger and Warnock (2004) show for U.S. investors, there is a strong home bias in bond holdings. We
ignore this bias in this paper. Portfolio models do not in general predict that investors should hold the world
market portfolio of bonds. For instance, in the well-known model of Solnik (1974), local-currency bonds
are risk-free bonds for local investors but risky bonds for foreign investors. In that model, foreign investors
take short positions in local currency bonds to hedge the currency risk of their local equity investments.
3
  See Stulz (2005) for references.


                                                      2
capitalization, the absence of a home bias would mean that foreign investors would hold 95.25%

of each French firm. Yet, in 2004, the equally-weighted average of insider ownership for French

firms for which data was available on Worldscope was 58.1%. If it was optimal for French firms

to have 58.1% insider ownership, then foreign investors could not have possibly held 95.25% of

each French firm’s equity unless foreign investors were also insiders. In fact, if 58.1% insider

ownership was optimal and insiders were residents, which is typically the case, the largest

fraction of the common stock of French firms foreign investors could hold was 41.9% on average.

With this perspective, the existence of an optimal insider ownership bounds the holdings of

foreign investors and prevents the elimination of the home bias.

    The existence of an optimal level of insider ownership leads to what we call the optimal

insider ownership theory of the home bias. With this theory, the upper bound on foreign

ownership through equity holdings is determined by the optimal size of insider ownership. This

theory has sharply different predictions for the evolution of the home bias than the portfolio

choice models with rational investors. Optimal insider ownership depends on the institutions that

support corporate governance in a country as well as on the risks of predation by the state. With

weak governance because of weak institutions, concentrated insider ownership is optimal.

Consequently, to improve the potential for risk-sharing through equity holdings, institutions have

to improve so that decentralized ownership becomes optimal. Therefore, for the home bias to

have a chance to disappear, institutions that support decentralized ownership have to become

prevalent across the world.

    Portfolio investors can only hold shares not held by insiders. Hence, as pointed out by

Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2003), portfolio investors cannot hold the world

market portfolio, but they can hold the world market portfolio of shares not held by insiders,

which we call the float-adjusted world market portfolio. If all investors hold the float-adjusted

world market portfolio, there is a mechanical relation between insider holdings and foreign

ownership: as insider holdings fall, foreign investors buy a fraction of the shares sold by insiders


                                                 3
equal to the weight of the country in the float-adjusted world market portfolio. But if foreign

investors do not hold the float-adjusted world market portfolio, there is no necessary relation

between a change in insider ownership and a change in shares held by foreign investors because

all the shares sold by insiders could be bought by local investors. In either case, our theory

implies that there is a lower bound on the home bias that depends on insider ownership. For many

countries, this lower bound is high enough that there would be a large home bias towards these

countries even if the lower bound were binding.

    We use data from 1994 to 2004 to investigate the evolution of the home bias. Our sample

period starts after a period of liberalization of equity markets in emerging countries, so that we

can consider a large number of countries whose equity markets are reasonably open to foreign

investors. 4 We first show that there is no evidence of a systematic decrease in ownership

concentration across the world. Consequently, the upper bound on risk-sharing has not increased

systematically. We then investigate how the holdings of U.S. investors in foreign countries

changed from 1994 to 2004, the first and latest years of the U.S. Treasury’s comprehensive and

high quality benchmark surveys of ownership of foreign securities by U.S. residents. Using this

dataset, we find that for a sample of 46 countries with the largest stock markets, the percentage of

stock market wealth invested in these countries by U.S. residents increased from 9.76% to

13.44% from 1994 to 2004. However, it would be wrong to infer from this that over time there is

a systematic increase in portfolio investment across countries towards the investment level that

would prevail without a home bias. In fact, the percentage of U.S. stock market wealth invested in

13 countries decreased over that period of time, and in 6 other countries the increase in U.S.

investment did not match the growth in the market. Further, the average change in the home bias

per country from 1994 to 2004 is not significantly different from zero. Strikingly, we find that the


4
  Henry (2000), Bekaert and Harvey (2000), Levine and Zervos (1998) and Kim and Singal (2000) provide
equity market liberalization dates for emerging markets. The only emerging markets with liberalization
dates after 1992 are Jordan (1995), Nigeria (1993) and Zimbabwe (1993). These countries are not included
in this study.


                                                   4
home bias decreases from 1994 to 2004 in countries where insiders had smaller stakes in firms in

1994 and where the stake of insiders fell from 1994 to 2004. This result is robust when taking

into account the endogeneity of insider holdings predicted by our theory.

    The U.S. dataset has two main advantages. First, it is high quality, as the U.S. government

constructs it from security-level benchmark surveys. Second, it represents the international

positions of the largest group of foreign equity investors in the world. The disadvantages of the

U.S. dataset are that it provides data only for U.S. investors and only at the country level.5 This

sharply limits our ability to test our theory. We therefore use a second dataset that has firm-level

ownership data for foreign investors as well as corporate insiders. Few countries have such data

available over an extended time period. The dataset we were able to obtain is from Korea.

Besides having the data we need, Korea is interesting because it experienced the largest reduction

in the home bias from U.S. investors of any country from 1994 to 2004. Strikingly, the proportion

of the Korean stock market capitalization held by foreign investors tripled from 13.50% in 1996

to 41.33% in 2004. The Korean dataset reinforces our U.S. results. Foreign ownership is highly

concentrated in a small number of large firms with fairly dispersed ownership. More generally,

we find that the foreign ownership of Korean firms is inversely related to insider ownership and

grew in firms in which insider ownership fell.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we review portfolio theories of the home bias. In

Section 3, we develop in more detail the implications of insider ownership concentration for the

home bias. In Section 4, we show that there is no evidence that insider ownership fell across the

world from 1994 to 2004. In Section 5, we document the evolution of the home bias of U.S.

investors from 1994 to 2004 and investigate the extent to which the evolution of the home bias

for U.S. investors is consistent with the various theories of the home bias. In Section 6, we




5
  Another country-level data set, the IMF's Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS), started too
late for our study (in 1997) and is complete starting only in 2001.


                                                    5
investigate whether the evolution of the home bias at the firm level for Korean firms is consistent

with the various theories of the home bias. We conclude in Section 7.



2. Portfolio models of the home bias

    The models that use the portfolio approach to explain the home bias all proceed similarly.

They posit an indirect utility function which depends on wealth and state variables. The investor

maximizes the expected indirect utility function based on his expectation of the joint distribution

of asset returns and state variables. Investors differ across countries because the indirect utility

function and/or expectations of the joint distribution of returns and state variables differ across

countries. These differences lead to a home bias.

    Most of the early literature on the home bias was focused on the role of barriers to

international investment. A number of papers presented models where domestic investors faced a

cost of investing in a foreign country (see, for instance, Black, 1974, Stulz, 1981a, and Errunza

and Losq, 1985). With such a cost, domestic investors overweight domestic stocks in their

portfolios. These models generally imply that investors will invest in the foreign stocks that have

the greatest diversification benefit for them, which are the foreign stocks least correlated with

domestic stocks.

    In testing these models, the literature looked at the cross-section of stock returns. If there are

barriers to international investment, the international capital asset pricing model does not hold.

The evidence shows that there are departures from the international capital asset pricing model

for countries with capital markets that are not completely open to foreign investors and that

departures from the international capital asset pricing model vary with the degree of segmentation

of markets (see, for instance, Bekaert and Harvey, 1995). When a market is completely

segmented from the world markets, one would expect the capital asset pricing model to hold

domestically for that market, so that the expected return of a stock should be proportional to the

stock’s beta with respect to the market portfolio of the country. In contrast, when a market is


                                                  6
completely integrated in the world markets and the capital asset pricing model holds, one would

expect the expected return of a stock to be proportional to the beta of the stock with respect to the

world market portfolio. With these models, as barriers disappear, investors hold the world market

portfolio.

    As barriers to international investment became less important but the home bias persisted,

authors focused more on alternative explanations for the home bias. Though one might think that

exchange rate risks lead investors to hold different equity portfolios, this need not be the case. If

there is no inflation, so that exchange rate risks are real exchange rate risks, investors can hedge

foreign exchange risks through money market positions, so that in principle foreign exchange

risks do not affect equity portfolios (see Solnik, 1974, Adler and Dumas, 1983). The fact is that

investors in different countries consume different goods and hence are exposed to different

inflation risks which can lead them to hold different portfolios of equities if portfolios that hedge

these relative price risks include stocks (Stulz, 1981b). The literature on hedging focuses either on

inflation risk directly or on the role of non-traded goods in consumption baskets. Cooper and

Kaplanis (1994) examine the role of inflation and conclude that the home bias cannot be

explained by inflation hedging. Evidence on the role of relative price risks in explaining the home

bias seems also to suggest that these risks are too small to explain the home bias (see, for

instance, Pesenti and Van Wincoop, 2002). Finally, investors are subject to various risks that they

might want to hedge also, such as risks to their human capital. Human capital risks may lead

investors to short domestic stocks (Baxter and Jermann, 1997), so that these risks can make the

home bias even more puzzling.6

    If markets are efficient and investors are mean-variance optimizers, as long as investors

consider identical joint distributions of real asset returns, they hold the same portfolio which is

the market portfolio. The theories of the home bias considered so far assume that the joint


6
  However, in the Engel and Matsumoto (2006) dynamic general equilibrium model, if goods prices are
sticky, productivity shocks can make it optimal to overweight domestic equities.


                                                   7
distributions of asset real returns differ because of barriers to international investment and

because of differences in consumption baskets, or assume that investors are not mean-variance

optimizers. An additional possibility is that individuals simply have different expectations about

stock returns, volatilities, and covariances. In particular, if investors are more uncertain about the

expected returns for foreign stocks, these stocks will appear more risky to them and they will

overweight their portfolio with domestic stocks (see Gehrig, 1993). This kind of argument has

some empirical support, but it has three weaknesses. First, Jeske (2001, p. 31) concludes that “it

is unable to account for the patterns of home bias that can be observed both qualitatively and

quantitatively.” Second, investors who are better informed about their home market will at times

have bad signals justifying a low allocation to their home market, yet allocations to home

countries always exhibit a home bias and change little (see Jeske, 2001). Third, if resident

investors are better informed, we would expect them to outperform foreign investors. Yet, some

authors find that in some countries foreign investors outperform domestic investors.7

    A possible explanation for the home bias is simply that investors exaggerate the risks of

investing abroad or hold biased estimates of expected returns for stocks from their own country.

There is survey evidence that is consistent with behavioral explanations of the home bias. For

instance, Shiller, Kon-Ya and Tsutsui (1996) show that investors are more optimistic about their

home equity markets than about foreign markets using survey data from the U.S. and Japan.8

Graham, Harvey, and Huang (2005) show that investors who believe they have greater

competence in their understanding of financial markets are substantially more likely to own

foreign stocks. Some authors have built models generating a home bias that use utility functions

that embed some behavioral factors emphasized in the psychology literature. In particular, Solnik

(2005) builds on an insight of Statman (1999) and models the portfolio allocation decision


7
  See Seasholes (2000), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000), and Froot and Ramadorai (2001). In addition,
Thomas, Warnock and Wongswan (2006) find that U.S. investors’ foreign equity allocations beat the MSCI
World (excluding US) index.
8
  See also Kilka and Weber (2000) and Strong and Xu (2003).


                                                  8
between foreign and home country stocks as one where investors view foreign assets through a

narrow frame as assets with upside potential, but have regret when that upside potential does not

manifest itself.



3. Firm value, ownership structure, and governance

    The simplest version of the portfolio models discussed in the previous section predicts that all

investors hold the world market portfolio if there are no barriers to international investment. With

this simple model, it would never be optimal for an individual to hold more equity in a firm in his

portfolio than the firm’s proportional share in the world market portfolio. Yet, everywhere in the

world, corporate insiders overweight the firm they control in their portfolio.9

    The portfolio model and corporate finance approaches to firm ownership differ radically. The

corporate finance approach emphasizes that greater ownership by those who control the

corporation (the insiders in the following) can reduce the adverse impact of agency problems and

information asymmetries, so that there exists a level of insider ownership that maximizes firm

value.10 The optimal stake of the insiders can be very large. We first discuss the determinants of

the optimal stake of the insiders. We argue that when the institutions that protect the rights of

investors are poor, the optimal stake of the insiders is large. We consider then the implications of

poor institutions and high optimal insider ownership for investors who are not insiders.

3.1. The optimal insider ownership

    Consider, for simplicity, a private firm controlled by an entrepreneur. We assume that he

owns all the equity of the firm. He is free to do what he wants as sole owner. In particular, he

faces no limits on the private benefits of control he consumes. The entrepreneur then chooses to

sell equity to the public through an IPO. The value of that equity will depend on how much

9
   In an international macro model of portfolio choice with sticky goods prices and output that is demand
determined in the short run, this overweighting can be optimal in the face of productivity shocks (Engel and
Matsumoto, 2006).
10
   See Helwege, Pirinsky and Stulz (2006) for a detailed review of the corporate finance approach to firm
ownership and references.


                                                     9
ownership the entrepreneur retains for at least two reasons. First, if the entrepreneur were to sell

all his equity, his incentives to work hard and make correct decisions for the firm or to limit his

consumption of private benefits of control would be low.11 The nature of private benefits the

entrepreneur can extract from the firm he controls varies widely across the globe and depends on

how well outside investors are protected. While in the U.S. private benefits may take the form of

a nicer corporate plane, in many countries insiders can and at times do take money away from

minority shareholders through related party transactions.12 As the entrepreneur extracts private

benefits of control, the value of the cash flows available to minority shareholders falls and the

value of their shares is reduced. Second, the entrepreneur knows more about the firm’s future

cash flows than outsiders. Consequently, outsiders will use the retention decision of the

entrepreneur to assess the value of the future cash flows.13 They expect the entrepreneur to sell

more shares if he believes them to be overpriced, so that the price they are willing to pay for the

shares falls with the fraction of his ownership the entrepreneur wants to sell.

     Investors will not buy equity from the entrepreneur if they believe that he will extract private

benefits from the firm to such an extent that there will be no cash flows left for outside investors.

To make public equity possible, it is therefore critical that it is costly for the insiders to extract

private benefits and that these costs increase as insiders extract more private benefits. Laws and

regulations that protect outside investors from expropriation by insiders increase the costs of

extracting private benefits of control. Outside investors are better protected if a country’s laws

and regulations are enforced efficiently and fairly, so that the degree to which investors are

protected from expropriation by insiders depends generally on the quality of a country’s

institutions. The entrepreneur can also increase the costs of extracting private benefits from the

firm by setting up firm-level governance mechanisms.



11
   See, for instance, Jensen and Meckling (1976).
12
   See Johnson, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2000).
13
   See, for instance, Leland and Pyle (1977).


                                                   10
       Firms in countries in which the insiders face low costs of extracting private benefits of

control will have higher insider ownership.14 Minority shareholders receive their proportionate

share of the firm’s cash flows net of the private benefits extracted by insiders. When insiders face

low costs of extracting private benefits of control, investors expect low cash flows and put a low

price on equity unless insiders commit to limit their extraction of private benefits of control.

Insiders can commit to lower extraction of private benefits of control by increasing their

ownership share of the firm. The reason for this is that insiders have fewer incentives to extract

private benefits of control if they have a large stake. If the insiders can extract private benefits

equal to a fraction δ of the cash flows and own a fraction α of the equity, they receive a fraction δ

+ α(1 – δ) of the firm’s cash flows. If α is equal to one, the fact that the insiders can extract

private benefits has no value to them since they own all of the firm’s cash flows and can do with

them what they want. When α is smaller than one, insiders pay for their private benefits partly out

of their own pocket because these private benefits come at the expense of dividends they would

otherwise receive. The lower the ownership of the insiders, the less they pay for their private

benefits out of their own pocket. Consequently, by choosing a high level of ownership, insiders

commit to low extraction of private benefits.

       As long as there is some protection of minority shareholders, there is a cost to insiders from

extracting private benefits. For instance, they might get caught doing so and have to pay

penalties. The cost of extracting private benefits will increase for insiders as the protection of

investors improves through laws and enforcement of laws. As the cost of extracting private

benefits increases, the benefits of high insider ownership become worth less to outsiders. In fact,

if the cost of extracting private benefits is infinite, ownership is optimally dispersed. It follows

from this discussion that optimal insider ownership is higher in countries with poorer institutions

to protect investors. At the extreme, if these institutions are extremely poor, there is no public

equity.

14
     See Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) and Stulz (2005).


                                                     11
    Good institutions make dispersed ownership feasible, but even with good institutions, there

will be firms with concentrated ownership. First, insiders may derive non-pecuniary private

benefits from controlling a large stake. For instance, by controlling a large corporation, they

might be able to play an important role in their country. Hence, good institutions are a necessary

but not sufficient condition for dispersed ownership. As Gilson (2006) discusses, the non-

pecuniary benefits of controlling a large corporation may be higher in smaller countries – there

are fewer such corporations in smaller countries. Similarly, Ehrhardt and Nowak (2003) find

evidence that control is valued more in firms located in small towns. Second, if institutions

improve so that more dispersed ownership is possible, the ability of insiders to sell shares

depends on the market for their shares. If the market for shares is illiquid, it will be expensive for

insiders to sell shares because the sales will have a substantial market impact. As Helwege,

Pirinsky and Stulz (2006) show for U.S. firms, insiders reduce their stake when the market for

their shares is liquid and when their shares have performed well.

3.2. Insiders and outside investors

    We consider first the case where the world capital asset pricing model holds and insider

ownership affects expected cash flows but not covariances of cash flows with the world market

portfolio. In this case, if there are no barriers to international investment, the discount rate for

expected cash flows does not depend on the level of insider ownership or on the type of outside

shareholders the company attracts. Suppose now that the optimal insider ownership is α*. As

pointed out by Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz and Williamson (2003), it immediately follows that all

investors who are not insiders can only hold (1 – α*) of the firm. One would expect insiders to be

mostly residents of the country where the firm is located. Suppose the world is divided between

insiders, whose wealth is completely invested in the firm they own, and non-insiders, who invest

in securities. Foreign investors represent a fraction b of the non-insiders. In this case, foreign

investors own a fraction b(1 – α*) of the firm if they have no home bias. Consider a country

where insiders own 50% of the equity. Suppose that U.S. investors own equity wealth equal to


                                                 12
half the equity wealth of portfolio investors in the world, so that b = 0.5. In this case, U.S.

investors would own 0.5(1 – 0.5), or 25% of the equity of that country if no portfolio investors

have a home bias. The portfolio model discussed in the previous section would imply that if U.S.

investors own half of the world portfolio equity wealth, they should own half of the equity of that

country. If the country represents 1% of the world market portfolio and the equity market wealth

of countries is equal to their market capitalization, the portfolio model would predict that if

foreign investors have no home bias, they should own 99% of the equity of that country.

However, because of the optimal holdings of insiders, foreigners cannot own more than 50% of

the equity of the country.

    We now turn to the case where the demand curve for shares is not perfectly elastic. In this

case, greater interest in shares of a company from foreign investors corresponds to a shift in the

demand curve and increases the stock price. The increase in the stock price can make it more

advantageous for insiders to sell shares. In addition to a shift in the demand curve, greater interest

from foreign investors can also increase the elasticity of the demand curve. As foreign investors

buy shares in a company for the first time, these shares contribute much less to the risk of their

portfolio than they would contribute to the risk of the portfolios of local investors who already

own shares of that company. Finally, greater participation of investors in the market for the

company’s stock would increase liquidity in the stock. With greater liquidity, insiders could sell

shares with less of a price impact. Hence, if changes in governance make it optimal for insiders to

decrease their stake, interest from foreign investors can make it easier for insiders to decrease

their holdings. It follows from this that if the demand curve for shares is not perfectly elastic, an

exogenous increase in interest in a company from foreign investors could lead to a decrease in

insider ownership. Such a decrease would not be possible if governance were sufficiently poor

that it would not support less concentrated ownership.

    Could the factors that lead insiders to have high optimal holdings also lead to a home bias

among portfolio investors so that portfolio investors would overweight stocks from their home


                                                 13
country relative to the world float portfolio? Leuz, Lins, and Warnock (2006) show that U.S.

investors invest less in firms in which the controlling shareholder holds more control rights in

countries with poor disclosure. Giannetti and Simonov (2006) show that this result holds in

Sweden for foreign investors and small investors, but they argue that larger local shareholders

may be able to extract benefits from control and may be more protected from the consequences of

agency conflicts between controlling shareholders and minority shareholders, so that they have a

comparative advantage for investing in companies in which that conflict is more serious.

Everything else equal, we would expect control rights held by insiders to be higher in countries in

which private benefits are more valuable for the reasons already discussed. In an efficient market,

higher expected consumption of private benefits simply lowers firm value. As long as firm value

is properly discounted for the consumption of private benefits, the anticipated consumption of

private benefits should have no impact on the investment decision of portfolio investors. 15

Consequently, for private benefits to affect the investment decision of portfolio investors

differently, these investors have to have different information or opinions about the anticipated

consumption of private benefits and the implications of private benefits for the risk of firms. If

resident investors all have more precise information about private benefits, foreign investors will

be reluctant to trade with them since they would be at an information disadvantage. As a result, if

trade takes place, it will be at a price that protects foreign investors from being taken advantage

of. At that price, it may be too expensive for residents to trade with foreign investors. If only

some foreign investors have valuable information, then trade will take place as long as these

investors can hide their trades among liquidity traders.

     Insider ownership has to be high when investor protection is poor. However, poor investor

protection increases the cost of participation for investors since firms are less transparent and


15
   Giannetti and Koskinen (2005) construct a model in which wealthy investors bid up share prices in
countries with poor investor protection because they can obtain benefits from control by holding a large
stake in a corporation, so that small investors find equity investment less profitable because share prices are
not fully discounted to reflect the consumption of private benefits by insiders.


                                                      14
investors must assess the consequences of poor investor protection. One would expect resident

investors to find it less costly to assess the consequences of poor investor protection in their

country than foreign investors. Resident investors receive valuable information in the normal

course of their activities that foreign investors would have to expend resources to gather. This

advantage of residents would be especially valuable in countries with poor investor protection

since these countries typically have poor disclosure and would enable them to forecast the

distribution of future cash flows more cheaply for a given level of accuracy. Further, controlling

shareholders face social and cultural constraints. Such constraints are much harder to understand

for foreign investors. Consequently, poor institutions increase participation costs for foreign

investors and create estimation risk for them. As a result, one would expect fewer foreigners to

invest in countries with poor institutions and these investors to hold fewer assets. Viewed from

this perspective, good governance reduces participation costs and estimation risk. These benefits

from good governance are more important for foreign investors than for domestic investors for

the simple reason that domestic investors already have some of the information that is produced

as a result of better governance.

       The analysis so far has assumed that the optimal insider ownership does not depend on who

holds the shares not held by insiders. There is a literature that emphasizes the role of institutional

investors as monitors.16 With this literature, greater holdings by monitoring institutions would

lead to lower insider holdings since the monitoring by institutions would make it more costly for

insiders to extract private benefits of control. Though there are grounds to suspect that there is a

relationship between optimal insider ownership and the composition of outside investor

ownership, such a relationship would seem to be a second-order effect compared to the

determinants of insider ownership we have discussed.




16
     For a survey, see Gillan and Starks (2003).


                                                   15
4. Financial globalization and the evolution of the upper bound on international risk

sharing through equity ownership

     For investors to hold the world market portfolio, corporate ownership has to be highly

dispersed, so that all shares could potentially be acquired by foreign investors. In most countries,

however, insiders own large stakes in most corporations.17 If the benefits that insiders derive from

controlling the corporation are maximized when they own such stakes, they will not sell their

shares to foreign investors. Consequently, the shares held by insiders place an upper bound on the

share ownership by foreign investors. Though in many countries insiders control more votes than

cash flow rights, the cash flow rights held by insiders are relevant for evaluating the upper bound

on risk-sharing, since the risks of cash flows are shared.

     We discussed in section 3 how insider ownership is determined. In this section, we examine

whether it evolved across countries from 1994 through 2004 in a way to make it possible for

foreign portfolio investors to hold much larger stakes in corporations. We report data for 1994,

2004, and the change from 1994 through 2004. The problem with estimating insider ownership is

that, in many countries, the reporting requirements are weak or non-existent. Further, the cash

flow rights of insiders result from their direct ownership of shares as well as from indirect

ownership. For instance, the controlling shareholder could own 40% of the shares of the firm

directly, but a different firm that he controls also could own 10% of the shares in addition. Direct

insider ownership can therefore understate the extent to which insiders own cash flow rights in

the firm if the 10% owned through a different firm are not taken into account. Various authors

have painstakingly identified the direct and indirect ownership of cash flows of controlling

shareholders for subsets of firms to estimate the ultimate ownership of these shareholders.18 In

this paper, because we focus on country aggregate insider ownership rather than firm-level

ownership, knowledge of the ultimate ownership of the controlling shareholders is not necessary

17
  See La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (1999).
18
  Claessens, Djankov, and Lang (2000), Faccio and Lang (2002), Lins (2003), and La Porta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, Shleifer (1999).


                                                  16
to estimate the number of shares held by insiders as long as all shares held by insiders at the firm

level are taken into account.19 To obtain the country aggregate insider ownership, we aggregate

block holdings reported by Worldscope at the firm level and then compute a country insider

ownership measure from block holdings. We include only firms for which insider ownership is

available, does not exceed 100%, and is not equal to zero.

       The Worldscope data has strengths and weaknesses. First, the approach we use makes it

feasible to estimate insider ownership for two different years for a large number of countries.

Though some papers have estimated insider ownership over time, they have done so for

individual countries.20 Here, we want to compare insider ownership in two different years across

a broad range of countries. Second, the approach of focusing on the controlling shareholder alone

assumes that blocks are independent from the controlling shareholder. This seems often unlikely.

Our approach may therefore capture better the shares that are part of a controlling coalition.

Third, we are not able to identify whether a block is aligned with the controlling shareholder or

not. Consequently, some of the blocks may not be part of the controlling coalition and we will

overstate the holdings of the controlling coalition. Fourth, some equity stakes that are indirect

equity stakes from the controlling shareholder or stakes from allies of the controlling shareholder

may be too small to be counted as blocks, so that we would understate the holdings of the

controlling coalition. Fifth, reporting requirements and the enforcement of reporting requirements

varies across the world. Sixth, Worldscope at times includes shares held by depository banks in

the insider category. This problem is more severe in 1994 than in 2004. Though we attempted to

correct for this problem, the correction is imperfect since shares held by these banks may actually

be held by insiders. Our results are not sensitive to this correction. Seventh, the firms included in

Worldscope vary over time. In particular the coverage of Worldscope has improved over time. It




19
     We thank Daniel Wolfenzon for his insights on this issue.
20
     See, for instance, Franks, Mayer and Rossi (2005).


                                                      17
is well-known that insider ownership is negatively related to the size of a firm.21 It could therefore

be that as firms are added to Worldscope average insider ownership increases because the new

firms are smaller. This would be less of a problem with a value-weighted measure of insider

ownership.

       To check the Worldscope data, we compared insider ownership computed from Worldscope

with insider ownership computed from the Korean dataset we use in Section 6 of this paper for

2004. We find that our dataset has 571 observations with equally-weighted average insider

ownership of 39.38%. Worldscope has 564 observations with average insider ownership of

39.8%. We looked at a sample of individual firms. For some, the insider ownership data is exactly

the same in both databases. However, for others it is not. On average, though, the difference is

trivial. The problem with this comparison is that Korea has excellent insider ownership data, so

that the task of Worldscope is straightforward there. In another check, we estimated insider

ownership using the median of the year before, the year after, and the year considered (though we

did not have 2005 available for all firms). Doing so did not change our results meaningfully.

       Table 1 reports insider ownership for 1994 and 2004 for 42 countries as well as the change in

insider ownership in these countries between 1994 and 2004. We use two separate measures of

insider ownership for each country. The first measure is the equally-weighted average of insider

ownership for the firms for which data is available. The second measure is the value-weighted

average of insider ownership. If we had insider ownership for all firms in a country, one minus

the value-weighted average of insider ownership would be the upper bound for foreign ownership

in that country if insiders are resident investors.

       In 1994, the average of the equally-weighted averages of insider ownership across 42

countries is 49.0%. In contrast, the average of the value-weighted averages of insider ownership

is 43.4%. The distribution of the insider ownership measures across countries conforms to the



21
     See, for instance, Demsetz and Lehn (1985).


                                                      18
results obtained in other studies.22 In particular, the U.S. has the lowest value-weighted insider

ownership at 12.5%. Further, as expected, the U.K. has a low value-weighted insider ownership.

Turkey has the highest value-weighted insider ownership at 72.5%. When we turn to 2004, we

find no evidence of a decrease in ownership concentration. The average of the equally-weighted

averages of insider ownership is 50.9% and the average of the value-weighted averages is 45.7%.

Argentina experiences a dramatic increase in ownership concentration over the period. However,

both measures of insider ownership are higher in 2004 than in 1994 even when we exclude

Argentina. In 2004 Ireland has the most diffuse ownership followed by the U.S. and the U.K., and

Argentina replaces Turkey as the country with the most concentrated ownership. The average

change in insider ownership is not significantly different from zero for either of our measures.



5. The evolution of the home bias of U.S. investors

     To investigate the holdings of U.S. investors in foreign countries, we use surveys conducted

by the Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the Federal Reserve

Board in 1994 and 2004.23 These so-called benchmark surveys provide the most reliable data on

the holdings of U.S. investors, the largest group of foreign investors in the world. We first

document holdings by U.S. investors across countries in 1994 and in 2004. We start from the 47

countries that have the highest market capitalization in 1997. Because the U.S. data reports

investments in Belgium and Luxembourg together for 1994, we combine these two countries for

2004 as well and have 46 countries.

     Table 2 reports the weight of each of these 46 countries in the portfolio of stocks of U.S.

investors. The sum of the weights increases by 37.70% from 9.76% in 1994 to 13.44% to 2004.24


22
   See La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (1999).
23
   The holdings data are as of March 31, 1994 and December 31, 2004, as reported in Table 18 of
Department of Treasury et al. (2005). For a primer on the surveys, see Griever, Lee and Warnock (2001).
24
   In Table 2, the fraction of foreign stocks in the equity portfolio of U.S. investors increases from 10.25%
to 15.27% when we consider all foreign countries. Consequently, it appears that the fraction of the portfolio
of U.S. investors invested in countries other than the 46 we focus on increased from 0.48% to 1.83%.


                                                     19
With the portfolio model, the sum of the weights of these countries in the stock portfolio of U.S.

investors should be 62.30% in 1994 and 54.50% in 2004 in the absence of a home bias.25 A

simple way to evaluate the extent of the home bias for U.S. investors is to compute the ratio of

the portfolio weight of foreign countries in the portfolio of U.S. investors relative to the portfolio

weight of these countries in the world market portfolio. In 1994, the allocation to these 46

countries from U.S. investors represented 15.73% of what it would have been had they held the

world market portfolio. In 2004, that allocation was 24.59% of the portfolio share of these

countries in the world market portfolio. If the home bias is measured as one minus the decimal

value of that percentage, so that there is no home bias when investors hold the world market

portfolio, the home bias fell from 0.84 to 0.75 from 1994 to 2004, or by 10.71%.

    If what happened over these 10 years had been a systematic reduction in the home bias across

countries, we should observe a reduction in the home bias measure for each country. Table 2

shows the home bias measures for each country in 1994 and 2004. It also shows the percentage

change in the home bias measure for each country. As illustrated in Figure 1, the home bias did

not decrease systematically across countries. Out of 46 countries with complete data, the home

bias increased for 19 countries and decreased for 27 countries. The home bias increased the most

for Argentina and fell the most for Korea. The average reduction in the home bias is 0.027 with a




However, this increase is misleading. It is almost entirely due to U.S. companies that re-incorporated or
created special-purpose vehicles (or corporations) in tax havens. Indeed, the countries we include constitute
100% of U.S. holdings in countries other than Caribbean financial centers in 1994 and 99% in 2004.
25
   We require market capitalization data expressed in U.S. dollars for year-ends of 1993 and 2004 as well as
March 1994 and various months in 2004. For year-end data we rely on Standard & Poors (2005, 2003),
which is the best source of year-end market capitalization expressed in U.S. dollars. For months that are not
year-end, for emerging markets we use the Emerging Markets Database. For industrial countries and the
rest of the world aggregate, market capitalizations for March 1994 are December 1993 amounts (from
EMDB) plus country-specific MSCI price changes. For industrial countries for months in 2004 (explained
below), data are from www.fibv.com. Exceptions are the following, for which December 2004 and MSCI
price returns were used: France (no entry in FIBV), Netherlands (no entry in FIBV), and Singapore (for
December 2004, FIBV data do not match S&P (2005) data). For Israel, as of December 2004 and March
1994 there were $9.2 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively, in Israeli stocks listed on Nasdaq but not the
TASE. These are omitted from typical market capitalization data; we add them to the end-2004 and end-
1994 amounts from Standard & Poors.


                                                     20
p-value of 0.155. Consequently, one cannot reject the hypothesis that there was no change in the

average home bias between 1994 and 2004.

    The home bias measured using the aggregate portfolio share of the 46 countries in the

portfolio of stocks of U.S. investors fell much more than the average home bias – by more than

three times that amount, as it fell by 0.09 instead of 0.027. Such a result can only obtain if the

home bias fell more for countries that have larger weights in the world market portfolio. The

distribution of country portfolio shares in the world market portfolio is extremely skewed. Four

countries account for 59.58% of the market capitalization of the 46 countries for which we have

data. The home bias of U.S. investors decreased towards each of these four countries from 1994

to 2004.

    In Table 3, for the 40 countries for which we have complete insider ownership and home bias

data for both 1994 and 2004, we report correlations for the variables we use in our regressions to

explain the change in the home bias from 1994 to 2004. We measure the home bias in two ways.

One way is the traditional approach of computing the world market portfolio including all

outstanding shares. The second way, which we call the float-adjusted home bias, uses the float-

adjusted world market portfolio to compute the home bias. The correlation between the changes

in the two measures is 0.72. The first column shows the correlations of the change in home bias

(measured the traditional way) with the variables of interest in our analysis. We see that the

change in the home bias is negatively correlated with the bias in 1994, which is consistent with a

catching up effect. Our next variable is the change in insider ownership. As expected, there is a

strong positive correlation between the change in insider ownership (∆io) and the change in the

home bias. Not surprisingly in light of the earlier results of Ahearne, Griever and Warnock

(2004), Edison and Warnock (2004), and Ammer, Holland, Smith and Warnock (2005), we find

that an increase in the fraction of a market’s capitalization that is available in the U.S. through a

cross-listing (∆xlist) is associated with a decrease in the home bias. We use next the Edison and

Warnock (2003) measure of the change of the fraction of a market’s capitalization unavailable for


                                                 21
investment by foreign investors (∆for). The change in the home bias does not have a significant

correlation with the change in that measure. We next examine whether changes in home bias are

related to changes in relative market capitalizations (∆wgtw). They are not. We then consider six

governance measures from Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2005). A higher value for these

measures corresponds to a better governance outcome. We find that the home bias is significantly

negatively correlated with three measures: governance effectiveness (∆ge), regulatory quality

(∆rq), and rule of law (∆rl). The other three measures do not have a significant correlation with

the change in the home bias. Next, we use the Sarkissian and Schill (2004) measure of geographic

proximity. We find that it is not significantly related to the change in the home bias. Finally, if

foreign investors trade on momentum, their holdings would be heavily determined by recent

returns. Using the return for the three years ending in 2004 as a proxy for recent returns, the

market’s return does not have a significant correlation with the change in the home bias.

    The float-adjusted measure of the change in the home bias has an insignificant correlation

with the change in insider ownership. This is consistent with the hypothesis that insider

ownership affects the home bias across countries primarily through its impact on the fraction of a

market’s capitalization available to foreign investors. We also see that the change in the float-

adjusted home bias is not significantly correlated with the change in governance measures, except

for the (marginally significant at the 10% level) negative correlation with government

effectiveness. In contrast, however, the correlation of the change in the float-adjusted home bias

with the change in the fraction of the stock market cross-listed is quite strong.

    The correlation table shows that the change in the home bias is strongly negatively correlated

with the change in several governance variables and with the change in cross-listing, and is

positively correlated with the change in insider ownership. Following our discussion of Section 3,

we would expect improvements in governance to bring about a decrease in insider ownership, but

it could also be the case that increases in foreign interest led to decreases in insider ownership. To

disentangle these effects, we estimate regressions of the change in the home bias on the level of


                                                 22
the home bias in 1994, the level of insider ownership in 1994, the change in insider ownership,

and various other control variables. To account for the possible endogeneity of the change in

insider ownership, we report regressions where we instrument the change in insider ownership.

Our instrumental variables are the changes in the governance variables. 26 We estimate all

regressions twice. The first estimate of a regression uses the world market portfolio to calculate

the home bias, while the second estimate uses the float-adjusted world market portfolio. If insider

ownership plays a role only because it limits the shares available for investment for portfolio

investors, we would expect insider ownership not to be significant in regressions that use the

float-adjusted portfolio. In contrast, if insider ownership is significant for other reasons, perhaps

because it proxies for governance and governance affects foreign holdings directly, then we

would expect insider ownership to be significant in the regressions that use the float-adjusted

portfolio.

     Regression (1) of Panel A in Table 4 shows that the change in the home bias is negatively

related to the home bias in 1994, positively related to the insider ownership in 1994 and

positively related to the change in insider ownership over the sample period. Regression (5) is the

same regression using the float-adjusted home bias. In that regression, neither of the insider

ownership variables is significant. This confirms the result we found with the correlation table,

namely that at the country level insider ownership affects the home bias through its impact on the

fraction of shares available for portfolio investment rather than for other reasons. In all the

regressions shown in Table 4 that use the conventional measure of the home bias, insider

ownership in 1994 and the change in insider ownership are significant. These results are

consistent with the prediction of the analysis of Section 3 that foreign equity portfolio investment




26
  The governance variables are good instruments because they explain close to 40% of the variation in the
change in insider ownership but are not correlated with changes in foreign ownership once we account for
changes in insider ownership. We also estimated the regressions without instrumenting insider ownership.
The qualitative results are the same.


                                                   23
is naturally limited by the extent of insider holdings. 27 In contrast, the measures of insider

ownership are never significant in the regressions that use the float-adjusted home bias.

     We investigate next whether the insider ownership variables are significant in the regressions

on the left-hand side of Table 4 because they proxy for omitted variables. First, we control for the

fraction of a market available in the U.S. through cross-listings on Nasdaq and NYSE in 1994 and

the change in that fraction. We see that these cross-listing variables remove the significance of the

bias in 1994, consistent with the evidence in Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2004), but they

have no impact on the insider ownership variables. Next, we add variables reflecting the extent to

which restrictions limited foreign ownership in a country in 1994 and how these restrictions

changed from 1994 to 2004. The restriction variables are not significant in regression (3), but

they are significant and positive when we use the float-adjusted measure of the home bias in

regression (7). Regressions (4) and (8) control for a country’s weight in the world market

portfolio in 1994 and the change in the weight. The change in the weight is marginally

significant, suggesting that, at least when controlling for initial bias levels and for insider

ownership, the bias increased against countries whose equity markets grew. Panel B report results

where we use the governance variables. The governance variables are not significant. Finally,

Panel C uses geographic proximity and our momentum variable. These variables are not

significant either.28

     We find strong evidence that changes in the U.S. home bias towards a country are related to

the size of insider holdings in that country and to the change in these holdings. Insider holdings

could affect foreign ownership for two different reasons. In Section 3, they did so because they

limit the shares available for other investors. Alternatively, it could be that foreign investors value

the incentive effects of insider ownership. However, the latter explanation can be rejected

27
   Argentina experienced a large increase in insider ownership in our dataset. We re-estimated our
regressions without Argentina and found that our results hold. Our results hold also if we estimate our
regressions without Japan and also without the U.K.
28
   In unreported results, we also tried the Sarkissian and Schill (2004) measures of cultural, economic, and
industrial proximity. None were significant.


                                                     24
because it would imply negative coefficients on the insider ownership variables in the float-

adjusted regressions. Further, we would then expect governance variables to be significant after

controlling for the insider ownership variables. They are not. Of course, as already discussed in

Section 3, equilibrium insider ownership depends on a country’s institutions. Consequently,

country governance variables do affect foreign ownership, but they do so through their impact on

equilibrium insider ownership. We investigate this relationship further in the next section, using

firm-level ownership data for foreign investors and corporate insiders in Korea.



6. Understanding the evolution of the home bias towards Korea

    In this section, we first show how foreign ownership increased dramatically in Korea from

1996 to 2004. We then investigate how insider ownership and governance can explain the current

holdings of Korean shares by foreign investors. In the last part of the section, we show how

changes in insider ownership and other firm characteristics can help explain changes in foreign

ownership in Korea.

6.1. The growth in foreign ownership in Korea

    Table 5 documents the evolution of foreign ownership in Korea from 1996 to 2004. We

obtain foreign ownership data from the FnGuide for the end of each year over the sample period.

The equally-weighted average of the ownership share of foreign investors in Korean firms starts

at 6.18% in 1996 and almost doubles to 11.25% by 2004. The problem with including all firms in

the average is that we include firms where foreigners have direct foreign investment stakes. For

instance, the Hankuk Shell Oil Company Ltd. has foreign ownership of 70.91%. However, most

of that ownership is in the form of foreign direct investment (FDI) by the corporate owner of the

company. To look more directly at portfolio ownership by foreign investors, we separate the

firms with FDI investment (the FDI firms in the following) from the other firms (the non-FDI




                                                25
firms) using a list of firms that benefited from FDI.29 The list, which contains information about

the company name, foreign investor, foreign country, and first reporting date, enables us to divide

our sample firms into two groups: FDI firms and non FDI firms.30

     As expected, foreign ownership is much higher on average in the FDI firms. Without the FDI

firms, the equally-weighted average of foreign ownership increases from 5.12% to 7.44%, or by

45.31%. Strikingly, the number of FDI firms increases by 64.51% from 1996 to 2004. Further,

the market capitalization of these firms relative to the market capitalization of the Korean stock

market increased from 11.6% to 31.8%. Consequently, the economic importance of firms with

FDI increased sharply.

     We turn next to the value-weighted average of the investment shares of foreign investors in

Korean firms. The value-weighted average experiences a much more dramatic increase than the

equally-weighted average, tripling from 13.50% to 41.33%. The investment share of foreign

investors does not increase monotonically over time. There are large increases in 1998, 2000, and

2001. There is essentially no increase in 1997 and 1999, a trivial increase in 2004, and a drop in

2002. Limits on foreign investment were removed in 1998 for most companies. In 2000 and 2001,

limits on some privatized companies were increased substantially. The evidence seems to indicate

that limits were binding for some companies, so that the relaxation of the limits explains some of

the increase in foreign ownership. For instance, for Korea Telecom, the limit was 20% in 2000

and foreign ownership was 19.43%. The limit was increased to 49% in 2001 and foreign

ownership jumped that year to 37.22%. Further, the government sold its remaining stakes in some

of the privatized companies during that period of time.




29
   The list is from the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy, which administers the reporting
requirement of a firm’s foreign investor pursuant to the Foreign Investment Promotion Act of September
16, 1998, which defines foreign direct investment in Korean firms. The main criterion for foreign direct
investment is that it involves the purchase of stock for “the purpose of establishing a continuous
relationship with and participating in the management of said Korean corporation or company”.
30
   The list includes all firms that have a record as an FDI as of 2005 year-end, among which we identify
102 KSE listed-firms included in our sample as of 2004 year-end.


                                                  26
    The difference between the value-weighted measure of foreign investment and the equally-

weighted measure indicates that foreign investors concentrate their holdings in large firms. Figure

2 demonstrate the concentration of foreign holdings in 2004. It turns out that foreign investment

in the five largest Korean firms with insider ownership below 20% represents 61.78% of the

foreign investment in the Korean firms in our sample including all firms traded on the main

exchange. Firms with insider ownership of less than 20% would meet the least restrictive

criterion used by LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) to identify firms with dispersed

ownership. These five firms are Samsung Electronics, POSCO, Kookmin Bank, Korea Telecom

Corp., and SK Corporation. Two of these five firms are privatized firms.

6.2. Insider ownership, governance, and the home bias in Korea

    We showed in Section 3 that 100% minus the percentage insider ownership constitutes an

upper bound for foreign ownership. Consequently, firms with small insider ownership are firms

in which foreign ownership can potentially be very large. We obtain insider ownership data from

the TS2000 database maintained by the Korea Listed Companies Association. Strikingly, for the

five firms discussed in the previous section, the average foreign ownership was 60.51% in 2004.

These firms had average insider ownership of 8.57%. Three of these firms had insider ownership

below 5%. A random sample of five large U.S. firms would most likely yield a group of firms

with similar insider ownership. In this section we explore more directly the role of insider

ownership and corporate governance as determinants of foreign ownership in 2004. We use all

firms with no FDI on the main exchange and use size as our only firm characteristic that is not

governance related.

    With the Korean data, we can verify that 100% minus the percentage insider ownership is

indeed an upper bound for the fractional ownership of foreign portfolio investors. First, we

checked this for firms with no FDI. All Korean firms with no FDI have a fractional ownership by

foreign investors lower than this bound. Second, not surprisingly, there are some FDI firms where

foreign ownership is greater than 100% minus the percentage of insider ownership. There are 102


                                                27
firms with FDI and 17 have foreign ownership in 2004 greater than 100% minus insider

ownership.

     We investigate the relation between foreign portfolio investment in 2004 and its upper-bound

across firms. To do this, we regress the foreigners’ share of firm ownership on 100 - insider

ownership. 31 Institutional investors are typically reluctant to invest in small firms and most

foreign investors are institutional investors. We therefore estimate a regression with all non-FDI

firms and a regression with non-FDI firms with capitalization in excess of $100 million (large

firms in what follows). Table 6 shows the regression estimates. The coefficient on 100 - insider

ownership is positive and highly statistically significant in regressions (1) and (7). The economic

significance of the coefficients is also substantial. In regression (7), we find that across large

firms 10% more insider ownership is associated with 4.13% less foreign ownership.32

     Regressions (2) and (8) use the direct ownership of the controlling shareholder as an

explanatory variable. We see that an increase in the direct ownership of the controlling

shareholder has a negative impact on foreign ownership. This is a striking result because it

suggests that the incentive effects of greater cash flow rights for the controlling shareholder have

at most a second-order effect for foreign investors. If these effects had a first-order effect, we

would expect direct ownership to have a positive coefficient.

     We construct data on corporate governance rankings based on the surveys of corporate

governance practices conducted by the Korea Corporate Governance Service (KCGS) for the

years from 2002 to 2004. 33 The annual survey contains over 100 questions divided into five



31
   In contrast to the regressions in Section 5, we do not report results with insider ownership instrumented because
there are no natural firm-level instruments available.
32
    One could argue that our measure of the fraction of shares potentially available to foreign investors should take into
account the shares held by the government and government-related entities. When we use the variable (100 – insiders –
shares held by the government or government entities), the coefficient on that variable is 0.357 and significant.
33
   The KCGS was established in June 2002 as an independent, nonprofit organization under the joint sponsorship of six
member firms, including the Korea Stock Exchange and Kosdaq Stock Market. The KCGS performs annual surveys to
award the top 10 best governed listed companies since Spring 2003, based on the criteria contained in the Code of Best
Practice available at www.cgs.or.kr/eng/. The reliability of the responses is carefully verified by the KCGS with the
evidence documentation provided by the responding firms. The response rate is very high: 426, 672, 528 KSE-listed
firms for the years of 2002, 2003, and 2004, respectively.


                                                           28
categories: shareholder rights, board of directors, disclosure, audit system, and dividend

payments. For each of the questionnaires, different weights are assigned toward a total of 300

points by the KCGS. For the purpose of our analysis, we rank each firm based on its total scores

for each year, and scale the ranks by the number of responding firms to get percentage ranks

ranging from 0 to 100. Lower ranks imply better governance; if a firm is ranked 10, this means

that 90% of the Korean firms that responded to the survey have worse governance. The average

governance ranking of the five firms discussed earlier in this section is 2.20 in 2004, meaning that

97.80% of the firms with a governance ranking had worse governance than (the average of) these

five firms. Across all firms, we find in regressions (3) and (9) of Table 6 that better governance is

associated with greater foreign ownership. The coefficient on the corporate governance ranking is

negative and significant in both. For large firms, an increase in a firm’s governance ranking from

the 50th percentile to the top of the ranking would increase foreign ownership by 15.65%.

    In Korea, all shares of common stock have the same voting rights. Consequently, for the

controlling shareholder of a firm to own more control rights than cash flow rights, he has to own

stakes in other affiliated firms that own shares in the firm considered. Ownership parity,

introduced by Black, Jang, and Kim (2005), measures the extent to which the controlling

shareholder exerts his control through related parties. It is defined as 100 – (Insider ownership –

Largest shareholder direct ownership). If the ownership parity is 100, there are no related parties,

so that the controlling shareholder owns the shares through which he exerts control. If the

controlling shareholder were to own less shares, ownership parity would be less than 100 and

would fall as the related parties held more shares. An increase in ownership parity is expected to

reduce the controlling shareholder agency costs. In regressions (4) and (10), we regress foreign

ownership on the ownership parity. Though the coefficient on ownership parity is positive, it is

significant only when we use the whole sample.




                                                 29
     It is well-known from the literature that foreign investors overweight large firms. 34

Regressions (5) and (11) verify this. Not only is the coefficient on size highly significant, the R-

square of these regressions is extremely high. In Korea, large firms are subject to a higher

standard for many governance attributes—for instance, firms with assets above 2 trillion Kwon

have to have at least 50% of outside directors—which creates a substantial negative correlation

between size and the governance index. 35 Consequently, we have to check whether the

governance index is significant because of size being an omitted variable.

     In regressions (6) and (12), we regress foreign ownership on the logarithm of the firm’s total

capitalization, 100 – insider ownership, ownership parity, and the governance rating. All the

variables are statistically significant in both regressions. The economic significance of the

variable 100 – insider ownership is still large: for large firms, a decrease in insider holdings from

the median (38%) to the smallest amount (3.6%) would translate into an increase in foreign

ownership of 11.39%. An increase in the corporate governance ranking from the median to the

highest score would increase foreign ownership by 6.4%. The coefficient on ownership parity is

negative in these regressions. Note, however, that insider ownership enters twice in this

regression because it is used in the definition of ownership parity, rendering the interpretation of

the coefficient on ownership parity more difficult. Specifically, we can rewrite the regression so

that ownership parity has a positive coefficient of 0.102 and sole ownership has a negative

coefficient of -0.170. 36 Consequently, with this rewriting, there is a positive relation between




34
   See Kang and Stulz (1997), Dahlquist and Robertsson (2001), Ammer, Holland, Smith, and Warnock
(2005), and Leuz, Lins, and Warnock (2006).
35
   See Black, Jang, and Kim (2005) and Nam (2004). The correlation between size and governance ranking
in our full sample is -0.460.
36
   Let IO be insider ownership, OwnPar be ownership parity, and Sole be the ownership of the controlling
shareholder. Including both (100-IO) and OwnPar (=100-IO+Sole) in column (6) of Table 6, we estimate
coefficients of +.170 and -0.068, respectively. Thus, we get 0.170*(100 – IO) - 0.068*(100 – IO + Sole),
which can be rewritten as 0.102*OwnPar - 0.170*Sole.




                                                   30
foreign ownership and ownership parity. With either interpretation, greater insider ownership is

associated with lower foreign ownership.

6.3. The evolution of the home bias in Korea

     We now investigate in Table 7 whether changes in insider ownership and other firm

characteristics can help explain the change in the home bias in Korea. We first estimate

regressions similar to those of Table 6 for every year in our sample. We add two firm

characteristics that have been shown to help explain foreign ownership, namely Tobin’s q and the

ratio of cash flow to assets (see Kang and Stulz (1997) and Dahlquist and Robertsson (2001)). We

see that every year after 1998 100 - insider ownership has a positive significant coefficient.

Before the end of 1998, foreigners still faced restrictions in investing in the typical firm. Not

surprisingly, size has a positive significant coefficient. Tobin’s q and cash flow have positive

coefficients, but they are not always significant. The coefficient on ownership parity is negative

when it is significant; in these cases, if we included sole ownership instead of 100 - insider

ownership, the coefficient on ownership parity would be positive and significant. For the last

three years, we add the governance index to the regressions. The index is not significant in 2002,

but it is significantly negative in 2003 and 2004. This evidence indicates that firm-level

governance is related to foreign ownership. This result is related to the evidence in Leuz, Lins and

Warnock (2006) that foreign investors invest less in firms where the agency conflict between the

controlling shareholder and minority investors is stronger when these firms are located in

countries with poor disclosure. In their paper, they use a proxy for the intensity of the agency

conflict that is related to ownership parity in this paper.37 Our evidence shows that more nuanced

measures of governance could uncover a relation between governance and foreign ownership in

countries with relatively good disclosure and governance institutions. Finally, it is useful to note



37
  See also Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz and Williamson (2003) and Gianetti and Simonov (2006) for
evidence on Sweden showing that foreign investors invest less in firms where the difference between the
voting rights and cash flow rights held by the controlling shareholder is greater.


                                                   31
that the yearly regressions explain a substantial fraction of the variation in foreign ownership

across firms. The highest adjusted R2 is 0.601 for 2004.

    We then estimate fixed-effect panel regressions that also include a full set of year dummies.

These fixed effects should capture unobserved firm heterogeneity and therefore help with

potential endogeneity problems (see Himmelberg, Hubbard and Palia (1999)). We estimate these

regressions using the sample from 1998 to 2004. We see that 100 - insider ownership has a

significant positive coefficient. As in Table 6, we also use a sample of large firms. The coefficient

on 100 - insider ownership is larger in absolute value for these firms.

    The last two regressions in Table 7 parallel the U.S. regressions in Table 4. We regress the

change in foreign ownership from 1998 to 2004 on changes in firm characteristics as well as the

initial (1998) values of each firm characteristic and foreign ownership. The change in 100 -

insider ownership has a significant positive coefficient. The coefficient is strikingly large for the

large firms. For these firms, a decrease in insider ownership of 10% corresponds to an increase in

foreign ownership of 4.58%. We show in the last two columns only the estimates for the changes

variables. Similar to the U.S. results in Table 4, taking into account the coefficients on initial

values (not shown), these regressions indicate that over this period foreign ownership increased in

firms that had less insider ownership in 1998 and that reduced insider ownership between 1998

and 2004. The evidence we find at the firm level for Korea is therefore wholly consistent with the

evidence we find using data on U.S. investors’ foreign equity holdings.



7. Conclusion

    In this paper, we investigate the evolution of the home bias in the age of financial

globalization. We document that the average bias of U.S. investors towards the countries that

have the largest capital markets in the world did not fall significantly from 1994 to 2004.

However, if the home bias is estimated from aggregate data of U.S. investment to the rest of the

world, the home bias fell. The explanation for these findings is that foreign investment in a


                                                 32
country depends crucially on the extent to which the institutions of that country support diffuse

ownership of corporations. If the institutions of a country are extremely poor, a country has no

publicly traded equity and there will be no foreign portfolio equity investment. In most countries,

insider ownership is concentrated because the institutions of the country do not support diffuse

ownership. This insider ownership concentration is an obstacle to international risk-sharing. We

develop a theory of the home bias based on the existence of an optimal level of insider ownership

that differs across countries and call it the optimal insider ownership theory of the home bias. We

show that the home bias towards many countries could fall substantially only if the optimal

insider ownership level of these countries were to fall substantially. The road towards greater

risk-sharing therefore goes through an improvement in institutions that make diffuse ownership of

firms possible in the countries where it is not. We provide evidence at the firm level for Korea

showing that foreign investors invest more in firms with lower insider ownership and better

governance. The experience of the large Korean firms with diffuse ownership shows that when

such firms exist, foreign portfolio investors can end up owning a majority of the firms’ shares.




                                                33
Bibliography


Adler, M. and B. Dumas, 1983, International portfolio choice and corporation finance: A
   synthesis, Journal of Finance 38, 925-984.

Ahearne, A. G., W. L. Griever, and F. E. Warnock, 2004, Information costs and home bias: An
   analysis of U.S. holdings of foreign equities, Journal of International Economics 62, 313-336.

Ammer, J., S. Holland, D. Smith, and F. E. Warnock, 2005, Look at Me Now: The Role of Cross-
  Listings in Attracting U.S. Shareholders, working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal
  Reserve System.

Baxter, M. and U. J. Jermann, 1997, The international diversification puzzle is worse than you
   think, American Economic Review 87, 170-180.

Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey, 1995, Time-varying world market integration, Journal of Finance
   50, 403-444.

Bekaert, G., and C.R. Harvey, 2000, Foreign speculators and emerging equity markets, Journal of
   Finance 55, 565-613.

Black, F., 1974, International capital market equilibrium with investment barriers, Journal of
    Financial Economics 1, 337-352.

Black, B., H. Jang, and W. Kim, 2005, Predicting firms’ corporate governance choices: Evidence
    from Korea, Journal of Corporate Finance, forthcoming.

Burger, J. D., and F. E. Warnock, 2004, Foreign Participation in Local Currency Bond Markets,
   International Finance Discussion Papers, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
   No. 794, Washington, D.C.

Claessens, S., S. Djankov, and L.H.P. Lang, 2000, The separation of ownership and control in
    east Asian corporations, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 81-112.

Cooper, I. A., and E. Kaplanis, 1994, Home bias in equity portfolios, inflation hedging and
   international capital market equilibrium, Review of Financial Studies 7, p. 45-60.

Dahlquist, M., L. Pinkowitz, R. M. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2003, Corporate governance and
   the home bias, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 87-110.

Dahlquist, M., and G. Robertsson, 2001, Direct foreign ownership, institutional investors, and
   firm characteristics, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 413-440.

Demsetz, H., and K. Lehn, 1985, The structure of corporate ownership: Cause and consequences,
   Journal of Political Economy 93, 1155-1177.

Department of Treasury, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Board of Governors of the
   Federal Reserve System, 2005. Report on U.S. Portfolio Holdings of Foreign Equities as of
   December 31, 2004.



                                               34
Edison, H. J., and F. E. Warnock, 2003, A simple measure of the intensity of capital controls,
    Journal of Empirical Finance 10, 81-103.

Edison, H. J., and F. E. Warnock, 2004, U.S. investors’ emerging market equity portfolios: A
    security-level analysis, The Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 691-704.

Ehrhardt, O., and E. Nowak, 2003, Private benefits and minority shareholder expropriation,
   working paper, University of Southern Switzerland, Lugano, Switzerland.

Engel, C., and A. Matsumoto, 2006, Portfolio choice in a monetary open-economy DSGE model,
   NBER working paper no. 12214, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

Errunza, V. and E. Losq, 1985, International asset pricing under mild segmentation: Theory and
    test, Journal of Finance 40, 105-124.

Faccio, M., and L. Lang, 2002, The ultimate ownership of western European corporations,
   Journal of Financial Economics 65, 365-395.

Franks, J., C. Mayer, and S. Rossi, 2004, Ownership: Evolution and Regulation, Unpublished
    paper, London Business School.

Friedman, T. L., 2005, The World is Flat, Farrar, Strauss, and Giroux.

Froot, K. A., and T. Ramadorai, 2001, The information content of international portfolio flows,
   NBER working paper no. 8472.

Gehrig, T., 1993, An information based explanation of domestic bias in international equity
   investment, Scandinavian Journal of Economics 95, 97-109.

Giannetti, M., and A. Simonov, 2006, Which investors fear expropriation? Evidence from
   portfolio choices, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Giannetti, M., and Y. Koskinen, 2005, Investor protection and the demand for equity,
   unpublished working paper, Stockholm School of Economics, Stockholm, Sweden.

Gillan, S. L., and L. T. Starks, 2003, Corporate governance, corporate ownership, and the role of
    institutional investors: A global perspective, unpublished working paper, University of Texas,
    Austin, TX.

Gilson, R. J., 2006, Controlling shareholders and corporate governance: Complicating the
    comparative taxonomy, Harvard Law Review 119, 1641-1679.

Graham, J. R., C. R. Harvey, and H. Huang, 2005, Investor competence, trading frequency, and
   home bias, unpublished working paper.

Griever, W. L., G. A. Lee, and F. E. Warnock, 2001, The U.S. system for measuring cross-border
    investment in securities: A primer with a discussion of recent developments, Federal Reserve
    Bulletin 87(10), 633-650.




                                               35
Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and performance of various
    investor types: A study of Finland’s unique data set, Journal of Financial Economics 55, 43-
    67.

Helwege, J., C. Pirinsky, and R. M. Stulz, 2006, Why do firms become widely-held? An analysis
   of the dynamics of corporate ownership, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Henry, P. B., 2000, Stock market liberalization, economic reform and emerging market equity
   prices, Journal of Finance 55, 529-564.

Himmelberg, C. P. R., G. Hubbard and D. Palia, 1999, Understanding the determinants of
   managerial ownership and the link between ownership and performance, Journal of Financial
   Economics 53, 353-384

Jensen, M. C., and W. H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs
    and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.

Jeske, K., 2001, Equity home bias: Can information cost explain the puzzle?, Federal Reserve
    Bank of Atlanta Economic Review (Third quarter), 31-42.

Johnson, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes and A. Shleifer, 2000, Tunneling, American
   Economic Review 90, 22-27.

Kang, J. and R. M. Stulz, 1997, Why is there a home bias? An analysis of foreign portfolio equity
   ownership in Japan, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 3-28.

Karolyi, A. and R. Stulz, 2003, Are assets priced locally or globally?, in G. Constantinides, M.
   Harris and R. Stulz, eds.: The Handbook of the Economics of Finance, North-Holland
   Publishers, New York, NY.

Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi, 2005, Governance matters IV: Governance
   indicators for 1996-2004, World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Kilka, M., and M. Weber, 2000, Home bias in international stock return expectations, Journal of
    Psychology and Financial Markets 1, 176-193.

Kim, E. H., and V. Singal, 2000, Stock markets openings: Experience of emerging economies,
   Journal of Business 73, 25-66.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership around the world, Journal
    of Finance 54, 471-517.

Leland, H. E., and D. H. Pyle, 1977, Informational asymmetries, financial structure, and financial
    intermediation, Journal of Finance 32, 371-387.

Leuz, C., K. V. Lins, and F. E. Warnock, 2006, Do foreigners invest less in poorly governed
   firms?, NBER working paper no. 12222, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

Levine, R., and S. Zervos, 1998, Capital control liberalization and stock market development,
   World Development.



                                                36
Lewis, K. K., 1999, Trying to explain home bias in equities and consumption, Journal of
   Economic Literature 37, 571-608.

Lins, K., 2003, Equity ownership and firm value in emerging markets, Journal of Financial and
    Quantitative Analysis, 38, 159-184.

Lucas, R. E. Jr., 1990, Why doesn’t capital flow from rich to poor countries?, American
   Economic Review 80, 92-96.

Nam, I. C., 2004, Corporate governance in the Republic of Korea and its implications for firm
   performance, working paper, Asian Development Bank Institute.

Pesenti, P., and E. Van Wincoop, 2002, Can nontradables generate substantial home bias?,
    Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 34, 26-50.

Sarkissian, S., and M. Schill, 2004, The overseas listing decision: New evidence of proximity
    preference, Review of Financial Studies 17, 769-810.

Seasholes, M. S., 2000, Smart foreign traders in emerging markets, Working paper, University of
   California at Berkeley.

Shiller, R.J., Kon-Ya, F., and Y. TsuTsui, 1996, Why did the Nikkei crash? Expanding the scope
    of expectations data collection, Review of Economic and Statistics 78, 156-164.

Shleifer, A., and D. Wolfenzon, 2002, Investor protection and equity markets, Journal of
    Financial Economics 66, 3-27.

Solnik, B., 1974, An equilibrium model of the international capital market, Journal of Economic
    Theory 8, 500-524.

Solnik, B., 2005, Equity home bias and regret: An equilibrium model, unpublished working
    paper.

Standard and Poors, 2003. Global Stock Markets Factbook.

Standard and Poors, 2005. Global Stock Markets Factbook.

Statman, M., 1999, Foreign stocks in behavioral portfolios, Financial Analysts Journal
    (March/April), 12-16.

Strong, N.C., and X. Xu, 2003, Understanding the equity home bias: evidence from survey data,
    Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 307–312.

Stulz, R. M., 1981a, On effects of barriers to international investment, Journal of Finance 36,
    923-934.

Stulz, R. M., 1981b, A model of international asset pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 9,
    383-406.

Stulz, R. M., 2005, The limits of financial globalization, Journal of Finance 60, 1595-1638.



                                                37
Thomas, C. P., F. E. Warnock, and J. Wongswan, 2006, The performance of international equity
   portfolios, NBER working paper no. 12346, NBER, Cambridge, MA.




                                            38
Figure 1. The Evolution of the Home Bias


                                 Bias in 2004 and 1994
        1




                                                                                          COPK
                                                                                             MA
                                                    AR                              CL     CN
                                                                                    BELX
                                                                                 PEHKMY         EG
                                                                                       THZA PL
                                                                                       GR
                                                                                       TR    IN
        .8




                                                                        ES   AUIT
                                                                                PT ID
                                                                                    PH         TW
                                                                                   FR DK JP
                                                         NZ        VE    SE         DEAT
                                                                   NO             BR
                                                                                   SG
           .6




                                                                     CA
                                                                      HU                 KR
                                                                            UK CH
     Bias04




                                                                         FI        IL

                                              NL   MX
   .4




                                                              IE
        .2
        0




                0        .2              .4                   .6               .8               1
                                               Bias94



Along the 45o line, home bias is unchanged between 1994 and 2004. For any country, the change
in U.S investors’ home bias toward it can be read from the distance from its point to the 45o line.
The home bias has declined for the 27 countries below the 45o line and increased for the 19
countries above it.




                                                   39
Figure 2. Cumulative percentage (from the largest firm to the smallest firm) of wealth
invested in all KSE stocks as of the end of 2004

                                                      100
                                                                Foreign investors

                                                      90
 .




                                                      80
 Cumulative percentage of wealth invested in stocks




                                                                           Domestic investors

                                                      70


                                                      60


                                                      50


                                                      40


                                                      30


                                                      20


                                                      10


                                                       0
                                                            1         51      101     151       201   251   301    351   401   451   501   551   601   651
                                                       Largest                                                                                         Smallest




                                                                                                              40
Table 1. Insider ownership and changes in insider ownership
The table uses the information reported by Worldscope on the firms for which Worldscope has information in a given year. We exclude firms with no insider ownership data and
with insider ownership exceeding 100% or equal to 0%.

                                                  1994                                                          2004
                                                                                (c)
                                         # Firms         Insider ownership(%)                           # Firms        Insider ownership(%) (c)    Diff        Diff
      Country           # Firms in                                                     # Firms in
                                   (a) with insider                                               (a) with insider
                                                                                                                                                  (8)-(4)     (9)-(5)
                       Worldscope                        Equally-       Value-        Worldscope                       Equally-       Value-
                                       ownership(b)      weighted      weighted                       ownership(b)     weighted      weighted
           (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)              (6)            (7)             (8)           (9)
Argentina                    31              9             57.1          55.7                80            9             71.7           93.9        14.6        38.2
Australia                    238            220            36.8          27.7              1571          1209            40.8           31.6         4.1         3.8
Austria                       85            36             57.9          55.1               101           53             62.4           55.8         4.6         0.7
Belgium                      108             97            57.5          51.1               144           90             52.5           45.8        -5.1        -5.4
Brazil                       110            69             46.3          57.4               344           139            64.5           52.2        18.3        -5.1
Canada                      439            150             33.0          31.8              1482           453            24.8           18.2        -8.2       -13.6
Chile                        69             53             58.5          51.9              197            98             67.1           63.7         8.6        11.8
China                        37               9            56.7          59.1              1554           433            61.5           72.5         4.8        13.4
Denmark                      168             94            25.6          28.0               178           105            43.8           40.8        18.1        12.7
Finland                      94             84             43.3          24.1              145            102            36.1           17.9        -7.2        -6.1
France                       557            502            61.7          41.2               834           486            58.1           33.1        -3.6        -8.1
Germany                      599            459            68.2          54.5               910           461            59.2           44.3        -9.0       -10.2
Greece                      122             38             65.7          70.8              315            55             54.7           44.7       -11.0       -26.1
Hong Kong                    180            167            54.6          45.5              1026           837            59.3           46.6         4.7         1.1
India                        204            13             52.7          57.0               527           304            55.5           60.5         2.8         3.5
Indonesia                    98             83             65.5          66.3              339            279            65.7           63.8         0.2        -2.5
Ireland                      55             52             35.9          19.8                77           55             28.9           10.3        -7.0        -9.5
Israel                       35              7             56.3          55.6              185            98             57.1           43.6         0.8       -11.9
Italy                        207             96            57.2          49.5               273           225            46.9           33.7       -10.3       -15.8
Japan                       2429           2202            47.6          37.2              3959          1730            42.1           34.0        -5.4        -3.2
Korea                        241            227            27.9          36.1              891            564            39.8           34.5        11.8        -1.7
Luxembourg                    18              6            65.7          66.4                46            8             50.4           68.7       -15.3         2.3
Malaysia                    238             221            52.0          52.7              1033           770            49.1           49.7        -2.9       -2.9




                                                                                      41
Table 1. continued

                                                     1994                                                             2004
                                                                                     (c)
                                          # Firms           Insider ownership(%)                             # Firms         Insider ownership(%) (c)    Diff      Diff
       Country           # Firms in                                                         # Firms in
                                    (a) with insider                                                   (a) with insider
                                                                                                                                                        (8)-(4)   (9)-(5)
                        Worldscope                          Equally-        Value-         Worldscope                        Equally-       Value-
                                        ownership(b)        weighted       weighted                        ownership(b)      weighted      weighted
           (1)                 (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)            (7)              (8)            (9)
Mexico                         79               9              60.1           30.5               138            24             73.9           66.4       13.7      36.0
Netherlands                    184             138             51.0           42.5               211           126             42.0           29.2       -8.9     -13.2
New Zealand                    48              46              51.6           54.2              119            78              49.6           53.5       -2.0      -0.7
Norway                         114             102             44.9           43.7               175           105             43.3           51.1       -1.7       7.4
Pakistan                       75              18              58.3           57.6               122           58              54.7           76.3       -3.6      18.7
Peru                           25               6              66.9           47.3                77           12              77.5           82.3       10.6      34.9
Poland                         15               5              39.9           45.6               111            74             59.3           53.9       19.4       8.3
Portugal                       73              48              50.4           56.3                65           36              61.7           38.6       11.3     -17.6
Singapore                      135             133             54.8           57.4               620           461             54.8           57.9        0.0       0.5
South Africa                   193             172             51.1           43.5               355           169             45.6           42.5       -5.5      -1.0
Spain                          140             107             53.9           47.7              159            111             49.7           37.6       -4.1     -10.1
Sri Lanka                      17              11              19.8           21.6                31           13              50.1           53.2       30.3      31.6
Sweden                         164             152             39.3           22.0               326           159             32.5           21.5       -6.8      -0.5
Switzerland                    190             128             46.7           23.6               282           225             43.5           23.9       -3.2       0.3
Taiwan                        113              20              18.1           15.0              1455           567             25.7           28.8        7.6     13.9
Thailand                       245             35              36.7           21.8               519           313             57.0           53.6       20.2      31.8
Turkey                          47             24              71.7           72.5               216           195             62.0           66.3       -9.7      -6.2
U.K.                          1588            1538             30.6           13.0              2354          1997             32.4           12.3        1.8      -0.7
U.S.                          2541            2323             29.7           12.5              8927          6075             31.6           12.2        1.9      -0.2
Average                                                        49.0           43.4                                             50.9           45.7       1.9       2.3
t-stat for difference                                                                                                                                    0.24      0.32
Note: (a) A firm is covered by Worldscope if it has either shares outstanding or December stock price.
        (b) Ownership data is set missing if it exceeds 100%. A firm is included in the analysis if it has both ownership data and Dec. market value.
        (c) Assuming ownership is 0 if Worldscope reports 0.




                                                                                           42
Table 2. The Evolution of the Home Bias
Table shows the home bias in U.S. investors’ equity portfolios as of 1994 and 2004. Weight in world market portfolio
is calculated from market capitalization as given in Standard & Poors (2003, 2005). U.S. portfolio is calculated as U.S.
market capitalization plus U.S. holdings of foreign equities less foreign holdings of U.S. equities (which is from
Thomas et al. (2004)). Country-level holdings data are as of December 31, 2004 and March 31, 1994, as reported in
Table 18 of Department of Treasury et al. (2005). Bias is calculated as one minus the ratio of the weights of the
country in U.S. equity portfolios and in the world market portfolio; that is, (col. 5) = 1 – (col.3) / (col. 1). Excluding
holdings of companies that are incorporated in the Caribbean, the listed countries represent 100% of U.S. investors’
foreign holdings in 1994 and 99% in 2004. Equally weighted averages, and t-statistics testing the difference from zero,
are provided in parentheses at the bottom of the table.

                                      Weight in World            Weight in U.S.                      Bias
                                      Market Portfolio          Equity Portfolio
                                      2004       1994           2004       1994         2004         1994       Change
                                       (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)
Developed Countries                   0.419       0.491         0.113      0.078         0.73        0.84        -0.11
   Euro Area                          0.162       0.108         0.039      0.024         0.76        0.78        -0.02
       Austria                        0.002       0.002         0.001      0.000         0.76        0.88        -0.13
       Belgium-Luxembourg             0.008       0.007         0.002      0.001         0.82        0.87        -0.05
       Finland                        0.005       0.002         0.002      0.001         0.57        0.72        -0.15
       France                         0.048       0.031         0.010      0.005         0.79        0.85        -0.05
       Germany                        0.031       0.031         0.007      0.005         0.76        0.85        -0.09
       Greece                         0.003       0.001         0.000      0.000         0.87        0.90        -0.03
       Ireland                        0.003       0.001         0.002      0.000         0.34        0.60        -0.26
       Italy                          0.020       0.012         0.003      0.002         0.83        0.79         0.04
       Netherlands                    0.016       0.012         0.008      0.007         0.49        0.44         0.05
       Portugal                       0.002       0.001         0.000      0.000         0.83        0.80         0.03
       Spain                          0.024       0.008         0.004      0.002         0.84        0.70         0.14
   Other Europe                       0.111       0.105         0.040      0.025         0.64        0.76        -0.12
       Denmark                        0.004       0.003         0.001      0.000         0.78        0.89        -0.12
       Norway                         0.004       0.002         0.001      0.001         0.70        0.65         0.05
       Sweden                         0.010       0.008         0.002      0.002         0.76        0.73        0.04
       Switzerland                    0.021       0.019         0.008      0.004         0.61        0.80        -0.19
       United Kingdom                 0.072       0.073         0.027      0.018         0.62        0.75        -0.13
   Other Developed                    0.146       0.278         0.034      0.029         0.77        0.90        -0.13
       Australia                      0.020       0.014         0.003      0.003         0.83        0.78         0.05
       Canada                         0.030       0.022         0.011      0.007         0.64        0.67        -0.03
       Japan                          0.095       0.240         0.020      0.018         0.79        0.93        -0.13
       New Zealand                    0.001       0.002         0.000      0.001         0.75        0.56         0.19




                                                           43
Table 2. continued

                           Weight in World          Weight in U.S.             Bias
                           Market Portfolio        Equity Portfolio
                           2004       1994         2004       1994    2004     1994     Change
                            (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)     (5)      (6)       (7)
Emerging Markets           0.126     0.132         0.021      0.020   0.83     0.85      -0.02
  Latin America            0.018     0.030         0.005      0.010   0.72     0.67       0.06
      Argentina            0.001     0.003         0.000      0.001   0.94     0.52       0.42
      Brazil               0.008     0.009         0.003      0.002   0.70     0.83      -0.13
      Chile                0.003     0.003         0.000      0.000   0.95     0.86       0.09
      Colombia             0.001     0.001         0.000      0.000   0.98     0.95       0.03
      Mexico               0.004     0.013         0.002      0.006   0.49     0.51      -0.02
      Peru                 0.001     0.000         0.000      0.000   0.92     0.81       0.11
      Venezuela            0.000     0.000         0.000      0.000   0.76     0.64       0.12
  Emerging Asia            0.060     0.058         0.009      0.004   0.84     0.92      -0.08
      China                0.016     0.003         0.001      0.000   0.96     0.95       0.01
      India                0.010     0.008         0.001      0.000   0.86     0.97      -0.11
      Indonesia            0.002     0.002         0.000      0.000   0.81     0.84      -0.04
      Korea                0.011     0.010         0.004      0.001   0.64     0.92      -0.28
      Malaysia             0.005     0.012         0.000      0.002   0.92     0.87       0.06
      Pakistan             0.001     0.001         0.000      0.000   0.99     0.96       0.03
      Philippines          0.001     0.002         0.000      0.000   0.82     0.86      -0.04
      Sri Lanka            0.000     0.000         0.000      0.000   0.98     0.93       0.05
      Thailand             0.003     0.007         0.000      0.001   0.88     0.90      -0.02
      Taiwan               0.011     0.012         0.002      0.000   0.82     0.99      -0.17
  Financial Centers        0.027     0.028         0.004      0.004   0.87     0.84       0.02
      Hong Kong            0.022     0.020         0.002      0.003   0.90     0.84       0.06
      Singapore            0.004     0.008         0.001      0.001   0.68     0.85      -0.17
  Emerging Europe          0.005     0.002         0.001      0.000   0.85     0.90      -0.05
      Hungary              0.001     0.000         0.000      0.000   0.64     0.68      -0.04
      Poland               0.002     0.000         0.000      0.000   0.90     0.96      -0.06
      Turkey               0.003     0.001         0.000      0.000   0.87     0.90      -0.03
  Other Emerging           0.016     0.014         0.003      0.001   0.84     0.91      -0.06
      Egypt                0.001     0.000         0.000      0.000   0.93     1.00      -0.06
      Israel               0.003     0.003         0.001      0.000   0.58     0.84      -0.27
      Morocco              0.001     0.000         0.000      0.000   0.99     0.98       0.02
      South Africa         0.012     0.011         0.001      0.001   0.89     0.92      -0.03

Total (above listed)       0.545     0.623         0.134      0.098   0.75     0.84      -0.09
Total Rest of World        0.580     0.631         0.153      0.102   0.74     0.84      -0.10

Equally Weighted Average   0.012     0.014         0.003     0.0021   0.787    0.814    -0.027
                           (4.31)    (2.52)        (3.78)    (3.69)   (36.0)   (40.3)   (1.45)




                                              44
Table 3. Correlations
Table shows correlations of changes, calculated from 1994 to 2004 (except for Governance Indicators, which are from 1996 to 2004), as well as of the 1994 levels of home bias
calculated using market capitalization data (bias) and using float data (biasF). Home bias measures are from Table 2. Insider Ownership (io) is described in Table 1. Cross-list (xl) is the
share (decimal from zero to one) of the foreign market that is available on the NYSE or Nasdaq. Foreign Ownership Restrictions (for) is the fraction of the market capitalization that is
unavailable to foreigners. Weight in World Market (wgtw) is from Table 2. The six governance indicators—Voice and Accountability (va), Political Stability (ps), Government
Effectiveness (ge), Regulatory Quality (rq), Rule of Law (rl), and Control of Corruption (cc)—are measured in units ranging from about -2.5 to 2.5, with higher values corresponding to
better governance outcomes (Kaufmann et al 2005). Geographic proximity (geog) is great-circle distance between capitals (in thousands of kilometers) from Sarkissian and Schill (2001).
Recent returns (ret) are computed using three years of monthly MSCI returns. There are 40 observations; thus, correlations greater in absolute value than 0.4, 0.3, and 0.27 are
significantly different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.


         | ∆bias    ∆biasF bias94 biasF94 ∆io      ∆xlist   ∆for    ∆wgtw    ∆va     ∆ps     ∆ge    ∆rq      ∆rl     ∆cc   geog
---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         |
  ∆biasF | 0.720
         |
  bias94 | -0.390 -0.206
         |
 biasF94 | -0.543 -0.356    0.915
         |
     ∆io | 0.360 -0.215     0.002   0.045
         |
  ∆xlist | -0.346 -0.446 -0.072     0.008 -0.077
         |
    ∆for | 0.243    0.219 -0.236 -0.195     0.010 -0.200
         |
   ∆wgtw | 0.139    0.168 -0.132 -0.143 -0.021      0.032 -0.050
         |
     ∆va | 0.112 -0.162     0.053   0.028   0.380   0.125 -0.338 -0.016
         |
     ∆ps | -0.025 -0.039    0.063   0.129   0.062 -0.126    0.133 -0.004    0.032
         |
     ∆ge | -0.338 -0.275    0.309   0.442 -0.048    0.094 -0.228 -0.006     0.079   0.562
         |
     ∆rq | -0.434 -0.118    0.111   0.344 -0.368    0.070 -0.044 -0.116 -0.033      0.342   0.566
         |
     ∆rl | -0.363 -0.087    0.190   0.296 -0.417    0.094 -0.108    0.062   0.028   0.445   0.644   0.762
         |
     ∆cc | 0.134    0.201 -0.104 -0.042 -0.121 -0.134       0.267   0.046 -0.151    0.163   0.087   0.388   0.213
         |
    geog | 0.035    0.082   0.394   0.251   0.118 -0.430 -0.227 -0.133 -0.101 -0.072 -0.004 -0.245 -0.240 -0.170
         |
     ret | 0.133    0.031   0.281   0.169   0.292 -0.372    0.060   0.059   0.401 -0.016    0.073 -0.190 -0.098 -0.024 -0.291




                                                                                            45
Table 4. Home Bias Regressions
The left half of each panel shows instrumental variables regressions of the change in bias from 1994 to 2004 (column 7 of Table 2) on the 1994 levels in, and changes from 1994 to
2004 of, several variables. The right half of each panel is identical except that home bias is calculated using float data. Throughout, Insider Ownership, described in Table 1 (but
expressed in decimal form here), is instrumented for using the six governance variables from Kaufmann et al (2005), which are described in Table 3. Other variables are also
described in Table 3. Reported in parentheses are t-statistics computed using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. All regressions have 40 observations.
Panel A
                                                (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)
 Bias 1994 (market capitalization)            -0.460       -0.105        -0.440       -0.458
                                              (-3.40)      (-0.67)       (-3.14)      (-3.38)
 Bias 1994 (float)                                                                                  -0.300        0.073        -0.456       -0.292
                                                                                                    (-1.79)      (0.23)        (-2.97)      (-1.67)
 Insider Ownership (1994)                     0.394         0.401        0.392         0.458         0.183        0.364         0.070        0.246
                                              (3.95)       (3.98)        (3.79)        (3.83)       (1.16)       (1.43)        (0.44)       (1.33)
 Insider Ownership (Change)                   0.440         0.494        0.445         0.494        -0.227       -0.088        -0.557       -0.161
                                              (3.03)        (3.62)       (2.44)        (3.13)       (-0.90)      (-0.37)       (-1.63)      (-0.65)
 Cross-Listing (1994)                                       0.361                                                 0.564
                                                           (1.88)                                                 (1.59)
 Cross-Listing (Change)                                    -0.094                                                -0.307
                                                           (-0.84)                                               (-1.95)
 Restrictions (1994)                                                     0.015                                                 0.387
                                                                         (0.20)                                                (2.81)
 Restrictions (Change)                                                   0.078                                                 0.411
                                                                         (1.07)                                                (3.08)
 Weight in World Market (1994)                                                         1.813                                                 1.782
                                                                                       (1.58)                                                (1.04)
 Weight in World Market (Change)                                                       2.967                                                 3.521
                                                                                       (1.71)                                                (1.29)

 R2                                           0.471         0.606        0.488         0.508        0.186         0.429        0.309         0.215




                                                                                        46
Table 4. continued. Panel B
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)
 Bias 1994 (market capitalization)   -0.362    -0.405    -0.408    -0.454    -0.412    -0.446
                                     (-2.20)   (-2.40)   (-2.35)   (-1.99)   (-2.33)   (-2.23)
 Bias 1994 (float)                                                                               -0.247    -0.274    -0.229    -0.303    -0.247    -0.290
                                                                                                 (-1.02)   (-1.15)   (-0.85)   (-0.97)   (-0.92)   (-1.05)
 Insider Ownership (1994)            0.565     0.481     0.449     0.559     0.547     0.437      0.357     0.266     0.251     0.356     0.440     0.247
                                     (3.69)    (2.93)    (2.20)    (2.33)    (2.48)    (2.18)    (0.92)     (0.72)    (0.60)    (1.00)    (1.02)    (0.50)
 Insider Ownership (Change)          0.733     0.598     0.573     0.702     0.717     0.518      0.117    -0.092    -0.067     0.081     0.221    -0.101
                                     (3.53)    (2.68)    (2.05)    (1.88)    (1.92)    (1.92)    (0.29)    (-0.24)    (0.15)    (0.11)    (0.34)   (-0.21)
 Voice and Accountability (1996)     0.057                                                        0.040
                                     (1.50)                                                      (0.51)
 Voice and Accountability (Change)   0.003                                                       -0.066
                                     (0.04)                                                      (-0.43)
 Political Stability (1996)                    0.031                                                       0.023
                                               (0.78)                                                      (0.28)
 Political Stability (Change)                  0.031                                                       0.025
                                               (0.78)                                                      (0.31)
 Government Effectiveness (1996)                          0.021                                                       0.021
                                                         (0.44)                                                       (0.22)
 Government Effectiveness (Change)                       -0.028                                                      -0.096
                                                         (-0.31)                                                     (-0.59)
 Regulatory Quality (1996)                                         0.028                                                       0.022
                                                                   (0.65)                                                      (0.27)
 Regulatory Quality (Change)                                       0.068                                                       0.071
                                                                   (0.54)                                                      (0.28)
 Rule of Law (1996)                                                          0.042                                                       0.061
                                                                             (0.85)                                                      (0.66)
 Rule of Law (Change)                                                         0.031                                                      0.044
                                                                             (0.21)                                                      (0.15)
 Control of Corruption (1996)                                                          -0.000                                                      -0.003
                                                                                       (-0.01)                                                     (-0.03)
 Control of Corruption (Change)                                                         0.115                                                       0.156
                                                                                       (1.65)                                                      (1.24)
 R2                                  0.452     0.463     0.461     0.418     0.425      0.509    0.176     0.187     0.195     0.159     0.146      0.221




                                                                                       47
Table 4. continued

Panel C
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
 Bias 1994 (market capitalization)   -0.491    -0.454
                                     (-3.89)   (-3.26)
 Bias 1994 (float)                                       -0.352    -0.329
                                                         (-2.53)   (-1.89)
 Insider Ownership (1994)            0.380     0.401      0.109     0.110
                                     (3.74)    (3.13)     (0.79)    (0.54)
 Insider Ownership (Change)          0.423     0.444     -0.287    -0.295
                                     (2.76)    (2.64)    (-1.02)   (-1.05)
 Geographic Proximity                0.003                0.010
                                     (0.63)               (1.02)
 Momentum (3 year)                             -0.006              0.044
                                               (-0.20)             (0.73)

 R2                                  0.477     0.471     0.213     0.197




                                                                   48
 Table 5. Foreign ownership for all KSE common stocks
Table shows summary statistics of foreign ownership (“Fown”) observed at each year-end for all KSE common stocks from 1996 to 2004. FDI firms are identified from the year
when their reports of foreign investments are made to the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy in accordance with the Foreign Investment Promotion Act. “EW” denotes
equal-weighted and “VW” denotes value-weighted.

                      Foreign ownership (Fown)                                                   Observed at each calendar year-end
                                                                             1996     1997     1998    1999      2000      2001     2002        2003     2004
                      Number of all KSE firms                                 724      771      729     706        698      685      675         672      666
                      Number of all KSE FDI firms                              62       66       74      73         79       82       88          96      102
                      Number of all KSE Non-FDI firms                         662      705      655     633        619      603      587         576      564

                      EW mean Fown for all KSE firms (%)                      6.18     5.03     5.81      5.82      5.83     6.52      7.24     9.37    11.25
                      EW mean Fown for all KSE FDI firms                     17.51    19.23    23.21     24.41     24.35    24.17     26.52    30.08    32.35
                      EW mean Fown for all KSE Non-FDI firms                  5.12     3.70     3.84      3.68      3.47     4.12      4.35     5.91     7.44

                      VW mean Fown for all KSE firms (%)                     13.50    12.91    21.03     21.32     28.19    37.04     35.56    39.88    41.33
                      VW mean Fown for all KSE FDI firms                     20.68    22.81    29.38     35.90     42.45    51.52     44.37    47.89    48.80
                      VW mean Fown for all KSE Non-FDI firms                 12.55    11.64    19.50     19.72     26.00    33.98     33.11    37.19    37.85


                      Total market cap for all KSE FDI firms (mil.$)        15,933    6,509   14,098    28,536    19,539   31,695    46,624    71,085 121,096
                      (% relative to KSE total market cap)                  (11.6)   (11.3)   (15.5)     (9.9)    (13.3)   (17.5)    (21.8)    (25.2)   (31.8)
                      Total market cap for all KSE Non-FDI firms (mil.$)   121,002   50,956   77,162   260,452   126,959 149,688    167,783   211,279 259,939
                      (% relative to KSE total market cap)                  (88.4)   (88.7)   (84.6)    (90.1)    (86.7)   (82.5)    (78.3)    (74.8)   (68.2)




                                                                                         49
 Table 6. Regression estimates of the foreign ownership on insider ownership and governance rankings
Table shows cross-sectional regression estimates of the foreign ownership on insider ownership and governance rankings, using all KSE common stocks in 2004. “Insider”
ownership is the percentage share ownership of common stocks by the largest shareholder, families, and all affiliated shareholders at fiscal year-end; “Sole ownership” is the
percentage share ownership of common stocks by the largest shareholder at fiscal year-end; “Gov. % ranks” are the percentage ranks based on the corporate governance survey
scores for the year 2004, with low values representing better governance; “Ownership parity” is defined as 100 – (insider ownership – sole ownership); “Log size” is log of market
value of common stocks in million dollars. T-statistics in parentheses are computed using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.

                                                              All of No FDI firms                           All of No FDI firms with size ≥100 mil.$
                                                 (1)        (2)       (3)     (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)      (9)   (10)     (11)     (12)
                           Intercept        -3.027     11.174 19.438 -0.549 -13.466 -15.340           -5.951 29.001 30.923         6.712 -26.718 -17.035
                                            (-1.73)     (8.96) (11.91) (-0.19) (-11.99) (-5.30)       (-1.67) (12.23) (13.83) (0.83) (-5.14) (-2.02)
                         100 – Insider        0.174                                          0.170      0.413                                         0.331
                                             (5.15)                                         (6.17)     (6.50)                                        (5.35)
                        Sole ownership                  -0.149                                                    -0.375
                                                       (-4.36)                                                   (-5.76)
                         Gov. % ranks                             -0.225                    -0.053                         -0.313                    -0.128
                                                                 (-9.52)                   (-3.40)                        (-6.68)                   (-3.04)
                       Ownership parity                                    0.095            -0.068                                  0.154            -0.243
                                                                          (2.69)           (-2.00)                                 (1.61)           (-3.05)
                           Log size                                                 5.349    5.367                                          7.633     6.846
                                                                                  (15.73) (16.17)                                           (8.47) (7.61)
                            Adj. R2          0.051       0.029     0.225  0.008     0.512    0.598      0.176      0.125    0.225   0.008   0.331     0.519
                             Nobs              557         557       449     557      564      444        161        161      135     161      161      135




                                                                                         50
                                             Table 7. Regression estimates of the foreign ownership on firm characteristic variables
Table shows regression estimates of the foreign ownership on firm characteristics, using the sample stocks of the non-FDI firms over the sample period from 1996 to 2004. The
regressions are estimated using three main datasets: year-by-year for each year from 1996 to 2004; balanced panels using data from 1998 to 2004; and a cross-section of longer-
term changes from 1998 to 2004. In the panel and “changes” regressions, we also report results for samples restricted to larger firms with 2004 market capitalization greater than
US$100 million. All explanatory variables are measured at the end of each year: “Insider” ownership, “Log size”, “Ownership parity”, and “Gov. % ranks” are described
previously in Table 6; “Tobin’s q” is the market value of assets (= book value of total liabilities + market value of preferred stock + market value of common stock) divided by the
book value of total assets; “Cash flow/assets” is the operating cash flows divided by total assets. Fixed-effect panel regressions include a full set of year dummies (not reported). In
parallel to Table 4, the “changes” regressions also include (but do not report) initial (1998) values of each explanatory variable and of the dependent variable. Reported in
parentheses are t-statistics computed using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors; for the panel estimations, the standard errors are also adjusted for within-firm correlation.
                                                                                                                                                                       Panel   Panel Changes Changes
                                                                                                                                                                     (1998~    (1998~ (1998~ (1998~
                                                1996          1997           1998          1999           2000          2001        2002        2003        2004      2004)      2004)   2004)   2004)
                                                                                                                                                                        Full     Size>     Full  Size>
                                                                                                                                                                     Sample    $100m Sample $100m
                 Intercept                    -9.375         -6.477        -11.754        -6.890        -11.538       -14.739    -19.047     -11.208     -15.137                       -19.515 -25.786
                 100 – Insider                 0.016          0.018          0.042         0.050          0.060         0.080       0.110       0.165       0.169     0.101      0.340   0.141   0.458
                 Log size                      3.198          2.003          2.829         2.098          2.798         3.838       4.265       4.173       5.003     2.051      4.413   5.430   8.310
                 Tobin’s q                     0.686          0.219          1.735         1.350          0.128         2.037       3.021       3.084       3.257     0.751      0.573   1.125  -1.494
                 Cash flow/assets              0.037          0.052          0.043         0.074          0.018         0.057       0.141       0.039       0.053     0.029      0.114   0.013   0.112
                 Ownership parity             -0.012          0.028          0.025        -0.024          0.025        -0.015      -0.019      -0.101      -0.086    -0.031     -0.222  -0.059  -0.296
                 Gov. % ranks             .              .             .              .             .             .                -0.005      -0.047      -0.056
                 t(Intercept)                  (-3.40)       (-3.11)        (-4.68)       (-3.26)       (-4.69)        (-5.82)     (-7.14)     (-4.68)     (-5.14)                        (-6.08)   (-3.22)
                 t(100 – Insider)               (0.64)        (0.76)         (1.63)        (2.12)        (3.35)         (4.33)      (3.72)      (6.61)      (6.20)    (5.95)    (6.49)     (4.82)    (4.58)
                 t(Log size)                  (14.44)         (9.26)       (10.23)         (9.71)        (9.09)       (10.31)     (10.16)     (11.46)     (13.05)     (8.53)    (5.70)   (11.40)     (4.79)
                 t(Tobin’s q)                   (1.12)        (0.33)         (2.59)        (3.21)        (0.64)         (2.57)      (2.05)      (2.41)      (2.12)    (2.67)    (0.48)     (1.05)   (-0.33)
                 t(Cash flow/assets)            (0.93)        (1.35)         (1.88)        (2.71)        (0.62)         (1.52)      (2.93)      (1.25)      (1.15)    (3.38)    (1.73)     (0.40)    (0.52)
                 t(Ownership parity)           (-0.34)        (0.90)         (0.74)       (-0.99)        (1.01)        (-0.66)     (-0.54)     (-3.42)     (-2.54)   (-1.48)   (-3.90)    (-1.57)   (-2.71)
                 Gov. % ranks             .              .             .              .             .             .                (-0.33)     (-3.29)     (-3.46)
                 Adj. R2                       0.324          0.201         0.302          0.324         0.287         0.417        0.531       0.531       0.601     0.401     0.478     0.463      0.425
                 Nobs                            647            659           608            617           610           593          360         571         444     4,143     1,012       462        129




                                                                                                                  51
