                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                ICT USE IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD: AN ANALYSIS OF
              DIFFERENCES IN COMPUTER AND INTERNET PENETRATION

                                           Menzie D. Chinn
                                           Robert W. Fairlie

                                         Working Paper 12382
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12382


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




We thank Thomas Wu for helpful comments, Tanapong Potipiti for assistance in collecting and compiling
data, and Hiro Ito for providing data. Financial support of UW and UCSC faculty research funds, and a grant
from the NET Institute, is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Menzie D. Chinn and Robert W. Fairlie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
ICT Use in the Developing World: An Analysis of Differences in Computer and Internet
Penetration
Menzie D. Chinn and Robert W. Fairlie
NBER Working Paper No. 12382
July 2006
JEL No. O30, L96

                                            ABSTRACT

Computer and Internet use, especially in developing countries, has expanded rapidly in recent years.
Even in light of this expansion in technology adoption rates, penetration rates differ markedly
between developed and developing countries and across developing countries. To identify the
determinants of cross-country disparities in personal computer and Internet penetration, both
currently and over time, we examine panel data for 161 countries over the 1999-2004 period. We
explore the role of a comprehensive set of economic, demographic, infrastructure, institutional and
financial factors in contributing to the global digital divide. We find evidence indicating that income,
human capital, the youth dependency ratio, telephone density, legal quality and banking sector
development are associated with technology penetration rates. Overall, the factors associated with
computer and Internet penetration do not differ substantially between developed and developing
countries. Estimates from Blinder-Oaxaca decompositions reveal that the main factors responsible
for low rates of technology penetration rates in developing countries are disparities in income,
telephone density, legal quality and human capital. In terms of dynamics, our results indicate fairly
rapid reversion to long run equilibrium for Internet use, and somewhat slower reversion for computer
use, particularly in developed economies. Financial development, either measured as bank lending
or the value of stocks traded, is also important to the growth rate of Internet use.


Menzie D. Chinn
Robert M. LaFollette School of Public Affairs
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu

Robert W. Fairlie
Department of Economics
University of California
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
rfairlie@ucsc.edu
1. Introduction
        The rapid diffusion of computers and Internet use has been a fixture of the global
landscape over the past decade; nonetheless, rates of technology use still differ markedly across
countries. For example, the latest estimates from the International Telecommunications Union
(ITU) indicate that only 3 percent of the population in India used the Internet in 2004. In
contrast, more than 50 percent of the population in all developed countries used the Internet, with
rates of technology use being substantially higher in many European and North American
countries. These disparities in technology diffusion may have important economic consequences
because technology use may increase knowledge diffusion through improving communication
efficiency (e.g. Jovanovic and Rob, 1989), improve political engagement (Norris, 2001), increase
productivity (Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2003, Dedrick 2003), and allow developing countries to
"leapfrog" traditional methods of increasing productivity (Steinmueller, 2003).
        The importance of ICT diffusion in developing countries to economic advancement has
been stressed in the policy arena and previous literature (Wallsten 2005). For developed
economies, the literature is fairly well developed, while the implications for developing countries
are only now being explored in a systematic fashion. To the extent that the pace of economic
growth is dependent on the rate of ICT diffusion, we believe it is important to examine the
factors that hinder the uptake of new ICT’s.1
        Several previous studies have examined the causes of computer and Internet penetration
rate differences across countries. Many studies find a strong positive relationship between
technology use and income across countries and within countries (see Quibria, et al. 2003,
OECD 2001, and U.S. Department of Commerce 2002 for example), while some point to other
factors – such as telecommunications access and pricing and regulatory effectiveness – as being
of major importance (Dasgupta, et al. 2001, Mann et al. 2000 and Wallsten 2005). In an earlier
extensive cross-country analysis of personal computer adoption, Caselli and Coleman (2001)
explore the determinants of the computer imports/worker ratio, which is their proxy measure for
the investment in ICT data, from 89 countries over the years 1970-90.2 The three notable
variables than enter with statistical significance are openness to imports from OECD countries,

1
  See OECD (2006). Policy declarations motivated by these concerns include statements at the 2003 UN/ITU World
Summit on the Information Society, http://www.itu.int/wsis/docs/geneva/official/dop.html.
2
  See also Pohjola (2003) for an analysis of the determinants of ICT investment for a sample of 49 countries from
the level of educational attainment, and the index of property rights. More recently, Chinn and
Fairlie (2006) examine the determinants of cross-country differences in computer penetration
across a panel of 100 countries over the 1999-2001 period. Income per capita, years of
schooling, illiteracy, youth and aged dependency ratios, the urbanization rate, telephone density,
electricity consumption, and regulatory quality are found to have statistically significant
relationships with computer penetration rates.
         Although the Internet is a more recent technological innovation, a few studies have
examined cross-country differences. Kiiski and Pohjola (2002) examine Internet hosts per 1000
inhabitants from 1995-2000 for a broad sample encompassing about sixty OECD and developing
countries.3 They find that the five year growth in this variable is related to income per capita,
telephone access costs, and the average years of schooling. Chinn and Fairlie (2006) also
examine cross-country differences in Internet penetration in 1999-2001, and find that they are
associated with income per capita, the dependency ratio, electricity consumption and regulatory
quality. A few studies have focused on specific groups of countries or regions of the world (see
APEC 2002, Estache, et al. 2002, Mann and Rosen 2001, Oyelaran and Oyeyinka 2003, Liu and
San 2003, and Wong 2002). Focusing on a panel of 45 developing countries in 2001, Wallsten
(2005) examines the determinants of Internet use. He finds that Internet use is negatively
associated with regulations, measured as whether ISPs are required to get formal regulatory
approval, and generally positively associated with per capita income and telephone mainlines.
         Although a few recent studies have focused on the topic, technology use in developing
countries is a fast moving target. For example, estimates from the ITU reported below indicate
that Internet penetration rates for developing countries have increased seven-fold since their
1999 levels, with some countries such as China increasing more than ten-fold. The surge in
computer and Internet trends in the past few years is not specific to developing countries as
technology use rates are considerably higher now than they were just a few years ago for almost
every country in the world. Another limitation of the previous research is that there is no
comprehensive empirical study of technology use in developing countries that includes a large
number of developing countries and includes an extensive set of controls for economic,


1993-2000. He finds positive effects for income and human capital, and negative effects for agricultural share.
3
  See also Dasgupta, et al. (2001) for an earlier analysis of cross-country differences in growth rates in the Internet to
telephone mainlines ratio and Hargittai (1999) for an earlier analysis of cross country differences in per-capita
Internet hosts.


                                                            2
demographic, infrastructure, institutional and financial variables. We also contribute to the
literature by providing the first estimates of the importance of financial openness and quality of
access to financial capital in explaining computer and Internet penetration rates, and the first
detailed analysis of the determinants of the rapid growth rates in technology that have occurred
over the past several years. Finally, we undertake a systematic analysis of the relative
importance of different factors in contributing to the differences across developing countries
using a technique commonly used to decompose earnings gaps between groups (Blinder, 1993
and Oaxaca, 1993). To be sure, Chinn and Fairlie (2006) estimate decompositions with their
panel of countries from 1999-2001, but the focus is on world-wide regional differences and not
specific countries or developing countries. To our knowledge, there are no systematic cross-
country econometric analyses of the determinants of PC and Internet use focused on developing
countries using data from the past few years in which technology penetration rates have
exploded.
       The decomposition analysis will allow us to directly address several issues that have been
discussed in the literature. One key question is the relative importance of income in explaining
differences across developing countries. Another set of questions are prompted by findings in
the recent growth literature that highlight the roles of human capital and institutional factors. The
channels through which these factors affect growth are difficult to discern, but it is likely that
both exert at least some influence on the rate at which new technologies are adopted. Hence, the
first question is how important is human capital for creating demand for information and
communication technology services? Computers may require substantial levels of education for
use, but telephones and the Internet may require very little, according to Dasgupta, et al. (2001).
Another question pertains to the impact of institutional regimes. Do factors such as legal
protections and regulatory quality matter even after accounting for income? Wallsten (2005),
among others, has focused on this issue. It is possible that these institutional aspects are
important factors in limiting ICT penetration among developing countries, but without a careful
analysis of all of the factors simultaneously we cannot identify their relative importance. This is
extremely important because it answers the question of how scarce resources should be allocated
along each of these fronts. We also suspect that openness to international trade, capital and
intellectual flows are also important for increasing ICT use in developing countries. But, in this
case there is very little empirical evidence. Hence, as a policy question we do not know how



                                                  3
much emphasis should be placed upon opening up countries to FDI, versus opening up trade in
ICT goods and services, versus other avenues of liberalization.
       To conduct this analysis we take several steps. First, we estimate panel data regression
models relating levels of computer and Internet penetration to economic, demographic,
infrastructure, institutional and financial factors using the last three years of available data (2002-
04). Second, we examine whether the determinants of IT penetration differ between developing
and developed countries. Third, we use a decomposition technique to identify the causes of
differences between specific developing countries and our benchmark, the developed country
average. Estimating the decomposition separately by country allows us to identify whether the
reasons for low rates of IT penetration differ between developing countries such as China, India
and Mexico. Finally, we explore the determinants of cross-country differences in rates of
technology diffusion focusing on developing countries. This last step is important because static
analysis may miss important aspects of the technology diffusion, which is first and foremost a
dynamic process. This issue may be particularly important if at any given time, some countries
are away from their respective long run equilibrium levels of technology penetration.


2. Data
       Data on technology use and telecommunications are from the International
Telecommunications Union’s (ITU) World Telecommunication Indicators Database. The data
are obtained primarily through annual questionnaires administered by the Telecommunications
Development Bureau (BDT) of the ITU. Supplemental information is obtained from reports
from telecommunication ministries, regulators, operators, and ITU staff. Detailed data are
available on telephone, personal computer, Internet, and other telecommunications and
electronics use. The ITU data also contain detailed information on telephone costs.
       Computer and Internet penetration rates analyzed below are derived from the number of
personal computers and Internet users per 100 people. These measures of technology use from
the ITU are the only ones available for a large number of countries over the past several years.
However, they may suffer from three notable limitations. First, the number of personal
computers may understate the total use of computers in some countries in which mainframe
computers are prevalent (World Bank 2002). This is probably less of a concern, however,
focusing on more recent data with the rise of networked PCs. Second, there is no information on



                                                  4
the quality of computers.4 Cross-country differences in the quality and number of high-quality
computers per person are likely to be large and possibly larger than simple counts of the number
of computers. Finally, the number of Internet users is based on reported estimates of users,
derivations from reported Internet Access Provider (ISP) subscriber counts, or calculated by
multiplying the number of Internet hosts by an estimated multiplier. Thus, Internet use may be
understated, particularly in developing countries where many commercial subscribers rent
computers connected to the Internet (World Bank 2002).5
        The primary source for data on demographics, income, and other variables included in
the regression analysis is the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database. We also use
indices of rule of law and regulatory quality drawn from the World Bank’s Governance
Indicators database. The construction and attributes of these indicators are described in much
greater detail in Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastrizzi (2003). Our primary measure of human capital,
average years of schooling, is derived from the World Bank’s Edstats.
        The impact of financial development is incorporated in a variety of ways. The first
variable we examine is a traditional measure, the ratio of private credit from deposit money
banks to the private sector, representing the overall development in the banking sector. We also
use an equity market variable, namely the ratio to GDP of the total value of stocks traded. We
draw the series from the database constructed by Beck, Demirgüc-Kunt, and Levine (2000), as
extended and updated by Hiro Ito.
        We incorporate a role for openness not only to trade flows, but also to capital flows. To
this end, we rely upon the capital account openness index, which we term financial openness,
developed by Chinn and Ito (forthcoming). This index is the first principle component of four
IMF binary variables relating to restrictions on cross-border transactions, including on the capital
account. To the extent that the stringency of the capital controls is correlated with restrictions on
the other categories, this variable measures the intensity of capital controls. More details on all
variables included in the analysis are provided in the Appendix.




4
  Hence, we only examine the extensive margin of technology diffusion. In contrast, Comin et al. (2006) have
stressed the dynamics of the intensive margin.
5
  Estimates of the number of Internet hosts in a country may also have measurement problems because they are
based on country codes and do not necessarily capture the physical location of the host. Furthermore, hosts that do
not have a country code are assigned to the United States (Wallsten 2005).


                                                         5
3. Cross-Country Differences in Computer and Internet Penetration Rates
Computer and Internet use has grown rapidly over the past decade. As depicted in Figure 1,
there were only 4.2 personal computers per 100 people in the world in 1995. By 2004, the
number of computers per 100 people had climbed to more than 12. Internet use grew even
faster. In 1995 less than 1 percent of the world'
                                                s population used the Internet. By 2004, 13.7
percent of the world'
                    s population used the Internet.
         In the past decade, technology use has risen from being concentrated among an extremely
small subset of the population in developing countries to a much large share of the population.
In 1995, there were only 6 computers per 1,000 people and 4 Internet users per 10,000 people in
developing countries. The computer/population ratio climbed to 3.7 computers per 100 people
and the percent of the population using the Internet grew to nearly 6 percent by 2004.6 The
growth in the Internet even over the past five years is remarkable -- only 0.8 percent of the
population in developing countries used the Internet in 1999. Developed countries also
experienced rapid increases in the past decade in technology use. By 2004, there were 57
computers and 52 Internet users per 100 people in developing countries, compared to 20
computers and 4 Internet users per 100 people a decade earlier.
         Technology use has increased rapidly among several large developing countries. Figures
3 and 4 report computer and Internet penetration rates for the eight largest developing countries,
China, India, Indonesia, Brazil, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nigeria and Mexico. Computer and
Internet penetration rates have grown so rapidly in Mexico and Brazil that for both countries
rates exceed 10 percent. China has also increased from computer and Internet penetration rates
of essentially zero in 1995 to 4.1 and 7.2 percent in 2004, respectively
         Although computer and Internet use has expanded rapidly in developing countries in the
past few years, a large digital divide continues to exist between the developed and developing
world.7 Table 1 reports estimates of computer and Internet penetration rates by type of country
and for the largest developing countries in 2004, which is the latest year of available data from

6
  Higher rates of Internet use than computers per capita in developing countries may be due to the preponderance of
Internet cafes in many of these countries (Wallsten 2004, 2005).
7
  Fink and Kenny (2003) note that growth rates in Internet use per capita have been higher in poor countries than
those in wealthy countries, and thus the digital divide is shrinking. Given the large differences that exist today, it
may be a considerable amount of time before we witness convergence in Internet use. They also point out that the
digital divide is not apparent when Internet use is normalized by GDP rather than population. We retain our focus,
however, on the conventional per capita measures of ICT use, and identify how much of the gap is explained by
income differences in a multivariate analysis.


                                                          6
the ITU. Relative to developed countries in which there are 0.57 computers per person and half
of the population uses the Internet, developing countries have a long way to go to close the gap.
As noted above, there are 3.7 computers per 100 people and less than 6 Internet users per 100
people in developing countries.
       Most developing countries have substantially lower rates of computer and Internet
penetration than the rates for developed countries. Rates of technology use are especially low in
African countries. For example, in Ethiopia there are 0.31 computers and 0.16 Internet users per
100 people. On the other hand, some developing countries have much higher rates. Malaysia
has computer and Internet penetration rates of 19.2 and 38.6 percent. Among larger developing
countries Brazil, Mexico and Iran have relatively high computer rates, and Argentina, Turkey
and Mexico have relatively high Internet rates. Overall, the estimates reported in Table 1
indicate that there exists a substantial amount of variation in rates of technology use between
developed and developing countries and even across the set of developing countries.


4. The Determinants of Computer and Internet Use
4.1 Empirical Model of Computer Use
The basic framework for analyzing the use of personal computers and the Internet is simply a
demand and supply one. Demand is driven by consumers and firms, whereas supply is driven by
a few countries that export the bulk of equipment (for computer use) and many firms in all
countries (for Internet providers). In the case of computers, they represent a derived demand,
insofar as firms are concerned; and a final demand for consumers. For firms, the marginal
product of ICT equipment is a function of the demand for the final good produced, which will be
correlated with income per capita. The “after-tax” price of goods sold will also depend upon how
burdened firms are by regulations; inefficiently implemented regulations, or regimes where
expropriation is the norm, will reduce the expected return to investing in capital of all sorts, and
hence reduce the derived demand for ICT equipment.
       The productivity of ICT equipment depends upon the attributes of the labor stock if labor
and ICT equipment are complements. Hence, the stock of human capital, measured by either
years of schooling, or the illiteracy rate, should be important. Another complementary input is
power consumption; clearly a PC is of limited use without adequate or consistent power supply.
Of course, after some threshold of connectivity or power level, ICT equipment and electricity



                                                  7
might be substitutes. Finally, the productivity of a computer might be enhanced by telephone
access. Telecommunications infrastructure might then be another complementary input.
        Income is likely to be a key determinant of the consumer demand for computers. It has
an effect on consumers'budget constraints, and it may also affect preferences for owning a
computer, especially in the sense of “keeping up with the Joneses.” Income may be especially
important in the presence of liquidity constraints. Although some consumers may view
computers as a worthwhile investment they may not be able to finance the purchase of one.
Preferences for owning a computer are also likely to vary across individuals and may depend on
exposure to and the perceived usefulness of owning a computer. This may be related to a
person'
      s income, education level, age, presence of children, and urban/rural location (see Fairlie
2004 and Ono and Zavodny 2006 for example).
        To estimate the demand function, one would need to be able to identify some exogenous
variables in the supply equation. In the case of computers, one candidate variable is obvious –
the price of computers. On a global scale, this appears to be driven by exogenous forces
(Moore’s Law) at the level of analysis we are concerned with. An examination of the hedonic
price indices calculated for ICT equipment in the US provides forceful evidence for large
movements in the relative price of computing power. Indeed, Pohjola (2003) uses the US price of
computing equipment as the price of computers in all economies he studies. Since this price
index looks very similar to a (downward sloped) linear trend, it is not clear that in a structural
setup, even one demand parameter could be identified (especially if there are deterministic time
trends in the demand function). Consequently, we rely upon a reduced form estimation
procedure, and assume that we cannot identify the underlying structural parameters.
        Specifically, we estimate several reduced-form equations for computer penetration rates
that include four main sets of independent variables. The first set includes conventional
infrastructure variables, such as main telephone lines per capita, two measures of Internet access
costs (monthly telephone subscription charges and the cost of a three minute call), and electricity
consumption.8 The second set includes demographic variables, such as shares of the population
below 14 and above 65, and the share of the population in urban centers. The third set includes
economic variables, such as income per capita and human capital (measured either as years of


8
 Unfortunately, we do not have a measure of the percent of the population with access to electricity. Instead, we
use per capita electricity consumption as a proxy.


                                                         8
schooling or the illiteracy rate). The fourth category includes measures of institutional quality or
policy, such as explicit measures of legal system quality or trade openness. The latter can be
construed as an economic characteristic, but it is often viewed as an indicator of how high trade
barriers are. And, because trade barriers tend to be correlated with other domestic impediments
to commerce, trade openness is often taken to be an indicator of a less regulated business
environment. The fifth category includes financial variables such as the economy’s openness to
capital flows, as well as levels of financial market development.
           We hypothesize that many of the same factors are likely to influence country-level
Internet penetration rates. In particular, income, telecommunications infrastructure and costs,
and legal quality may be especially important determinants of Internet use. We include the same
set of regressors in the reduced-form equations for Internet penetration rates.
           We first turn to the results for computer penetration rates from 2002-04, which are
reported in Table 2. In column (1), the results indicate that there are a number of clearly
identifiable determinants of computer use. Unsurprisingly, income per capita comes in as a
powerful determinant of PC use; each $1000 increase in per capita income is associated with a
1.7 percentage point increase in the number of PCs per capita.9 Also not unexpectedly, human
capital appears to be important. A one year increase in average schooling is associated with
roughly a 1.5 percentage point increase in PC penetration. Recent research on the determinants
of computer ownership using microdata also finds strong relationships between computer
ownership, and income and education. The positive relationship between per capita income and
computer penetration rates may be partly due to relaxing the budget constraint, changing
preferences, or liquidity constraints.
           One surprising result is the importance of telephone line density. A one percentage point
increase in this variable is associated with a 0.3 percentage point increase in PC penetration. It is
hard to interpret this result; it may be there are complementarities between computers and
telephone lines. Telephone lines may be important for one of the most common uses of
computers, accessing the Internet. Another explanation is that countries that have a well
developed communication infrastructure are also likely to have other unobservable attributes that
encourage PC use.



9
    Scatter plots of computer penetration rates and income reveal an approximate linear relationship.


                                                            9
         We also include measures of telephone costs in the computer penetration regression,
mostly to retain the consistency of the specifications across the two types of technology. While
telephone costs may affect computer adoption through Internet use, which is one of the main
uses of personal computers, our estimates do not provide evidence of such a relationship. Both
monthly telephone subscription charges and the cost of three minute local calls have statistically
insignificant coefficients in the computer penetration regressions.
         We do not find that higher rates of electricity consumption are associated with higher
rates of computer penetration after controlling for other factors. This is somewhat surprising
because access to electricity is essential for the use of personal computers. The reported
specification includes a modified measure of electricity consumption in which values in excess
of 6000 kWh per capita are top coded at the value (which represents a clear breakpoint in the
bivariate relationship), but an unmodified measure of electricity consumption also results in a
negative and statistically insignificant coefficient estimate. The problem may be due to
collinearity with income because we find that the two variables are strongly correlated and we
find a positive and statistically significant coefficient estimate on our electricity consumption
variable after removing income from the equation.
         Demographic variables generally enter in with the expected signs. A higher proportion of
youth is associated with greater rate of PC use. Children may generate a stronger demand for
technology, especially for educational purposes. Although statistically insignificant at
conventional levels, the point estimate for ages 65 and above is negative providing suggestive
evidence that the elderly have a lower demand for technology either for personal use or because
of absence from the labor force. The coefficient estimate on the percent of the population
located in urban areas is negative and statistically insignificant at conventional levels.
         In the next set of variables, we find that the rule of law is statistically insignificant.10
Openness to trade also enters the equation with a positive and statistically insignificant
coefficient at conventional levels. Many previous empirical studies of growth find that openness
to international trade is an important factor.



10
   We also estimate a specification that includes a related measure -- regulatory quality. Fairlie and Chinn (2006)
find using earlier data (1999-02) that regulatory quality has a positive and statistically significant relationship with
computer penetration. Instead, we find a small negative and statistically insignificant coefficient for the 2002-04
period.


                                                           10
        We also include a few financial variables that have not been previously examined in this
context. First, we include a measure of financial openness (see column 2). There appears to be
no relationship between financial openness and computer penetration. We also include a
measure of the development of the banking sector in the country. Specifically, we measure the
ratio of private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to GDP. The
coefficient estimate on this variable is also small and statistically insignificant. In column (3),
we replace this measure with the ratio of the total value traded on the stock market to GDP. The
coefficient is positive, but statistically insignificant. Overall, the financial openness of the
economy and level of internal financial development do not appear to be correlated with
computer penetration after controlling for income and other factors.
        To increase the sample size substantially, we exclude the telephone cost variables which
are not statistically significant in any of the specifications (column 4). We also drop electricity
consumption which is missing for many countries. The results for income, telephone density and
youth are robust to increasing the sample of countries. The main change is that the coefficient on
years of schooling is now smaller and statistically insignificant at conventional levels. We also
try excluding average years of schooling and replacing it with the illiteracy rate (column 5). The
illiteracy rate has a small and statistically insignificant coefficient.


5.2 Internet Use
        We now take up the results for Internet penetration rates. To maximize comparability
with the results for PC penetration rates, we retain the same basic set of regressors in our
specifications. The Internet results are somewhat different than the computer results. Income
has a smaller coefficient, but remains statistically significant. An increase of $1,000 is
associated with slightly less than a 1 percentage point increase in the Internet penetration rate in
column (1). The same increase in income is associated with a larger, 1.7 percentage point,
increase in the computer penetration rate. The finding is consistent with Internet service being
relatively inexpensive compared to the cost of purchasing personal computers. This is especially
true in some parts of the developing world where Internet cafes are an important source of access
(Wallsten 2004, 2005). The association between Internet penetration and education is also
weaker. In this case, the coefficient estimates are positive, but statistically insignificant in all
specifications. The coefficient on illiteracy is positive, but statistically insignificant.



                                                   11
            Another difference in the results is that telephone density is not a statistically significant
determinant of Internet use in some of the specifications. This is somewhat surprising given the
statistically significant coefficient on this variable in the computer penetration regressions. We
should note, however, that the telephone density is close to statistical significance in some of the
specifications and is statistically significant in the final specification that includes a broader
sample of 331 observations. By dropping the access costs and increasing the number of
countries to include more developed countries in this specification, we are increasing the
variability of telephone density so that this factor'
                                                    s signal to noise ratio is increased. The
coefficient for this broader set of countries is not substantially different that the coefficient
estimate for computer penetration. The smaller Internet penetration coefficient on telephone
density may also be due to a non-linearity in the relationship that we are not capturing or the
different ways of measuring the two dependent variables (i.e. Internet users vs. number of
personal computers).
            Some of the Internet results are surprising. Counter to the conventional wisdom, we find
that the Internet access pricing proxies – the monthly telephone subscription charge and the
average cost of a three minute local call – do not enter in with statistical significance. These
results may differ from those reported in Dasgupta, et al. (2001) and Liu and San (undated)
because we examine a more recent period (2002-2004), and a different sample of countries. In
particular, the effect that Mann, Eckert and Knight (2000) identify – that high per minute charges
may negatively affect Internet use more than high monthly subscription charge – may be
swamped by other factors in our broader cross-country sample.
            The demographic variables are not good predictors of Internet access, with the potential
exception of the youth dependency ratio. Having a young population is associated with higher
Internet penetration rates, but is statistically significant at conventional levels in only one of the
reported specifications. The elderly population percent and urban percent have inconsistent
signs across specifications and are statistically insignificant in all specifications.
            The quality of legal institutions in a country is associated with Internet penetration. The
coefficient estimate on rule of law is large and positive in all specifications and statistically
significant in most specifications.11 Using the median reported coefficient estimate, a one
standard deviation increase in rule of law is associated with a 5 percentage point increase in

11
     We also try specifications with a measure of regulatory quality, but find statistically insignificant coefficients.


                                                              12
Internet penetration. In contrast to these results, we find that trade openness is not statistically
significant in its relationship with Internet penetration. The finding of a positive effect of trade
openness in other studies may reflect the omission of a regulatory or legal policy variable such as
the one we include in our regressions.
        The estimates reported in Table 3 do not provide evidence that financial openness or the
relative level of the stock market development matter for Internet penetration, but they do
provide evidence that banking sector development is important.12 The coefficient on banking
sector development is large and positive in all specifications and statistically significant in most
specifications. The level of development of the banking sector may be important in providing
loans to Internet providers and businesses needing to purchase IT equipment.


5.3 Robustness Checks for Main Regressions
        To check the sensitivity of our results we conducted some robustness checks. We first
estimate computer and Internet penetration regressions that include country fixed effects, to
address the concern that there are unobserved country-level factors that may be correlated with
some of the explanatory variables, thereby leading to biased coefficient estimates. Despite the
brevity of the panel (which only includes three years), the results are somewhat informative,
yielding estimates that are fairly similar to those obtained from the random effects model. In the
computer penetration regressions, income and youth dependency have large positive coefficients,
and the elderly percent has a negative effect. The main differences are that the coefficient on
income is larger, the coefficient on telephone density is smaller and the coefficient estimate on
years of schooling becomes implausibly large and negative (due to multicollinearity with the
fixed effects). In the Internet regressions, income, rule of law, banking sector development and
youth dependency have large positive coefficients. In these regressions, the coefficient on years
of school is positive and also somewhat large. Overall, although the fixed effects estimates
suffer from imprecision, they do not change our general conclusions regarding the determinants
of computer and Internet penetration.
        We also estimated models that weight countries by their population. In the weighted
regressions, we continue to find large positive coefficients on telephone density, youth


12
  Other measures of stock market development were also tested. These include including stock market capitalization
to GDP ratio, and the stock market turnover ratio.


                                                       13
dependency, income and years of schooling in the computer regressions, and large positive
coefficients on income, rule of law and banking sector development in the Internet regressions.
The key changes are that years of schooling and telephone density generally exhibit stronger
relationships in the weighted Internet regressions than in the original Internet regressions.


5.4 Developing Countries
       Table 4 reports estimates of computer and Internet penetration regressions for developing
countries. Estimates for all other countries are also reported for comparison. Overall, the factors
associated with computer and Internet penetration do not differ substantially between developing
countries and the rest of the world. In the computer regression for developing countries,
telephone density, income and youth dependency have large positive coefficients. Compared to
the set of other countries, some of these coefficients are smaller, but this is expected because the
average computer penetration rate is much lower. The main difference in the computer results is
that the education level is not associated with computer penetration. The lack of strength in this
relationship is likely to be partly due to the removal of the largest source of variation in
education levels (i.e. the difference between developing and developed countries). Similarly, the
income coefficients are smaller in both subsamples than in the full sample.
       In the Internet regressions, the coefficient estimate on income for developing countries is
very similar to the coefficient estimate on income using the full sample (but is now statistically
insignificant). We also find a roughly similar sized coefficient on rule of law and somewhat
smaller coefficient on youth dependency. The level of banking sector development, however,
does not enter in significantly.
       Although we do not investigate these differences in detail, the main finding we draw
from this analysis is that the factors associated with computer and Internet penetration do not
differ substantially between developing and more developed countries. The factors that have
weak or no relationships with technology adoption for the full sample of countries continue to
have similar relationships. And, the most important factors associated with computer and
Internet penetration in the full sample are generally the same ones for the developing world. The
main problems arise from imprecise estimates resulting from removing a large number of
observations and the variation between poor and wealthy countries.




                                                  14
6. Explanations for the Global Digital Divide
6.1 Methodology
The regression analysis presented above reveals that factors such as income, human capital,
telecommunications, rule of law, and banking sector development may contribute to the global
digital divide. The analysis, however, does not identify the relative importance of these factors
in contributing to the alarming differences between developing countries and developed
countries. Explanations for low technology penetration rates may also differ across individual
developing countries.
       To explore these issues further we borrow from a technique of decomposing inter-group
differences in a dependent variable into those due to different observable characteristics across
groups and those due to different "prices" of characteristics of groups (see Blinder 1973 and
Oaxaca 1973). The technique has been widely used to decompose earnings gaps between whites
and blacks or men and women using microdata. The Blinder-Oaxaca technique, however, can be
used to decompose a gap between any two groups or even countries. In particular, the difference
between an outcome, Y, for group i and j can be expressed as:
        Y i − Y j = ( X i − X j ) βˆ i + X j ( βˆ i − βˆ j ),                                  (1)

where X i is a row vector of average values for the individual-level characteristics and β̂ i is a
vector of coefficient estimates for group i. The first term in the decomposition represents the
part of the gap that is due to group differences in average values of the independent variables,
and the second term represents the part due to differences in the group processes determining the
outcome, which is often referred to as the "unexplained" component. The first term can be
further decomposed into the separate contributions from group differences in specific variables
and is the focus of the following analysis.
       The technique is commonly modified to use coefficients from a pooled sample of both
groups, β̂ , to weight the first expression in the decomposition (see Oaxaca and Ransom 1994 for
example). We adopt this approach to calculate the decompositions. In particular, we use
coefficient estimates from regressions that include all countries in our sample (reported in
column 2 of tables 2 and 3). We then denote the average for all developed countries as the base
or reference group and calculate the decomposition for computer and Internet penetration rate
gaps between the developed country average and several large developing countries. Thus, the



                                                                15
first term in the decomposition that captures the explained variation in penetration rates between
the developed world and developing country j is:
       ( X Dd − X j ) βˆ ,                                                                  (2)

where β̂ are the coefficients and X represents the three-year average of the independent
variables included in the regressions. The technique allows us to quantify the separate
contributions from differences in income, human capital, telephones, and other factors, to the
gaps in computer and Internet penetration rates between the developed country average and
developing country j.


6.2 Computer Use Contributions
Table 5 reports the results for contributions to the gaps in computer penetration rates between the
average for developed countries and several of the largest developing countries and an average
for all developing countries. The decomposition is performed for the four largest developing
countries -- China, India, Indonesia and Brazil. We also report decomposition estimates for
Nigeria and Mexico which are the 7th and 8th largest developing countries, respectively. All
developing countries have substantially lower computer penetration rates than the developed
country average. The computer penetration rate is 50.5 percent for developed countries.
       The largest single factor contributing to the disparities in computer penetration rates is
per capita income. Income differences explain 43.7 percentage points of the gap between
developed and developing countries. The large contributions to the computer penetration rate
gaps are not surprising considering the enormous disparities in income levels between developed
and developing countries. The average per capita income (PPP adjusted) in developed countries
is $30,108 compared to $4,085 in developing countries. The income gap is likely affecting
computer penetration by way of the cost relative to income. A personal computer costing $1000
represents one fourth of a person'
                                 s average annual income in developing countries. Interestingly,
the explanatory power of income differs somewhat across countries. For example, income
differences explain 35.1 percentage points of the computer penetration rate gap for Mexico
whereas these differences explain 50.7 percentage points of the gap for Nigeria.
       Another important factor in contributing to the computer penetration rate gaps is per
capita telephone lines. This factor explains 16.1 percentage points of the overall gap between
developed and developing countries, and from 11.7 to 22.2 percentage points of the gaps for


                                                16
specific countries. These results suggest that the assertion that the global digital divide is just a
manifestation of a long-standing disparity in telecommunications access appears to be partly true
(Dasgupta, et al. 2001). Interestingly, however, the effects of differences in telecommunications
infrastructure are not due to costs, at least as measured by monthly subscription and per minute
telephone charges. The contributions from these factors are essentially zero for all countries.
          Human capital disparities, as measured by years of schooling, contribute to the divide
between developed and developing countries. Differences in education explain 6.1 percentage
points of the total developed/developing country gap and from 3.7 to 6.7 percentage points of the
individual country gaps even after controlling for differences in income. Computers require
some education for use, limiting demand in countries with relatively low levels of human capital.
Hence, we confirm the findings of Caselli and Coleman (2001) and Pohjola (2003).
          Developing countries generally have younger populations than developed countries, a
factor which provides a negative contribution to the computer penetration rate gaps. In other
words, the computer penetration rate gaps would be even larger if developing countries had older
populations more similar to the developed world. In particular, a larger percent of the population
in developing countries is between the ages of 0-14, which leads to higher demand for
computers, all else equal.
          Most other factors provide small contributions to the gaps in computer penetration rates
between developed and developing countries. This finding is consistent with the relatively small
and statistically insignificant coefficients on these variables in the regression models. One
exception is that the point estimate, although insignificant, on rule of law and large differences in
average values for this measure lead to a positive contribution of roughly 5 percentage points.
The imprecision of the coefficient estimate and lack of robustness across alternative
specifications reported in Table 2 provide some uncertainty regarding the importance of this
factor.


6.3 Internet Decomposition Results
Table 6 reports the results for contributions to gaps in Internet penetration rates between
developed and developing countries. The Internet rate is 47.4 percent in developed countries
compared to 4.8 percent in developing countries resulting in a 42.7 percentage point gap.
Similar to the results for the computer penetration rate gaps, income differences are the most



                                                  17
important factor. For differences in Internet penetration, however, the explanatory power is
somewhat smaller. For example, income differences explain 20.6 percentage points of the gap in
Internet penetration between developed and developing countries. This finding is consistent with
the cost of Internet access being substantially lower than the cost of purchasing a personal
computer and the prevalence of Internet cafes providing inexpensive access in some developing
countries (Wallsten 2004, 2005).
       The second most important factor contributing to differences in Internet penetration rates
is rule of law. Overall, differences between developed and developing countries in this measure
explain nearly 10 percentage points of the Internet penetration rate gap. The quality of legal
institutions may represent an important barrier to increasing Internet penetration in developing
countries. This appears to be especially likely in Nigeria where 16.1 percentage points of the
Internet penetration rate gap is explained by lower quality legal institutions than in the developed
world. For comparison, income differences explain 24.3 percent of the gap for Nigeria.
       Differences in the development of the banking sector explain part of the gaps in Internet
penetration rates. For all developing countries, this factor explains 6.3 percentage points of the
Internet gap. The contribution estimates for large developing countries do not vary substantially,
contributing 6.0 to 7.2 percentage points to the gaps. Restricted access to credit provided by the
banking sector may limit investment in IT equipment in many developing countries.
       The decomposition estimates indicate positive contributions from differences in access to
telephones, electricity and human capital, but the original coefficient estimates are statistically
insignificant limiting the confidence placed on these estimates. In no cases, however, are these
contributions large even with imprecisely measured coefficients. The contribution estimates
from the telephone cost variables are very small. Similar to the results presented above, the
relative youth of developing countries mitigates the extent of the digital divide.


7. The Dynamics of ICT Diffusion and Adoption
7.1 Modeling Issues
Estimates from the 2002-2004 panel regressions shed light on the determinants of current
disparities in computer and Internet penetration for developing countries, but do not highlight the
dynamics associated with the diffusion and adoption of new information and communication
technologies over time. As noted above, computer and Internet penetration rates among



                                                 18
developing countries have risen dramatically over the past several years. To examine this issue
more closely, we appeal to the large literature on technology adoption. Many models of
technology adoption incorporate a type “S” shaped curve of use; early references include
Stoneman’s early (1976) study of computer use. As Geroski (2000) observes, there are many
different types of theoretical models that are reconcilable with such patterns, ranging from exotic
ones such as epidemic models and information cascades, to more prosaic partial adjustment
models.
         We choose to use a Gompertz model, which implies an asymmetric “S” time-path for
technology penetration. This specification was also adopted by Kiiski and Pohjola (2002) in their
examination of the diffusion of the Internet, although we apply this to a broader set of countries
over a more recent period, and use a different measure of technology diffusion.
       Let y denote the log value of the variable of interest, and ~
                                                                   y be the post-diffusion or
                                                                     i

equilibrium level of penetration.
  y − y = ϕ (~
    it     it − k y −y )
                    1    i     it − k                                                (3)
this specification has the flavor of an error correction model (ECM) commonly used in time
series analysis. However, one key difference is that ~ y is the current equilibrium, rather than the
                                                         i

lagged, as would be the case in a conventional ECM. Assuming the equilibrium is time-invariant
would make the two specifications identical. Then ϕ1 has the interpretation of being the rate of
reversion to equilibrium.
         We allow for time variation in the equilibrium value of y. Letting X it denote the

determinants of ~
                yit leads the following specification:

yit − y it − k = −ϕ1 y it −k + X it B                                                (4)


7.2 Empirical Implementation
         We undertake these dynamic regressions using the same set of explanatory variables as
those discussed in Section 5. In principle, the lag length and the horizon over which the growth
rate is calculated can take on any value. However, because there is so much noise in year to year
changes, we undertake some averaging by way of examining the average growth rate over five
years (hence the coefficients on the lagged log technology penetration ratios can be taken as the
annual rate of reversion).


                                                  19
          The results for computer and Internet penetration are presented in Table 7. For all
computer specifications, the reversion coefficients uniformly show up as statistically significant.
The half life of a deviation from the long run equilibrium ranges between 11 and 17 years. It is
important to understand that this does not mean that the gap between current levels of PC use
and PC use in the country will disappear in 11-17 years; rather half the gap between the current
levels of computer use and the long run equilibrium level of use implied by current per capita
income, current telephone density, etc., is eliminated in this period, on average. Since the right
hand side variables are also moving over time, the actual time taken to close half the gap may be
longer.
          In column 1, the pricing variables enter in significantly, with the price of a three minute
call negatively related to computer penetration. On the other hand, the subscription price has a
positive effect, although this result might be rationalized by the fact that high prices are
correlated with good telephone service (in terms of connectivity). Dropping the telephone pricing
and electricity variables, in column 2, does not substantially change the nature of the results, with
the exception of the coefficient on the bank lending variable. This statistically significant result
indicates that higher levels of private credit to GDP lead to a higher equilibrium computer
penetration rate. The different result probably arises from the expanded sample (about 30%
larger). If a stock market variable is substituted for the bank lending variable, the sample size
drops while the qualitative nature of the estimates on the other coefficients is unchanged.
          For the Internet penetration regressions (columns 4-6), the results are clearer. In all
instances, the rate of reversion to equilibrium is again statistically significant; indeed the rate of
diffusion is even more rapid than in the case of computers. Half of the gap between the current
level of internet penetration and the equilibrium is eliminated in between seven to eight years.
          The number of telephone main lines is statistically significant across specifications,
although – interestingly – the pricing variables do not exhibit significance, just as they failed to
evidence importance in the static regressions. Generally, there are few statistically significant
coefficients, but this is likely a result of the relatively small sample size.
          Once the telephone pricing and electricity variables are dropped from the regression, the
sample size increases by about a third. The estimated rate of reversion is slightly higher, and
while no other coefficients are statistically significant at conventional levels, trade openness and
financial openness are significant, with the expected sign, at the 15% and 12% levels. Finally,



                                                   20
substituting the stock market measure of financial development for the bank lending measure
leaves the other coefficients largely unchanged,13 while financial development now enters with a
high level of statistical significance.
         Given the apparent heterogeneity of behavior across developing and other countries, it
seems appropriate to stratify the sample by country type. These estimates are reported in Table 8.
In column 1, the PC penetration dynamics for developing countries are displayed. While the
coefficient estimate indicates reversion to equilibrium, it is imprecisely estimated. Conditional
on convergence to a long run equilibrium, telephone pricing effects are as estimated in the full
sample, while demographics also show up as more important than before. Per capita income also
enters in with a positive coefficient.
         In contrast, computer penetration rates in other countries (largely developed economies)
do not appear to be converging, although the estimated reversion rate in column 2 is not
statistically significant. Given the relatively limited variability in this smaller more homogeneous
sample, this outcome is not too surprising. Dropping the telephone pricing and electricity
consumption variables does not alter this pattern.
         For the Internet, both sets of countries exhibit rapid rates of reversion to long run
equilibrium. Main telephone lines also matter in developing countries (columns 4 and 5), but
pricing variables do not. Financial development as measured by bank lending is not significantly
linked to Internet penetration, while the stock market variable is. For other countries, telephone
line density has no statistical impact, and indeed, almost no variable has a statistically detectable
effect. We also find in these regressions that openness – either trade or financial – does seem to
matter in a positive way for Internet adoption in developing countries. Trade openness and
financial openness always have positive, albeit insignificant, coefficients.
         It is not straightforward to compare our dynamic results to estimates from previous
research using earlier data with much lower technology penetration rates. In their study of
Internet hosts per capita, Kiiski and Pohjola (2002) find a similar rate of reversion for the OECD
countries over the 1995-2000 period, while obtaining a larger estimate for per capita income;
however, they omit institutional factors that might be correlated with per capita income.



13
  The GNI per capita variable now enters with a statistically significant negative sign; this result only occurs with
the smaller sample, and we conjecture it arises because of the multicollinearity between lagged log Internet
penetration ratio and the log per capita income level (the two are correlated with a coefficient of about 0.80).


                                                          21
Interestingly, they also conclude that the average years of schooling variable does not enter in
significantly, even if the sign of the estimated coefficient is correct.
        Note that in many cases the static regressions yield levels of statistical significance for
certain coefficients different from those obtained in these dynamic regressions (although the
signs of the coefficients typically agree). In particular, there are much fewer instances of
statistical significance in the dynamic regressions; this indicates to us that it is hard to precisely
identify the long run parameters. On the other hand, given the high level of statistical
significance for the estimated reversion coefficients, the dynamic regressions clearly indicate that
some countries are away from their long run levels of technology penetration. Estimation of the
dynamic equations provides insights into the trajectory of these economies over time.


8. Conclusions
In this study focusing on differences between developed and developing countries, we obtain a
series of results that are likely to be useful for informing the discussion about the sources of the
global digital divide, and the importance of various determinants of that divide. First, as in
earlier work, we confirm the importance of per capita income in explaining the gap in computer
and Internet use. This factor remains the single largest factor in our static regressions. Second,
we find that in a broad sample encompassing developed and developing countries, telephone
access pricing variables that have garnered attention do not exhibit statistical or economic
importance in explaining the Internet gap. This result should not be construed as implying that
pricing policies are not important, but rather that such factors are minor by comparison to
economic, demographic and institutional factors in heterogeneous samples.
        Third, the level of legal development is important. Differences in legal development as
measured by the Rule of Law index sometimes account for substantial portions of the gaps in
technology use. For instance, 19 percent of the Nigeria/Developed Country Internet gap is
associated with the difference in legal development. More generally, our estimates suggest that
over one-tenth of the aggregate Internet penetration rate gap might be closed if less developed
countries had similar legal development as the average level in developed economies. To place
this result in context, this effect is comparable to that flowing from differences in educational
attainment.




                                                  22
          Finally, in our dynamic regressions we find that the evidence for reversion to long run
equilibrium is pronounced for both technologies when the entire sample is taken into account.
The evidence in favor of reversion is more muted for PC penetration when examining a fairly
small and homogenous sample of developed economies. On the other hand, in casting the net
wider to encompass a diverse set of developing countries, reversion to equilibrium in Internet use
is readily detectable. Moreover, we find that the gaps between current and equilibrium levels of
technology penetration are shrinking faster for Internet use than for PC use. However, our
modeling results are consistent with the conclusion that even if developing and developed
countries were at their long run equilibrium levels of technology penetration, gaps would still
remain between penetration rates in the two groups because the determinants (per capita income,
openness) differ. In other words, economic growth alone is insufficient to close the global digital
divide.


Acknowledgements
We thank Thomas Wu for helpful comments, Tanapong Potipiti for assistance in collecting and
compiling data, and Hiro Ito for providing data. Financial support of UW and UCSC faculty
research funds, and a grant from the NET Institute, is gratefully acknowledged.




                                                  23
References

Beck, T., Demirgüc-Kunt. A., and Levine, R. (2000). A new database on financial development
and structure, Policy Research Paper No. 2147 (Washington, D.C.: World Bank).

Brynjolfsson, E., and Hitt, L. (2003) Computing productivity: Firm-level evidence, Review of
Economics and Statistics, 85, 793-808.

Casseli, F., and Coleman, W.J., II (2001) Cross-country technology diffusion: The case of
computers, American Economic Review, 91, 328-335.

Chinn, M.D. and Fairlie, R.W. (2006), “The Determinants of the Global Digital Divide: A Cross-
Country Analysis of Computer and Internet Penetration,” forthcoming, Oxford Economic
Papers.

Chinn, M.D., and Ito, H. (forthcoming) What Matters for Financial Development? Capital
Controls, Institutions and Interactions, Journal of Development Economics.

Chong, A., and Micco, A. (2003) The Internet and the ability to innovate in Latin America,
Emerging Markets Review, 4, 53-72.

Comin, D., Hobijn, B., and Rovito, E. (2006) Five Facts You Need to Know About Technology
Diffusion, NBER Working Paper No. 11928 (January).

Council of Economic Advisers (2001) Economic Report of the President, 2001, U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

Dasgupta, S., Lall, S., and Wheeler, D. (2001) Policy reform, economic growth and the digital
divide: An econometric analysis, Working Paper No. 2567 (World Bank).

Dedrick, J., Gurbaxani, V., and Kraemer, K. (2003) Information technology and economic
performance: A critical review of the empirical evidence, ACM Computing Surveys, 35, 1-28.

Estache, A., Manacorda, M. and Valletti, T.M. (2002) Telecommunication reforms, access
regulation and Internet adoption in Latin America, Economía, 2, 153-217

Fairlie, R.W. (2004) Race and the Digital Divide, Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy,
The B.E. Journals, 3, Article 15, 1-38.

Fink, C. and Kenny, C. (2003) W(h)ither the digital divide? Info, The journal of policy,
regulation and strategy for telecommunications, 5, 15-24.

Hargittai, E. (1999) Weaving the Western Web: Explaining differences in Internet connectivity
among OECD Countries, Telecommunications Policy, 23, 701-718.




                                               24
Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., and Mastruzzi, M. (2003) Governance matters III: Governance
indicators for 1996-2002, Development and Comp Systems 0308001, Economics Working Paper
Archive at WUSTL.

Kawaguchi, D. (2005) Are computers at home a form of consumption or investment? A
longitudinal analysis for Japan, Japanese Economic Review, forthcoming.

Kiiski, S., and Pohjola, M. (2002) Cross-country diffusion of the Internet, Information
Economics and Policy, 14, 297-310.

Liu, M.-C., and San, G., undated, Social conditions and the digital divide: Examining the role of
Internet diffusion, mimeo, Chung-Hua Institution for Economic Research.

Mann, C., Eckert, S.E., and Knight, S.C. (2000) Global Electronic Commerce: A Policy Primer,
Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C.

Norris, P. (2001) Digital Divide: Civic Engagement, Information Poverty, and the Internet
Worldwide, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.

OECD (2006) ICTs and Economic Growth in Developing Countries, Development Assistance
Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.

OECD (2001) Understanding the Digital Divide, Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, Paris.

Ono, H., and Zavodny, M. (2005) “Digital Inequality: A Five Country Comparison Using
Microdata,” Paper prepared for the American Sociological Association Meeting, Philadelphia,
August 2005.

Ono, H., and Zavodny, M. (2004) Gender differences in information technology usage: A U.S.-
Japan comparison, Working Paper No. 2004-2, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

Oshikoya, T.W., and Husseain, M. N. (1998) Information technology and the challenge of
economic development in Africa, Economic Research Papers No. 36, African Development
Bank, Abidjian, Côte d’Ivoire.

Oyelaran-Oyeyinka, B. and Lal, K. (2003) The Internet diffusion in Sub-Saharan Africa: A
cross-country analysis, Institute for New Technologies Discussion Paper No. 2003-5, UN
University, Helsinki.

Pohjola, M. (2003) The adoption and diffusion of ICT across countries: Patterns and
determinants, The New Economy Handbook, Academic Press, New York.

Primrose, J. (2003) 2001 Census: Computer and Internet use, Census Paper No. 03/03,
Australian Bureau of Statistics.




                                               25
Quibria, M. G., Ahmed, S.N., Tschang, T., and Reyes-Macasaquit, M.-L. (2003) Digital divide:
Determinants and policies with special reference to Asia, Journal of Asian Economics, 13, 811-
825.

Sinai, T., and Waldfogel, J. (2004) Geography and the Internet: Is the Internet a substitute or a
complement for cities? Journal of Urban Economics, 56, 1-24.

Singh, V. (2004) Factors associated with household Internet use in Canada, 1998-2000, Rural
and Small Town Canada Analysis Bulletin, Statistics Canada, Catalogue no. 21-006-XIE,
5.

Steinmuller, W. E. (2001) ICTs and the possibilities of leapfrogging by developing countries,
International Labour Review, 140, 193-210.

U.S. Department of Commerce (2000) Falling Through the Net: Toward Digital Inclusion, U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

U.S. Department of Commerce (2002) A Nation Online: How Americans are Expanding Their
Use of the Internet, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

Wallsten, Scott. (2004) "Internet Service in India," Internet Policy in India, eds. Roger Noll and
Scott Wallsten.

Wallsten, Scott. (2005) Regulation and Internet use in developing countries, Economic
Development and Cultural Change, 53, 501-23.

World Bank (2003) World Development Indicators, World Bank, Washington, DC. Available at:
http://www.worldbank.org/data/wdi2002/index.htm




                                                26
                                         Appendix
                              Variable Descriptions and Sources

Key:
ITU: International Telecommunications Union, World Telecommunication Indicators Database.
WDI: World Bank, World Development Indicators.
ES: World Bank, EdStats.
BDL: Beck, Demirgüc-Kunt, and Levine (2000).
KKM: Kaufman, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2003).

Personal computers per 100 people: Estimates are derived from annual questionnaires
supplemented by other sources. Source: ITU.

Internet users per 100 people: The number of Internet users is based on reported estimates,
derivations based on reported Internet Access Provider (ISP) subscriber counts, or calculated by
multiplying the number of hosts by an estimated multiplier. Source: ITU.

Main telephone lines per 100 people: Main telephone lines refer to telephone lines connecting
a customer's equipment (e.g. telephone set, facsimile machine) to the Public Switched Telephone
Network (PSTN) and which have a dedicated port on a telephone exchange. For most countries,
main lines also include public payphones. Source: ITU.

Monthly telephone subscription charge: The monthly telephone subscription charge is the
average of the residential and business subscription charges and is converted to international
dollars using purchasing power parity rates provided by the World Bank. Monthly subscription
refers to the recurring fixed charge for subscribing to the Public Switched Telephone Network.
The charge covers the rental of the line but not the rental of the terminal (e.g., telephone set)
where the terminal equipment market is liberalized. Source: ITU, WDI, and authors’
calculations.

Cost of three minute local call: The cost of a three minute local call during peak rates is
converted to international dollars using purchasing power parity rates provided by the World
Bank. Source: ITU, WDI, and authors’ calculations.

Electric power consumption (kwh per capita): Source: WDI.

Population ages 0-14 (% of total): Source: WDI.

Population ages 65 and above (% of total): Source: WDI.

Urban population (% of total): Source: WDI.

Gross national income per capita: Gross national income is converted to international dollars
using purchasing power parity rates provided by the World Bank. An international dollar has the
same purchasing power over GNI as a U.S. dollar has in the United States. Source: WDI.




                                                27
Trade in goods (% of GDP): Sum of exports and imports, divided by GDP. Source: WDI.

Years of schooling: Average years of schooling of adults. Source: ES.

Rule of Law: A composite index that includes several indicators which measure the extent to
which agents have confidence in and abide by the rules of society. These include perceptions of
the incidence of crime, the effectiveness and predictability of the judiciary, and the enforceability
of contracts. An Unobserved Component Model (UCM) is used to aggregate the various
responses in the broad 6 clusters where the weights are proportional to the reliability of each
source. The resulting estimates of governance have an expected value (across countries) of zero,
and a standard deviation (across countries) of one. Source: KKM.

Regulatory quality: The regulatory quality index focuses specifically on the policies, including
measures of the incidence of market-unfriendly policies such as price controls or inadequate
bank supervision, as well as perceptions of the burdens imposed by excessive regulation in areas
such as foreign trade and business development. Source: KKM.

Bank based measure of financial development: Ratio of private credit by deposit money banks
to GDP. Source: BDL, 1970 – 97, updated by Hiro Ito, using data from WDI and IMF,
International Financial Statistics.

Stock market based measure of financial development: Ratio of equity market total value
traded to GDP. Alternative measures of stock market based measures: (i) Ratio of equity market
capitalization ratio to GDP, and (ii) Equity market turn over ratio. Source: BDL, 1975-97,
updated by Hiro Ito, using data from WDI and IMF, International Financial Statistics.




                                                 28
                                              Figure 1
                     Computer Penetration Rates by Country Type (ITU 1995-2004)

20                                                                                   60


18

                                                                                     50
16


14
                                                                                     40

12
                                                                                          Developing
                                                                                          Transition
10                                                                                   30
                                                                                          World
                                                                                          Developed
8

                                                                                     20
6


4
                                                                                     10

2


0                                                                                    0
1995   1996   1997        1998     1999      2000     2001      2002      2003    2004




                                                29
                                               Figure 2
                     Internet Penetration Rates by Country Type (ITU 1995-2004)

20                                                                                   60


18

                                                                                     50
16


14
                                                                                     40

12
                                                                                          Developing
                                                                                          Transition
10                                                                                   30
                                                                                          World
                                                                                          Developed
8

                                                                                     20
6


4
                                                                                     10

2


0                                                                                    0
1995   1996   1997       1998      1999      2000      2001      2002      2003   2004




                                                30
                                       Figure 3
                       Computer Penetration Rates, ITU (1999-2004)

12




10




8
                                                                                   China
                                                                                   India
                                                                                   Mexico
                                                                                   Brazil
6
                                                                                   Nigeria
                                                                                   Indonesia
                                                                                   Pakistan
                                                                                   Bangladesh
4




2




0
1995   1996   1997   1998      1999      2000      2001      2002    2003   2004




                                           31
                                          Figure 4
                        Internet Penetration Rates, ITU (1999-2004)

14




12




10

                                                                                    China
                                                                                    India
8                                                                                   Mexico
                                                                                    Brazil
                                                                                    Nigeria
6                                                                                   Indonesia
                                                                                    Pakistan
                                                                                    Bangladesh

4




2




0
1995   1996   1997   1998      1999       2000      2001       2002   2003   2004




                                            32
                                      Table 1
                      Computer and Internet Penetration Rates
                  International Telecommunications Union (2004)

                                     Computers    Internet Users   Population
Country                               per 100         per 100        (000s)
World                                  12.24           13.65       6,359,891
Developed Countries                    56.64           51.83        983,477
Transition Countries                   11.89           13.98        403,681
Developing Countries                    3.68            5.95       4,972,734

Largest Developing Countries
China                                   4.08            7.23       1,300,000
India                                   1.21            3.24       1,081,000
Indonesia                               1.36            6.52        222,600
Brazil                                 10.71           12.18        180,700
Pakistan                                               1.31         152,500
Bangladesh                              1.20            0.22        137,100
Nigeria                                 0.68            1.39        127,100
Mexico                                 10.68           13.38        104,900
Philippines                            4.46            5.32          82,652
Viet Nam                                1.27            7.12         82,481
Ethiopia                                0.31            0.16         72,420
Turkey                                  5.12           14.13         72,320
Egypt                                   3.29            5.57         69,997
Iran (Islamic Rep. of)                 10.53           7.88          69,789
Thailand                                6.00           11.25         61,974
Congo (Democratic Republic of the)                                   54,417
Myanmar                                0.60             0.12         54,000
Colombia                               5.53             8.94         45,325
South Africa                           8.27             7.89         45,214
Argentina                                              16.10         38,226
Tanzania                               0.74             0.88         37,671
Sudan                                  1.76             3.30         34,512
Kenya                                  1.36             4.63         32,420
Algeria                                0.90             2.61         32,339
Morocco                                2.07            11.71         29,900
Peru                                   9.69            11.61         27,746
Uganda                                 0.45             0.75         26,699
Venezuela                              8.19             8.84         26,175
Iraq                                                   0.14          25,856
Malaysia                               19.16           38.62         25,580




                                       33
                                               Table 2
                          Computer Penetration Rate Regressions (2002-2004)

                                                                    Specification
Explanatory Variables                     (1)              (2)           (3)               (4)            (5)
Main telephone lines per                0.3141          0.3608          0.2894          0.2942          0.2762
  100 people                           (0.1164)        (0.1276)        (0.1333)        (0.1073)        (0.0955)
Monthly telephone                       -0.0189         -0.0168         -0.0640
  subscription charge                  (0.0655)        (0.0685)        (0.0818)
Cost of three minute local              -4.8559         -4.8667         -7.0884
  call                                 (3.8358)        (4.1236)        (4.6178)
Electric power consumption              -0.0007         -0.0009         -0.0006
   (kwh per capita)                    (0.0011)        (0.0013)        (0.0013)
Population ages 0-14                    0.6360          0.6507          0.5148          0.5507          0.2731
  (% of total)                         (0.2333)        (0.2569)        (0.2691)        (0.1937)        (0.1756)
Population ages 65 and                  -0.6412         -0.8679         -0.9740         -0.7563         -0.6100
  above (% of total)                   (0.4432)        (0.5126)        (0.5115)        (0.4134)        (0.3744)
Urban population (% of total)           -0.0933         -0.0567         -0.0452         -0.0205         -0.0190
                                       (0.0596)        (0.0676)        (0.0643)        (0.0509)        (0.0430)
Gross national income per               1.6948          1.6803          1.5682          1.7328          1.7124
  capita (000s)                        (0.2649)        (0.2959)        (0.3009)        (0.2230)        (0.1964)
Years of schooling                      1.4555          1.2997          1.7843          0.7466
                                       (0.6430)        (0.7075)        (0.7671)        (0.5609)
Rule of law                             2.0991          2.8534          2.6947          0.2115          -0.7675
                                       (2.0201)        (2.3442)        (2.3140)        (1.8815)        (1.5066)
Trade in goods (% of GDP)               0.0273          0.0190          0.0131          0.0121          0.0149
                                       (0.0186)        (0.0248)        (0.0252)        (0.0195)        (0.0179)
Financial openness                                      -0.0900         -0.2159         0.0381          0.0273
                                                       (0.6749)        (0.7357)        (0.5324)        (0.4728)
Private credit by banks and                             0.3457                          2.4619          1.9805
oth. fin. insts. / GDP                                 (3.1363)                        (2.8051)        (2.6362)
Stock market total value                                                3.3105
traded / GDP                                                           (2.0922)
Illiteracy rate                                                                                         0.0020
                                                                                                       (0.0531)
Average Computer Pen. Rate               20.29           20.84           23.56           17.72          15.17
Sample Size                               221             197             170             240            301
Notes: (1) The dependent variable is the number of personal computers per 100 people. (2) Estimates account for
country-level random effects. (3) Standard errors are reported below coefficient estimates.




                                                        34
                                                  Table 3
                            Internet Penetration Rate Regressions (2002-2004)

                                                                      Specification
Explanatory Variables                      (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)             (5)
Main telephone lines per                 0.0889          0.0971           0.0759          0.1263          0.2163
  100 people                            (0.1199)        (0.1283)         (0.1406)        (0.1123)        (0.1035)
Monthly telephone                        0.0370          0.0308           -0.0071
  subscription charge                   (0.0605)        (0.0613)         (0.0782)
Cost of three minute local               -3.9731         -3.3835          -3.7733
  call                                  (3.3398)        (3.3129)         (3.6419)
Electric power consumption               0.0008          0.0009           0.0015
   (kwh per capita)                     (0.0012)        (0.0014)         (0.0014)
Population ages 0-14                     0.4460          0.5927           0.4994          0.3471          0.1762
  (% of total)                          (0.2690)        (0.2947)         (0.3222)        (0.2192)        (0.1921)
Population ages 65 and                   0.0248          0.1791           -0.1253         -0.0283         0.3354
  above (% of total)                    (0.5046)        (0.5745)         (0.6029)        (0.4659)        (0.4112)
Urban population (% of total)            -0.0017         0.0570           0.0631          0.0579          0.0521
                                        (0.0693)        (0.0774)         (0.0780)        (0.0583)        (0.0476)
Gross national income per                0.9636          0.7930           0.6587          1.0664          0.7053
  capita (000s)                         (0.2810)        (0.3125)         (0.3304)        (0.2383)        (0.2136)
Years of schooling                       0.9995          0.9711           1.3508          0.6758
                                        (0.7368)        (0.8043)         (0.9152)        (0.6340)
Rule of law                              5.9491          5.2261           8.7481          2.3046          2.3349
                                        (2.1681)        (2.5006)         (2.6257)        (1.9584)        (1.5837)
Trade in goods (% of GDP)                0.0044          0.0024           -0.0144         0.0069          0.0171
                                        (0.0195)        (0.0246)         (0.0264)        (0.0189)        (0.0177)
Financial openness                                       -0.4032          -1.0225         -0.1007         0.6194
                                                        (0.6757)         (0.7856)        (0.5471)        (0.4938)
Private credit by banks and                              5.8935                           6.7487          7.2865
oth. fin. insts. / GDP                                  (3.3235)                         (3.0227)        (2.8765)
Stock market total value                                                  0.3267
traded / GDP                                                             (1.9302)
Illiteracy rate                                                                                           0.0307
                                                                                                         (0.0564)
Average Internet Pen. Rate                21.58           22.10            25.16           18.33          16.02
Sample Size                                235             211              180             266            331
Notes: (1) The dependent variable is the number of Internet users per 100 people. (2) Estimates account for country-
level random effects. (3) Standard errors are reported below coefficient estimates.




                                                         35
                                      Table 4
        Technology Penetration Rate Regressions by Country Type (2002-2004)

                                                            Specification
Explanatory Variables                     (1)             (2)            (4)                  (5)
Dependent variable                     Computer         Computer      Internet             Internet
Country type                           Developing        Other      Developing              Other
Main telephone lines per                 0.1218           0.4972           0.0238          0.2182
  100 people                            (0.0729)         (0.2579)         (0.1669)        (0.2372)
Monthly telephone                        -0.0062          -0.2129          0.0380          -0.1226
  subscription charge                   (0.0157)         (0.3255)         (0.0364)        (0.2838)
Cost of three minute local               -1.0552         -11.2444          -5.9613         -6.2905
  call                                  (1.9882)         (6.5020)         (4.6878)        (4.6203)
Electric power consumption               0.0004           0.0029           0.0013          0.0049
   (kwh per capita)                     (0.0006)         (0.0040)         (0.0011)        (0.0039)
Population ages 0-14                     0.1425           -0.5322          0.3093          -0.2622
  (% of total)                          (0.1360)         (1.1073)         (0.2660)        (1.1558)
Population ages 65 and                   0.3711           -1.2534          1.3834          0.0706
  above (% of total)                    (0.3912)         (1.1520)         (0.7778)        (1.1499)
Urban population (% of total)            0.0141           -0.1220          0.0321          0.1091
                                        (0.0363)         (0.1916)         (0.0707)        (0.2017)
Gross national income per                0.8475           0.6296           0.7354          -0.9214
  capita (000s)                         (0.2692)         (0.5774)         (0.5574)        (0.5808)
Years of schooling                       -0.2030          3.1622           -0.7503         1.8903
                                        (0.4063)         (1.6624)         (0.7792)        (1.6742)
Rule of law                              0.9200           8.6145           4.3273         16.4094
                                        (0.8653)         (6.2832)         (1.7650)        (6.4209)
Trade in goods (% of GDP)                0.0242           0.0653           0.0746          -0.0131
                                        (0.0133)         (0.0458)         (0.0257)        (0.0410)
Financial openness                       0.3019           -0.1688          0.2163          -2.4526
                                        (0.2254)         (2.6427)         (0.4557)        (2.2238)
Private credit by banks and              -1.6635          2.7431           -0.2028         7.5631
oth. fin. insts. / GDP                  (1.5430)         (6.3784)         (3.1659)        (5.9305)
Average dependent variable                 4.85           43.26              7.49          43.76
Sample Size                                115              82               126             85

Notes: (1) The dependent variable is the number of personal computers per 100 people. (2) Estimates
account for country-level random effects. (3) Standard errors are reported below coefficient estimates.




                                                  36
                                                        Table 5
                 Computer Penetration Rate Decompositions Relative to Developed Country Total (2002-2004)

                                                        Developing
                                                          Total          Brazil       China     Indonesia       India      Mexico         Nigeria
Computer penetration rate gap                               47.3          41.5         46.9        49.2         49.5         40.9          49.8
Contribution from:
Main telephone lines per 100 people                         16.1          11.7         12.8        18.4         18.4         14.1          22.2
Monthly telephone subscription charge                        -0.1          0.1         -0.1         -0.1         0.0          0.1          0.2
Cost of three minute local call                              0.3           0.2         0.2          0.0          0.1          0.6          1.2
Electric power consumption (kwh per capita)                  -4.5          -3.6        -4.2         -4.9        -4.9         -3.7          -5.2
Population ages 0-14 (% of total)                            -8.4          -5.8        -3.3         -7.2        -9.0         -8.9         -12.9
Population ages 65 and above (% of total)                    -7.9          -7.8        -6.3         -8.3        -8.1         -8.0         -12.3
Urban population (% of total)                                -2.1          0.3         -2.3         -1.9        -2.8         -0.2          -1.0
Gross national income per capita (000s)                     43.7          37.7         42.1        45.1         45.8         35.1          50.7
Years of schooling                                           6.1           6.7         4.9          6.5          6.4          3.7
Rule of law                                                  5.3           4.8         5.2          6.6          4.1          4.9          9.3
Trade in goods (% of GDP)                                    -0.1          0.3         -0.4         -0.1         0.4         -0.3          -0.1
Financial openness                                           -0.3          -0.2        -0.3         -0.1        -0.3         -0.2          0.4
Private credit by banks and oth. fin. insts. /
GDP                                                          0.4           0.4                      0.4          0.4          0.4          0.5
Notes: (1) The dependent variable is the number of personal computers per 100 people. (2) Coefficient estimates are reported in Table 3
Specification 2. (3) All contribution estimates are relative to the developed country total.




                                                                      37
                                                       Table 6
               Internet Penetration Rate Decompositions Relative to Developed Country Total (2002-2004)

                                                         Developing
                                                           Total          Brazil     China Indonesia India            Mexico      Nigeria
Internet penetration rate gap                                42.7         37.2        41.4       43.3        45.2       35.4          46.6
Contribution from:
Main telephone lines per 100 people                           4.3          3.2         4.3        5.0        5.0         3.8          6.6
Monthly telephone subscription charge                         0.1          -0.2        0.3        0.2        0.0        -0.1          0.5
Cost of three minute local call                               0.2          0.1         0.1        0.0        0.0         0.4          0.8
Electric power consumption (kwh per capita)                   4.5          3.6         4.2        4.9        4.9         3.7          5.2
Population ages 0-14 (% of total)                             -7.7         -5.3       -2.7        -6.6       -8.2       -8.1          -12.4
Population ages 65 and above (% of total)                     1.6          1.6        -0.6        1.7        1.7         1.7          0.9
Urban population (% of total)                                 2.1          -0.3        1.5        1.9        2.8         0.2          2.6
Gross national income per capita (000s)                      20.6         17.8        24.3       21.3        21.6       16.6          24.3
Years of schooling                                            4.6          5.0         3.8        4.9        4.7         2.8
Rule of law                                                   9.7          8.8        11.2       12.1        7.5         8.9          16.1
Trade in goods (% of GDP)                                     0.0          0.0         0.0        0.0        0.0         0.0          0.0
Financial openness                                            -1.2         -1.0       -1.5        -0.5       -1.4       -0.8          -0.8
Private credit by banks and oth. fin. insts. /
GDP                                                           6.3          6.0                    6.9        6.2         7.1          7.2
Notes: (1) The dependent variable is the number of Internet users per 100 people. (2) Coefficient estimates are reported in Table 3
Specification 2. (3) All contribution estimates are relative to the developed country total.




                                                                     38
                                   Table 7: Technology Penetration Dynamics
                                                                     Specification
Dependent Variable                          (1)         (2)         (3)              (4)         (5)        (6)
                                       Computer Computer Computer                 Internet    Internet   Internet
Lagged log technology                    -0.0416     -0.0407      -0.061          -0.0972     -0.0988    -0.0824
     penetration level                  (0.0206)    (0.0141)    (0.0160)         (0.0247)    (0.0173)    (0.0167)
Main telephone lines per                  -0.033     -0.0151     -0.0313           0.0771      0.0642     0.0642
    100 people                          (0.0250)    (0.0174)    (0.0202)         (0.0363)    (0.0248)    (0.0236)
Monthly telephone                         0.0427                                    0.004
    subscription charge                 (0.0143)                                 (0.0199)
Cost of three minute local               -0.0412                                  -0.0062
    call                                (0.0138)                                 (0.0192)
Electric power consumption               -0.0092                                  -0.0072
    (kwh per capita)                    (0.0209)                                 (0.0257)
Population ages 0-14                     -0.1766     -0.1235     -0.0933           0.0198     0.0615      0.0939
    (% of total)                        (0.1166)    (0.1090)    (0.1114)         (0.1424)    (0.1362)    (0.1172)
Population ages 65 and                   -0.1068     -0.0482     -0.0423           0.0629      0.0736     0.0688
    above (% of total)                  (0.0765)    (0.0589)    (0.0616)         (0.0928)    (0.0738)    (0.0660)
Urban population (% of total)            -0.0365      0.0215      0.0357            0.045      0.0575     0.0555
                                        (0.0459)    (0.0297)    (0.0329)         (0.0650)    (0.0386)    (0.0344)
Gross national income per                 0.0648      0.0358      0.0859          -0.0761     -0.0517    -0.0977
    capita (000s)                       (0.0377)    (0.0299)    (0.0361)         (0.0513)    (0.0384)    (0.0372)
Years of schooling                        0.0214     -0.0034      0.0064          -0.0707     -0.0019     0.0233
                                        (0.0415)    (0.0293)    (0.0494)         (0.0579)    (0.0360)    (0.0551)
Rule of law                               0.0042     -0.0276     -0.0207          -0.0049     -0.0308    -0.0121
                                        (0.0274)    (0.0196)    (0.0214)         (0.0347)    (0.0257)    (0.0242)
Trade in goods (% of GDP)                -0.0007      -0.002      0.0037           0.0234      0.0318     0.0201
                                        (0.0199)    (0.0172)    (0.0181)         (0.0262)    (0.0216)    (0.0201)
Financial openness                        0.0006     -0.0005       0.002           0.0139      0.0136     0.0108
                                        (0.0082)    (0.0066)    (0.0076)         (0.0105)    (0.0087)    (0.0085)
Private credit by deposit money
banks and oth. fin. insts. / GDP         0.0174       0.0431                      0.0205      0.0198
                                        (0.0201)     (0.0163)                    (0.0276)    (0.0211)
Stock market total value                                        0.0057                              0.014
     traded/GDP                                                (0.0043)                           (0.0045)
Observations                            56            73          60             63         82        66
R-squared                              0.55          0.36         0.5           0.78       0.72      0.79
 Notes: (1) The dependent variable is the 5 year difference in the log number of personal computers per
100 people, in columns 1-3; and 5 year difference in the log number of internet users per 100 people in
columns 3-4. (2) Standard errors are reported below coefficient estimates.




                                                      39
                         Table 8: Technology Penetration Dynamics by Country Type
                                                                Specification
                                    (1)        (2)          (3)               (4)         (5)          (6)
Dependent Variable            Computer Computer Computer                   Internet    Internet    Internet
Country Type                 Developing       Other        Other        Developing Developing        Other
Lagged log technology           -0.0394      0.0037       0.0719           -0.1183     -0.0836     -0.0958
       penetration level       (0.0310)    (0.0831)     (0.0400)          (0.0395)    (0.0272)    (0.0391)
Main telephone lines per        -0.0444     -0.0103       0.0014            0.1168      0.0702      0.0609
     100 people                (0.0407)    (0.1414)     (0.0673)          (0.0565)    (0.0369)    (0.1239)
Monthly telephone                0.0466      0.0313                        -0.0034                   0.035
     subscription charge       (0.0225)    (0.0666)                       (0.0321)                (0.0591)
Cost of three minute local       -0.046      0.0024                         0.0025                 -0.0095
     call                      (0.0227)    (0.0415)                       (0.0321)                (0.0395)
Electric power consump.          -0.019      0.4988                        -0.0049                  0.4856
     (kwh per capita)          (0.0274)    (0.4418)                       (0.0355)                (0.4088)
Population ages 0-14            -0.3314     -0.0661      -0.1561           -0.0723      0.1475      0.0214
     (% of total)              (0.1957)    (0.2192)     (0.1295)          (0.2592)    (0.2173)    (0.1266)
Population ages 65 and          -0.1919     -0.0933      -0.1559            0.0423      0.0847      0.0394
     above (% of total)        (0.1140)    (0.2421)     (0.1352)          (0.1494)    (0.1139)    (0.1374)
Urban population (% of
total)                          -0.0498      0.0814       0.0997            0.0688      0.0504      0.0399
                               (0.0677)    (0.1177)     (0.0698)          (0.1009)    (0.0511)    (0.0908)
Gross national income            0.0949     -0.1801      -0.0899           -0.1323     -0.1136     -0.1577
     per capita (000s)         (0.0602)    (0.1640)     (0.0832)          (0.0863)    (0.0599)    (0.1696)
Years of schooling                0.001     -0.0271      -0.1486           -0.0671      0.0531     -0.2011
                               (0.0585)    (0.1326)     (0.1030)          (0.0823)    (0.0822)    (0.1222)
Rule of law                      0.0306     -0.0693      -0.0736           -0.0139     -0.0044     -0.0109
                               (0.0425)    (0.0698)     (0.0345)          (0.0568)    (0.0365)    (0.0736)
Trade in goods
 (% of GDP)                     -0.0027     -0.0187       0.0064            0.0644      0.0309     -0.0172
                               (0.0360)    (0.0269)     (0.0201)          (0.0498)    (0.0414)    (0.0289)
Financial openness                 0.01     0.0503        0.0411            0.0152      0.0089     -0.0072
                               (0.0122)    (0.0456)     (0.0240)          (0.0156)    (0.0124)    (0.0378)
Private credit by deposit
money banks and oth. fin.
insts. / GDP                    0.0019      0.0555       -0.0071            0.0137                  0.006
                               (0.0290)    (0.0736)     (0.0422)          (0.0409)                (0.0705)
Stock market total value                                                                0.0144
       traded/GDP                                                                     (0.0064)
Observations                        36         20           23                41          41           22
R-squared                          0.56       0.76         0.59              0.62        0.63         0.87
 Notes: (1) The dependent variable is the 5 year difference in the log number of personal computers per
100 people, in columns 1-3; and 5 year difference in the log number of internet users per 100 people in
columns 3-4. (2) Standard errors are reported below coefficient estimates.




                                                  40
