NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LEVEL AND COMPOSITION OF CONSUMPTION OVER THE
BUSINESS CYCLE: THE ROLE OF “QUASI-FIXED” EXPENDITURES
Kerwin Kofi Charles
Melvin Stephens, Jr.
Working Paper 12388
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12388
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2006

This paper was prepared for the National Poverty Center project, “Working and Poor: How Economic and
Policy Changes are Affecting Low-Wage Workers.” We would like to thank Rebecca Blank, Sheldon
Danziger, Robert Hall, Robert Schoeni, James Sullivan, and especially Christopher Jencks for helpful
comments and observations. Yaa Akosi Antwi provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2006 by Kerwin Kofi Charles and Melvin Stephens, Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Level and Composition of Consumption Over the Business Cycle: The Role of “QuasiFixed” Expenditures
Kerwin Kofi Charles and Melvin Stephens, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 12388
July 2006
JEL No. D12, E21, E24
ABSTRACT
We study how the level and composition of household expenditures changes over the business cycle
for households at different positions in the income distribution. Using data from the Consumer
Expenditure Survey, we find that transitory, state-specific increases in unemployment causes lower
income groups to lower their total expenditure outlays, contrary to the prediction of the textbook
account of consumption behavior. In addition, in bad economic times these groups raise the share
of their total outlays devoted to relative fixed outlays like home or car payments. These adjustments
are primarily concentrated among reductions in outlays devoted to entertainment and personal care
expenditures. We find no similar effects for households at higher positions in the income
distribution. It is difficult to attribute these differences across households to differences in credit
constraints, both because the specific results for credit holdings are imprecisely estimated and
because income losses experienced by higher SES households are so small that there is, for them,
little need to adjust consumption.
Kerwin Kofi Charles
Harris School
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL. 60637
and NBER
kcharles@uchicago.edu
Melvin Stephens
H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and Mana
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
mstep@cmu.edu

1.

Introduction
The years from 1988 to 2000 spanned large changes in the macro-economy.

There was a sharp economic downturn in the early nineteen-nineties, a long and robust
expansion in the mid to later parts of the decade, and an economic slowdown at decade’s
end.1 How did these macro-economic fluctuations affect the well-being of American
families? Were the effects similar across households at different positions in the income
distribution, or were households with low or modest income affected disproportionately?
In this paper we investigate how recent macro-economic changes, and the changes in
income and unemployment associated with them, affected the level and composition of
households’ consumption, with particular attention paid to the differential changes across
the income distribution.
While the overwhelming majority of the literature studying household economic
well-being has focused on income, wages or earnings as the outcomes of interest, many
recent authors, studying a variety of research questions, have focused on household
consumption - usually measured by expenditures devoted to a given bundle of
consumption items (Cutler and Katz 1991, Krueger and Perri 2002). Among the things
that recommend this focus on consumption is its connection to theory.

Economists

model individuals' utility, not as direct function of their income, but rather as a function
of the consumption and leisure their income finances.

The modern theory of

consumption behavior yields a sharp set of predictions about how consumption ought to
respond to changes in different aspects of consumers’ constraint sets, and thus helps
frame empirical analysis by creating a null against which actual consumption behavior
can be measured.
Ever since the seminal work of Friedman (1957), Ando and Modigliani (1963),
and Modigliani and Brumberg (1954), economists have argued that consumption in every
period is determined by consumers’ “permanent income” – roughly the mean of the
various income streams received over periods and states of the world.

The

lifecycle/permanent income hypothesis (LCH/PIH) posits that a rational consumer solves
the dynamic consumption problem by “smoothing” consumption across periods. That is,
1

According to the National Bureau of Economic Research, the business cycle peaked in July 1990, hit a
trough in March 1991, and did not reach another peak until March 2001. See
http://www.nber.org/cycles.html/.

1

he saves when income is high by consuming less than his income, and either borrows
against future income or uses previously acquired savings when income is low. These
actions ensure that the marginal (expected) utility of consumption is equalized across
periods, and that consumption is unaffected by period to period transitory variation in
income.2
But the theoretical LCH/PIH prediction of consumption smoothing across periods
and states of the world depends crucially on whether particular textbook assumptions are
satisfied. For example, the incorporation of uncertainty or risk aversion can significantly
weaken this sharp prediction. Both these things are likely to bedevil the real-world
consumer. An even more important real-world departure from what is usually explicitly
assumed in the standard model is that capital markets are not, in fact, perfect.

More,

these markets are probably especially imperfect for particular types of households.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that many consumers cannot easily borrow against their
future income when their current income is low.

Thus, even if it is granted that all

households can save in periods of high income simply by consuming less than their
income in the period, adverse transitory income shocks might nonetheless lower
consumption for persons whose savings are low, or who are unable to secure loans in bad
times. In the real world, imperfect capital markets might cause the level of consumption
to change with current changes in economic fortunes, relative to the presumed smoothlife cycle path.
Current consumption and current income may be linked for another reason, which
has been much less emphasized in the literature.

Whereas the theoretical literature

typically speaks of “consumption” as a single, undifferentiated entity, a household’s
consumption encompasses a widely different set of goods. One way in which these
goods differ is in the ease with which expenditure outlays devoted to them can be
adjusted. Indeed, in the short run, expenditures on particular classes of consumption
items are effectively fixed – or at least inflexible downwards without incurring some
substantially penalty. To see how differences in the ease with which expenditures can be
adjusted, especially in an environment with imperfect capital markets, might cause
2

While this smoothing behavior is typically ascribed only to non-durable consumption, the theoretical
result also extends to durable goods (Mankiw 1982). Moreover, households not only act to smooth their
stocks of durable goods, but they will also smooth their durable good expenditures.

2

income shocks to sub-optimally alter the composition if not the level of consumption,
consider the following scenario.
Suppose that individuals live for two periods, and that in each period they
consume two goods – say “trips to the movies” and “housing”. These goods are financed
out of income flows received in the two periods.

The LCH/PIH says that utility-

maximizing agents should equalize the (expected) marginal utility of a particular
consumption good over time. Otherwise, lifetime utility could be increased by shifting
consumption out of one period in which marginal utility is low and into one where it is
high. Utility maximization also implies that the marginal utility of the two goods should
be equalized at any given time. We have already discussed how negative shocks to
income may cause consumption to be sub-optimally adjusted downward if capital
markets are imperfect. Notice that because it is, in general, very difficult to lower
housing payments, such reductions in total consumption expenditure should come
disproportionately out of movie attendance – a consumption item that is relatively easy to
adjust. As a result, adverse income shocks might cause the marginal utility of movie
attendance to be sub-optimally high relative to that of housing.

In general, if capital

markets are not perfect, and if items in the consumption bundle are relatively inflexible,
regular, and unavoidable, the consumption of other, more flexible aspects of
consumption is forced to be lower than the consumer would optimally prefer.

In this

paper, we refer to these difficult to adjust or avoid types of expenditures as “quasi-fixed
expenditure” (QFE).3
The preceding discussion forms the foundation of the empirical work in this
paper. Like the other authors in this volume, we are interested in the effect of the
business cycle changes during the 1990s on the well-being of U.S. households, and
3

Browning and Crossley (2004) present a model in which credit constrained households have differential
responses to income shocks across goods with differing degrees of durability. In their framework, a credit
constrained household that suffers a small negative transitory income shock will cut back primarily on
durable expenditures but very little on non-durable expenditures. Intuitively, since households derive
utility from their stocks of durable goods which are in part carried over from the previous period, these
relatively larger changes in durable expenditures do not correspond to nearly as dramatic changes in utility
(See also the empirical results in Dynarski and Gruber 1997). Browning and Crossley note that if durable
purchases are irreversible, then large negative income shocks will lead to large changes in non-durable
consumption since households will be unable to lower their accumulated durable stocks to help smooth
non-durable consumption. Analogously for the current paper, one can view quasi-fixed expenditures as
durable goods with a positive irreversibility constraint which leads households to undergo larger changes in
non-durable consumption than they would in the absence of the constraint.

3

especially on those of lower income. Our organizing assumptions are: (a) that capital
markets are less than perfect, especially for low income households, and (b) that an
important part of a household’s expenditure outlays are quasi-fixed expenditures (QSE),
in the sense described above.4 Given these assumptions, we expect recent macroeconomic changes to have generated several effects, which we formally test for in the
data.
First, contrary to the basic LCH/PIH, changes in the macro-economy and the
income changes associated with them should have changed the level of households’
consumption (as measured by their expenditures). Second, business cycle changes should
have changed the composition of consumption bundles, with the largest changes
occurring for low income families. Specifically, we expect that the share of households’
total expenditure outlays devoted to quasi-fixed consumption items should have risen in
bad times and (perhaps) fallen in good, with these effects most pronounced for those at
the bottom of the income distribution.

A corollary is that the share of household

expenditure devoted to easily adjustable non-durable consumption should have moved
pro-cyclically, especially for the low income. Third, since the principal means by which
households likely make short-term credit adjustments is the use of instruments like store
or commercial credit cards, we expect relatively larger percentage changes in total noncollateralized debt during bad periods for the less constrained high-income than we do
among lower income families.

The paper finds very strong support for the first two

propositions. Curiously, the evidence about debt holdings is much less convincing.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we describe
Consumer Expenditure Study (CEX) data used in the paper. Section 3 discusses how we
sort households by their income position, and presents some summary results about
average changes in total expenditure, total quasi-fixed expenditure over the business
cycle for different types of households. In Section 4 we outline the regression framework
and describe how we measure different types of non-durable expenditures in the analysis.
Formal regression results are presented in Section 5 and Section 6 concludes.

2.
4

Data

Jappelli (1990) finds that roughly 20 percent of U.S. households are credit constrained.

4

CEX Overview
This study uses data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) Interview
Survey (United States Department of Labor, various years). The CEX is an on-going,
rotating, panel dataset in which consumer units (households) are interviewed up to five
times, at intervals of three months between interviews. In any given calendar quarter,
approximately five thousand consumer units (CUs) are interviewed, with some CUs
beginning their participation in the survey and others completing their fifth (final)
interview. The initial interview collects household demographic information which is
updated during subsequent interviews to reflect any changes in household composition.
The second through fifth interviews each collect CU expenditure information for the
three calendar months immediately preceding the interview.
The CEX also collects information regarding labor force activities and
government transfer receipt for each CU member age fourteen and above. Labor force
information includes data on earned income, annual works worked, and usual weekly
hours.

Data on transfer program participation and benefit amounts includes Social

Security, Supplemental Security Income, and Unemployment Insurance. Income and
benefit amounts correspond to the twelve months prior to the interview date. Following
the advice of the BLS staff, federal, state, and FICA (Social Security) taxes for each CU
are calculated by using the NBER's TAXSIM program (Feenberg and Coutts 1993). All
dollar figures are deflated to the January 2000 CPI-U using information on the interview
month and year.
Unfortunately, because labor force and transfer receipt information is collected
only during the second and fifth interviews, changes in labor force and transfer payment
outcomes can only be ascertained between these interviews. It is difficult to interpret
these changes in the data because the questions put to respondents concern the preceding
twelve months, while there are only nine months between these two surveys. A further
limitation is that rather than asking a labor force participation question similar to those
found in other studies, such as whether the respondent is disabled, retired or unemployed,
labor force status information is only acquired for those who did not work at all during
that past twelve months. These issues greatly complicate examining the relationship
between changes in expenditures and changes in labor force and/or transfer payment

5

outcomes within households.

As such, we limit our analysis here to examining

differences across households by focusing only on the data reported by households in
their second interviews. Although limiting the sample to just one interview per CU
results in a large loss of expenditure data, we are greatly limited by the fact that the labor
market and transfer information is not collected as frequently as the expenditure data.5

Expenditure Information in CEX
The primary data collection undertaken in the CEX involves expenditures on a
wide variety of items.

The CEX Interview Survey collects information on all

expenditures except housekeeping supplies, personal care products, and nonprescription
drugs. However, since these items comprise a fairly small share of total expenditures, the
BLS believes that the Interview Survey captures up to 95 percent of total expenditures.6
For this study, total expenditures consist of two parts: outlays on what we term “quasifixed” and all other expenditures.

The CEX’s Monthly Expenditure Files (MTAB)

contain information on all new spending.7 Thus, since loan payments represent payments
on previously purchased items rather than new spending, no information on loan
payments is contained in the MTAB files. Loan payments on mortgages or on vehicles two of the main components of “quasi-fixed” expenditures - are not to be found on these
files, and are calculated from another source, which we describe below.

On the other

hand, some of expenditures on the MTAB do represent outlays on QFE’s. Vehicle lease
payments, rent for homes and apartments, and insurance payments are the main examples
of this sort. To compute total non-fixed payments, we sum all quarterly expenditures on

5

Given our emphasis on quasi-fixed expenditures, of which housing expenditures are a major component,
the ability to examine changes in these payments would be useful. For households that take out a new
mortgage, purchase a new vehicle, or pay off an existing loan, we can track these changes in the CEX.
However, since the CEX tracks residences and not individual households, we can not follow changes from
being a renter to becoming a homeowner and vice versa. A similar scheme of sampling residences is used
by the Current Population Survey.
6
See United States Department of Labor (Various Years) for more details. The codebook for the Interview
Survey notes that between five to fifteen percent of total expenditures is accounted for by the categories not
collected by the Interview Survey.
7
The MTAB files include information on the month of expenditure. Some expenditures in these files do
not perfectly align with the three month reference period prior to the interview month. Following previous
studies, expenditures are allocated to the appropriate reference period. In addition, pension contributions
and cash contributions are not included in our analysis.

6

the MTAB files, and then subtract out the measures which we characterize as quasifixed.8
The CEX collects a wide array of information concerning payments we
characterize as quasi-fixed outlays. Housing expenditures represent our main example of
expenditures that cannot be easily adjusted.

For home-owning households, a large

number of questions are asked pertaining to the financing of the home. For each house
owned by the CU, detailed information is collected for each mortgage that the household
holds and is made available on the public use files beginning in 1988. Included in this
information is the amount of the monthly payment for each mortgage. Beginning in
1991, the CEX also collected information specifically focusing on home equity loans as
well as home equity lines of credit. The amount of the regular payments for each home
equity loan is collected as well as the amount of the last payment for the home equity line
of credit. Households are asked whether their mortgage payments and payments on home
equity loans include other payments such as property taxes, property insurance, and
mortgage guarantee insurance. Since these expenses should be difficult to adjust, we
include them in our measure of quasi-fixed housing payments.9 Finally, the CEX also
collects information on rent payments for CU renting their residence.
Expenditures on vehicles are the second class of QFE in the paper. Payment
information for all vehicles is covered by the CEX including cars, trucks, motorcycles,
and boats. A variety of data is collected for each vehicle including information on the
vehicle model, the purchase date, and, if one exists, the vehicle loan or lease. Most
important for our study, the regular payment amount for each loan and lease is collected.
In the empirical work, our main measure of quasi-fixed expenditures combines
payments on residences (mortgages, home equity loans and lines of credit, rent, property
taxes, and homeowner fees) and payments on vehicles (vehicle loan and lease payments).
Some other forms of expenditures, such as utility payments and insurance payments
might be considered “quasi-fixed”, but we study expenditures on this category of outlays
8

Specifically, rent payments, vehicle lease payments, property taxes, homeowner fees (such as
condominium fees), the interest portion of payments on home and vehicle loans, and payments on
homeowner’s, renter’s, and vehicle insurance plans are considered fixed payments that appear on the
MTAB files. In some of our analysis, we will also consider utility payments to be fixed payments.
9
The CEX also collects information on property taxes and fees such as condominium fees. These expenses
are included as part of fixed housing payments.

7

separately, for reasons discussed below.10 Total expenditures are, of course, the sum of
the particular quasi-fixed and all other expenditure outlays coded in the CEX.11
The third outcome discussed in the Introduction is a measure of a household’s
non-collateralized debt. This is the debt households hold on things like department store
or bank credit cards. We treat these obligations as a separate item for a couple of
reasons. On the one hand, these obligations may too large to be completely ignored, and
are the major mechanism by which households might adjust their consumption on other
items. On the other hand, even if households run up substantial credit card debt, their
outlays on them can be quite minimal. We thus use a measure of non-collateralized debt
which measures not how much people pay to service this type of debt each year, but
rather how much they report owing on this type of debt as of the interview month.12
Some consumer units were deleted because of missing data. The primary reason
for deleting CUs is when they are deemed by the BLS to have incomplete income data
(20 percent of the sample). This designation is, in general, based upon the reporting of
values for major sources of income such as wages and salaries, self-employment income,
and Social Security income. These households are not used because the BLS sets all
income data to zero (even for categories in which data is reported) for this set of CUs.13
In addition, we exclude households with missing or top-coded data for home or vehicle
loan information or for rental payments.14

Basic Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents the summary statistics for the three main outcomes variables,
over all households and for the years 1988-2000. As mentioned above, all dollar figures
are in January 2000 dollars. Over the thirteen years studied, quarterly household total
10

Research on the impact of utility expenditure fluctuations due to weather changes finds that higher utility
payments reduce food as well as other non-durable consumption (Bhattacharya, DeLeire, Haider, and
Currie 2003; Cullen, Friedberg, and Wolfram 2004).
11
In the previous literature, total expenditures are defined as the sum of expenditures on the MTAB files
with some exceptions such as pension and cash contributions (Parker 1999; Souleles 1999). Our
definitions includes these expenditures as well as the fixed housing and vehicle payments that do not
appear on the MTAB files but are found elsewhere in the CEX data.
12
The fifth interview of the CEX contains information on the total amount of finance charges and late fees
paid in the last year. However, information on monthly payment amounts on non-collateralized debt is not
available.
13
See United States Department of Labor (Various Years) for more details.
14
This last restriction affects five percent of the observations.

8

expenditures averaged $8243. The standard deviation around this expenditure was quite
large, at $7236.

The last three entries in the column show the 10th, median and 90th

percentile of the total expenditure distribution. These numbers show that the distribution
of total expenditures was quite uneven; half of all households had quarterly expenditures
of less than $6400 or less, while households with in the top 10 percent of expenditures
spent more than $15,700 a quarter.
The second column shows the means for the main measure of QFE used in the
paper. This index is the sum of all payments on home and vehicle payments.
Expenditures devoted to the items averaged $2142 a quarter across all households and
years, with a standard deviation that was larger than this mean at $2776. If anything, the
distribution for QFE is even more skewed that for total expenditures, with the 10th,
median and 90th percentile being a $125, $1580 and $4717, respectively. Occasionally,
we will use another measure of QFE. This measure is the sum of home and vehicle
payments, and payments made to insurance. Like home and vehicle payments, insurance
payments are a commitment generally made prior to the current period, and are difficult
to adjust by varying use. Utility payments might also have a quasi-fixed character, but
we look at results for this outcome separately for reasons discussed below. The table
indicates that quarterly outlays to the alternative quasi-fixed items of home, vehicles and
insurance payments averaged $2600 a quarter across all households and years, on
average. Adding insurance payments does little to change the uneven nature of the QFE
distribution: the 10th , median and 90th percentiles of the distribution are $439, $1985, and
$5456, respectively.
The final column in the table shows the non-collateralized debt held as of the
interview month by households across all the years studied was $2633.

The standard

deviation for more than four times the mean, at $11,953. As the remainder of the table
illustrates, the distribution of credit card and store card debt (the principal components of
non-collateralized debt) over the period studied was very much right skewed; high debt
households held dramatically more debt than did other households.
Figure 1 presents the average in each year of quarterly after-tax income, quarterly
total expenditure, the two quasi-fixed expenditures measures, and non-collateralized debt
owed. The figure shows that across all years studied, average total expenditure and

9

average quarterly income across all household closely track each other, with reported
expenditures slightly exceeding income in most years.15 The income numbers are of
special interest as it is presumably changes in this variable over the course of the business
cycle that gives rise to the behavioral responses of interest. There is some evidence of
average income tracking the business cycle, but the pattern in these average numbers is
certainly not striking.
Figure 1 shows that average total expenditures across all households averaged
around slightly above $8,000 in 2000 dollars. From a high of just under $8600 in 1989,
average total expenditures declined slightly to a low of $8,000 in 1993 and are relatively
constant at about $250 higher over the succeeding years. The figure shows that quasifixed expenditures are quite constant, on average, over the years studied.

Quarterly

outlays on payments related to households’ home and cars were around $2,000 in each
year studied.

When insurance payments are added the measure of QFE, average

payments to this type of expenditure were about $400, and quite flat over time.
The patterns for average total non-collateral debt owed show much greater
variation over time. In particular, outstanding debt rises somewhat before 1990, up to a
maximum of around $3,000. Over the first three years of the 1990s, debt owed fell by
close to $1,000. Average outstanding debt then rose by about $1,000 over the next
several years, reaching the late-1980s levels by 1996.

In the final four years studied,

debt outstanding again declined – although in these years the average decline was only
about half as large as that during the early 1990s.
Somewhat surprisingly, we find that both income and total expenditures – while
exhibiting cyclical fluctuations – do not show any evidence of an upward trend over this
period. The lack of an increase in the CEX expenditure data during the 1990s while the
personal consumption expenditures component of the National Income and Product
Accounts increased has been noted by other researchers (Attanasio, Battistin, and
Ichimura 2004). For our main empirical investigation, we are primarily interested in the
variation in expenditure and income over the business cycle, specifically the degree to
which these measures vary with state-level employment fluctuations.

15

As such, the

CEX income is an annual income measure. We divide this computed annual number by 4 for presentation
in this graph.

10

decline in these measures in the early 1990s as well as the subsequent increases in the
latter part of the decade suggests that there is indeed interesting variation over the
business cycle to examine, the lack of an upward trend notwithstanding.

3.

Classifying Households by Income Position
We are interested in the effect of macro-economic changes on the consumption

patterns of households at different positions in the income distribution. Ideally, we
would like to sort households by their levels of permanent income and assess how macroeconomic variation differentially affects them.

Unfortunately, we do not observe

permanent income. Our strategy in what follows will thus to be sort households by their
positions in the CEX national income distribution.

One consequence of this choice is

that households are stratified by their position in the distribution of a variable which is
itself determined by business cycle changes. We doubt that this is a serious problem
since, as we discuss below, the variation in the regression analysis is within-state,
idiosyncratic variation – something unlikely to appreciably affect how a household
compares to all households in the country. Nevertheless, to raise confidence that our
results do indeed reflect differences across persons with different levels of lifetime
resources, we will also present results in which households are distinguished by the
education of the household head, the race of the household, and whether or not the
household is headed by a single mother.
Figures 2a shows the after-tax mean of annual household income across all the
households used in the analysis, and by income quartile. On average, household income
was just above $30,000 in each year. Average incomes for the households in the bottom
three quartiles of the national income distribution exhibit very little variation over time.
In each year, after-tax incomes for these three groups diverge by between $1,000 and
$1,200, with the incomes for the lowest quartile averaging slightly less than $9,000.
The figure reflects the skewness of the overall after-tax income distribution; households
in the highest quartile of the income distribution have incomes that are, on average,
double those of households in the third quartile.

11

As mentioned, we will also show results in which groups are distinguished along
other dimensions likely correlated with their levels of lifetime resources.

Figure 2b

shows mean after-tax income for subgroups in the different categories whose permanent
incomes we would expect to be relatively low. The graph plots average after-tax income
for African-Americans, single mothers, and high school dropouts.

For ease of

comparability, we have kept the scale of the graphs on Figures 2a and 2b the same so that
the reader can readily see compare incomes for these groups to the overall income
distribution. The figure shows that all of these groups have incomes below the mean for
all households, with the possible exception of single mothers. Since the very loweducated, racial minorities and single mothers are precisely the persons whose permanent
income we expect to be especially low, these results further justify our focus on a
household’s quantile position in the national income distribution as the measure of
lifetime or permanent income. As noted, we also present results in which the focus is on
variation at the by household race, family-type and schooling.
Next, we briefly show how the key outcomes of interest in the paper changed over
time for different sorts of households.

Figures 3-5 summarize changes in the four

measures for persons at different positions in the income distribution. Figure 3 shows
that such changes to total expenditure as occurred over the years seems to have been
driven by changes in the expenditure outlays of households in the highest quartile of the
income distribution. For example, in 1990, total quarterly expenditures for this group of
households were just over $14,800.

During the first three years of the 1990s,

expenditures fell for this group by almost $1,500 a quarter.

In the mid-1990s,

expenditures rose again, and then declined and stabilized, at close to the levels observed
in the late 1980s.

By contrast, for the lowest income American households, total

expenditures were almost perfectly flat at $4,000 though all of the years.
Figures 4a and 4b show changes in average QFE outlays over the business cycle
for households at different points in the income distribution. The figure shows that, apart
from a decline for the highest income households between 1992 and 1993, these outlays
were relatively flat over time for each type of household, and from year to year in much
the same manner for each group.

12

The patterns for non-collateralized debt outstanding depicted in Figure 5 show
that most of the changes in the mean over time were driven by changes in the highest
income households. In particular, the strong U-shaped pattern in average debt holdings
over the recession of the early nineteen nineties and recovery later in the decade was due
almost exclusively to changes in the debt holdings of the high income. For those at the
bottom of the income distribution, debt holding seemed to have changed only very
modestly over the years studied.
These figures hint at a very modest pro-cyclical dimension to total expenditures,
and a weaker one for quasi-fixed expenditures. It must be emphasized that these patterns
are merely suggestive. Changes in the various outcomes are not purged of any secular
effects that might be coincidentally correlated with business cycle changes and driving
the relationships indicated. For example, a national expansion in credit which happened
to coincide with national economic downturns would exaggerate the apparent extent to
which households used credit when times were bad. Nor do any of the results shown
control for systematic sources of variation for each of the outcomes. Life-cycle
considerations are an important example of these. In addition, regional variation possibly
due to differences in economic fluctuations across industries is another such factor. The
figures shown are effectively aggregate level results, as they relate national
unemployment to national expenditure and debt.

The causal relationship of interest

would seem be the relationship between the economic conditions in a state on the
consumption expenditure and debt holding patterns of the people who live there. An
aggregate level analysis cannot effectively get at this question, nor can it account for
unobserved state-specific factors that affect expenditures.
Below, we use regression analysis to study the connection between local (statelevel) economic conditions and the level and composition of consumption within the
state. Apart from state level controls, our regression specifications will also control for
age of household, and other systematic effects.

4.

Regression Estimates of Effect of Unemployment Variation and Changes in
Level and Composition of Expenditures

13

In this section, we formally assess how recent macro-economic changes affected
the level and composition of consumption expenditures and debt using a series of
regressions.

Of special interest to us is whether expenditures on quasi-fixed expenditure

outlays “crowd-out” other forms of expenditures during economic times, and how the
various effects differ for households at different positions in the income distribution.

Framework
We estimate regressions of the form:
yit = θ s + θt + β1 X it + β 2U st + β 3IQi + β 4 (U st * IQi ) + ε it

(1)

In (1) yit is either total expenditure, total debt owed, or share or fraction of total
spending devoted to particular expenditure items. The variables θ s and θt are vectors of
state and time fixed effects. The vector X it contains controls for like the age of
household, household size, race and family structure. U st measures the unemployment
rate in the state at time t .

IQi are indicator variables denoting the household’s position

in the income distribution.

We will mainly measure that position by an indicator

denoting the income quartile to which the household belongs, but will also show results
where income position is measured by the education of the household head, the race of
the household and whether it is headed by a single mother.
Because they contain state fixed effects, the regressions (1) measure how, for
households in a given state, higher unemployment in that state in a particular year relative
to the state’s time mean, affects expenditure and debt holdings. The inclusion of the time
fixed effects ensures that the estimates are purged of the possible contamination
attributable to unobserved secular trends that affects all groups equally. Because there
might also be secular effects specific to particular groups, such as the very low income,
or those with low levels of schooling, we also add group-specific trends to the various
regressions.
We are chiefly interested in three sets of coefficients from the regressions: β 2
through β 4 . The coefficient β 2 measures how the particular outcome variable changes,

14

on average across all households, with changes in the business cycle.

β 3 measures

systematic differences across income groups in expenditure and debt holding for the
different income and education groups.

The β 4 on the interaction term measures

whether macro-economic changes produce different effects on expenditures and debt
holdings for the various income groups. If a particular income (or education, race, or
family structure) group’s response to macro-economic changes is the same as that of the
excluded groups (those with the lowest income or lowest education) the estimated
coefficient for the particular interaction term will be zero.
In some regressions, we focus on the various “ratio measures” – specifically the
share of a household’s total expenditure going to a particular type of expenditure. Since
we also separately study results for total expenditure, it is straightforward in most cases
to combine these results to determine how the level of expenditure on particular item is
affected over the business cycle. For example, if total expenditure for particular groups
remains constant during booms, but the share of expenditure devoted to item x rises, then
if follows the total spending on good x goes up. We focus on these ratios because they
directly address the issue of the composition of expenditure over the business cycle (one
of our chief interests).

Measuring Consumption
In our estimation of (1), we use two measures of quasi-fixed expenditures. The
first combines payments on residences (mortgages, home equity loans and lines of credit,
rent, property taxes, and homeowner fees) and payments on vehicles (vehicle loan and
lease payments). The other adds insurance payments to this measure.
One difficultly we confront is how to measure aspects of consumption that are not
the QFEs. The convention in the previous work on consumption has been to lump
various “non-durable” consumption items into a single category. However, there has been
considerable variation in the particular items scholars have chosen to include in their
measures. To help determine which variant, if any, of the different measures that have
appeared in the literature we should use in our analysis, we decided on the simple
strategy of examining what the alternative measures that have appeared in the literature
say about life cycle consumption patterns. If the picture one gets about lifecycle
15

consumption differs markedly from one measure to the next, then it would seem
appropriate to not rely on the choice of any of these measures in our analysis, but instead
to focus on the specific items that make up the composite non-durable measure.
Figure 6 plots the coefficients from a series regression in which the spending
measure is regression on a full vector of dummy variables for age, and on state and time
fixed effects. The plotted effects show how expenditure changes over the life-cycle,
relative to the excluded age 25, netting out the effect of national variation, and the effect
of anything systematic about the state in which the household member happens to be
located. If over the lifecycle expenditure on non-durables remained the same, all of the
plotted age effects would be zero.
Souleles (2000) uses a non-durable expenditure measure consisting of outlays on:
food, alcohol, tobacco and smoking supplies, utilities, personal care, household
operations (personal services and other household expenses), public transportation, gas
and motor oil, apparel, health expenditures, education, and reading materials. Lusardi
(1996) uses a measure of non-durable expenditure called “strictly non-durable
consumption” which is the same as the Souleles measure, except that it subtracts off
education, health, apparel, and reading material. Lusardi’s measure attempts to capture
expenditures that are truly non-durable over a quarterly interval. Parker (1999), Hsieh
(2003), and Stephens (2003) all study how predictable changes in income affect
consumption behavior.
food,

alcohol,

These papers measure non-durable expenditures as the sum of

textiles,

small

appliances,

miscellaneous

equipment,

apparel,

entertainment, personal care, reading, tobacco/smoking, public transportation, and gas
and motor oil. Their non-durable measure does not include health, education or utilities
as do the Souleles and Lusardi measures, but does include entertainment unlike those
other measures.
Figure 6 shows that the differences over the lifecycle in the fraction of outlays
devoted to non-durable consumption as measured by these three measures. The figure
shows that the Lusardi measure’s share of total expenditure is the same as the Souleles
measure until age 55. Thereafter, its share of total expenditure is basically flat, while that
of the Souleles measure rises dramatically. The Parker/Hsieh/Stephens measure exhibits
a very different pattern than either of the other two measures. In particular, the share of

16

expenditure devoted to this non-durable measure consistently falls below age-25 levels
once household reach age 60, and then fall in further in each successive year.
What accounts for the difference across the various measures? In Figure 7 we
present results similar to those in Figure 6, but for specific expenditure items. The figure
presents results for health expenditures, food, utilities and outlays on expenditures on
entertainment and personal care. We have drawn the graphs in Figures 6 and 7 on the
same scale. From a comparison of the figures, it is clear that it is increased health
spending than accounts for the difference between the Souleles and Lusardi non-durable
measures. And, the pattern for utilities explains, in turn, why the Parker/Hsieh/Stephens
measure diverges from the Lusardi measure.
Rather than use an aggregate non-durable measure in the analysis below, we study
particular consumption items separately. The results above suggest that the obvious
individual measures to focus on are: health, food, entertainment and personal care, and
utilities. Looking at each of these items separately obviates the need to choose among the
different non-durable measures that have appeared in the literature, and also allows us to
more precisely characterize the dimensions along which households adjust the
composition of their expenditures as macro-economic conditions change.

5.

Results
Table 2a investigates how business cycle fluctuations affect households’ after tax

income. The first column of the table presents the relationship between state
unemployment and income, in a regression with state and time fixed effects. The point
estimate implies that a one percentage point increase in a state’s unemployment rate
lowers after tax income by about $390, averaged across all households.

In the

specifications in the second and third columns, the coefficient on the unemployment rate
measures how business cycle changes affect the expenditures of the excluded group –
households with the lowest income or schooling. 16 These regressions and all others like
them to follow, also control for household age, race, marital status, household size as well
16

The CEX includes a variable for the household’s place in the income distribution for household’s that are
deemed complete income reporters. Indicators for income quartile are created from this variable. The four
education categories are high school dropout, high school graduate, some college, and college graduate.

17

as differential time period effects for the specific group being investigated.17

The

coefficients on the interactions terms measures how much higher or lower the response
for the indicated group is relative to that of the lowest income/schooling households. The
coefficient on the unemployment rate measures the impact of unemployment on the
lowest income/education group.
These results show that increases in unemployment lower the incomes of
households in the lowest income quartiles by relatively large and strongly statistically
significant amounts, while affecting the incomes of those with higher levels of income
and schooling only modest, if at all. For example, the results in column 2 suggest that
each 1 percentage point change in unemployment lowers after-tax income in the lowest
income quartile fall by about $450, and lowers incomes in the third quartile by only half
this amount.
Table 2b does the same analysis as that in the final two columns as Table 2a, but
with households distinguished by race and single mother status. On the whole, the results
are consistent with our expectations. Unemployment lowers income for blacks as well as
for single mothers relative to other groups.
How do these income changes over the course business cycle affect consumption?
Table 3a and 3b show results for total expenditure. The layout of these Tables is exactly
the same as that in Tables 2a and 2b.
The first column in Table 3a shows that a one point increase in unemployment
lowers total expenditure by a modest $116 across all households. The results in the
second column show that each one point increases in unemployment lowers total
expenditures for the lowest income quartile by a statistically significant $170. The point
estimates imply that a 1.9 point increase in the unemployment rate, such as that which
occurred nationally between 1990 and 1992, lowered total expenditures of the lowest
income households by about $324. This represents an eight percent reduction relative to
mean expenditures for this group of about $4000 in a given year. The other point
estimates in the second column suggest that there is effectively no change in total
expenditures over the business cycle for households other than those at the bottom of the
17

For example, when the unemployment rate is interacted with each of the quartile indicators, the
specification includes differential time period effects for each quartile to capture any differential national
trends across the income quartiles.

18

income distribution. The results in the third column, in which the unemployment rate is
interacted with the household’s education rather than with its income position, are
broadly consistent with these results.
Table 3b does the same analysis as that the last columns of Table 3a, but uses
other indicators of households’ income position. The first column shows unemployment
has the same on total expenditure effect across all races. In the second column, by
contrast, we find that single mothers sharply lower total expenditures when
unemployment rises. Given the earlier results for income, which showed that both racial
minorities and single mothers experience disproportionately large income losses when
there is higher unemployment, the fact that the two groups respond so differently with
respect to total expenditure is surprising.
The next set of regression results measure how the composition of expenditures
varies over the business cycle. In these regressions, the outcomes are the share of
household expenditure that is devoted to each of the indicated expenditure items. Before
presenting these results, Table 4 presents the means for these share variables for over the
years studied for all households, and by household income quartile. The table shows that
for all households, expenditures on the quasi-fixed categories of home and vehicle
payments represent about a quarter of all expenditures across households, with the share
rising slightly the higher the household’s income. When QFE expenditures include
insurance payments, the share is about five to seven percentage points higher for every
group.

Outlays on food comprise about a fifth of the expenditures of the average

household. Unlike QFE outlays, the importance of this item in expenditure set, following
the familiar Engel’s Law, falls slightly as income rises. Utilities exhibit a pattern similar
that found for food expenditures. For all households, expenditures on health and outlays
on entertainment and personal care each constitute about eight percent of expenditures.
Table 5a presents results for the effect of local unemployment changes on the
fraction of expenditures devoted to home and vehicle payments.

It has been our

argument throughout that because these quasi-fixed expenditures are difficult to adjust in
the short run, they constitute a larger share of total expenditures in bad times, and a
smaller share if households are forced to vary total expenditures over the business cycle.
Are the results consistent with this reasoning? In the first column of Table 5a, the

19

estimated point estimate, which represents the mean across all households, is indeed
positive and statistically significant.
In the second and third columns, the interaction terms assess how this effect
varies across households defined by income quartile and schooling. Now, the coefficient
on the unemployment variable measures the effect for the lowest income households. The
point estimate is positive and strongly statistically significant. It suggest that a two point
increase in the unemployment rate increases the fraction of expenditures going to home
and car payments by about 0.016. This represents about an eight percent increase in share
of expenditures going to these quasi-fixed outlays for this group of households. The
positive estimated interaction terms in the column imply that the effects for other income
quartiles are smaller by statistically significant amounts from what occurs for the lowest
income quartile. Indeed, since the total effect for any of these other groups is the sum of
the point estimate of the unemployment variable and the relevant interaction term, the
results indicate that for households other than the lowest income the share of total
expenditures going to home and vehicle payments changes very little over the business
cycle. The final column in the table tells a virtually identical story to that in column two:
changes in the business cycle affect the share of resources devoted to quasi-fixed
payments, but only for households at the bottom of the SES distribution.18
In Table 5b we distinguish households by race and by single mother status. The
results for single mother households are consistent with the notion that the lowest SES
households spend larger fractions of their budgets on housing and vehicle payments in
bad economic times. However, as with the results for total expenditure, we again find the
somewhat surprising result that racial minorities are no more likely to see the share of
their expenses going to these two main quasi-fixed expenditures rise with increases in
unemployment even though income is observed falling for this group. It is worth noting,
though, that the point estimates on the two race variables are twice the size as the main
effect. It may be that the lack of power precludes any significant conclusions in these
data.

18

We estimate but do not present the results measuring QFE as home and vehicle payments, plus payments
on insurance and/or plus utility payments. The results are quite similar to those shown in Table 5a.

20

The results show that for some households quasi-fixed expenditures rise as a share
of total expenditure outlays when the economy did poorly and rose when it did well.
What types of expenditure are “crowded-out” or increased from those households’
consumption bundles as a result? Table 6a examines the share of total expenditures
going to the four largest items in households’ non-durable expenditures: food (both eaten
at home and away), health, entertainment and personal care, and utilities.

The table

presents results only for the main regressions in which the unemployment rate is
interacted with household income quartile.
The results in Table 6a show that for health and utility expenditures, business
cycle variation produce no changes in the fraction going to the consumption for any type
of family. For higher income households, these results are not too surprising, since we
could find only no reductions in total expenditures for them, and virtually no changes in
the fraction they allocated to outlays on quasi-fixed expenses. It is reassuring, however,
to observe that adjustments the lowest income households make to their consumption
expenditures do not come out of these immensely important items. Nor the lowest
income families adjust by altering their food consumption over the business cycle.
Table 6a shows dramatically that it is on the expenditures devoted to
entertainment and personal care where the lowest income families make adjustments over
the business cycle. The strongly statistically significant estimate in the first line implies
that household at the bottom of the income distribution lower the share of their outlays
going to things like movie and concert tickets, haircuts, televisions, radios or sound
equipment in bad times, and increase them in good, by about -0.002 for each one
percentage point increase in the state’s unemployment rate.

The other entries in the

column show that the allocation of higher income households to entertainment and
personal consumption over the business cycle is different in a strongly significant way to
that for the lowest income. In particular, the results indicate that for every type of
household except those in the bottom income quartile, entertainment’s share as a fraction
of total expenditure outlays does not change at all as the business cycle changes.
The results in Table 6b present a picture that is by now very familiar.

These

results show that, on the whole, the results for other groups with low SES closely match
the results when unemployment is interacted with income quartile, except for the results

21

for racial minorities. Thus, for entertainment and personal care, the only category for
which we find any evidence of compositional change over the business cycle, single
mothers lower expenditures devoted to this item in bad times. There is no such effect for
racial minority groups, despite the fact that their income losses during recessions are
about the same size as those for single mothers.
Our results thus far have shown that both the level and composition of
expenditure of the lowest income households appear to have been affected by the macroeconomic changes of the past decade and a half.

When the economy is bad and income

falls, their total expenditures fall, and the share of resources they devote to quasi-fixed
payments like home and vehicle payments, rise.

Further, the results suggest that low

income households make these adjustments to the composition of their expenditure
outlays principally by lowering their expenditure on entertainment and on personal care,
rather than on things like health, utilities, or food.
What accounts for these different patterns across groups? One obvious possible
answer might be that the lowest income households are more credit constrained than
other income groups. Thus, rather than using credit to smooth consumption and keep the
composition of consumption the same over the business cycle, they are forced to make
the adjustments described above. In the final two tables in the paper – Tables 7a and 7b –
we examine how total non-collateralized debt owed varies over the business cycle for
different groups.
On the whole, the results for debt owed are not precisely estimated. Nonetheless,
the point estimates do offer some suggestive evidence that might partly explain the
results we find. The results indicate that, consistent with our expectation, lower income
groups do not increase their debt holdings over the business cycle, and might actually
lower debt slightly. By contrast, there is weak evidence that higher income households
slightly increase debt in bad times – precisely what the standard model would predict for
non credit-constrained households. The results for other subgroups in Table 7b are not
precisely estimated but interesting nonetheless. We find weak evidence that blacks might
slightly increase debt in bad times, unlike single mothers whose debt holding appear to
fall slightly. This differential response with respect to debt holdings might explain why

22

blacks are the only low SES group for which we find changes in neither the level nor
composition of consumption expenditure over the business cycle.

6.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have argued that because of credit market and other

imperfections, transitory variations in income such as those arising from business cycle
fluctuations, might cause consumption behavior to depart from the textbook standard. In
particular, in bad economic times affected households might be such imperfections might
caused affected households to lower total expenditure, and to increase the share of their
overall consumption devoted to expenditure items like car or vehicle payments that are
difficult to adjust without a cost.
We distinguish households by their position in the national income distribution, as
well as by their race and whether they are headed by a single mother. Using a series of
regressions in which we exploit state-specific variation over time, and in which we also
control for general time effects and well as group-specific trends, we find that local
variation in unemployment are generally associated with reductions in after-tax income
for the lowest SES groups. We find much smaller or non-existent reductions for higher
permanent income subgroups. Our results indicate that most lower-income groups lower
total expenditure when state unemployment is high.

There are no reductions for

households higher up in the income distribution.
Changes in the composition of expenditure outlays are also concentrated among
lower income groups, to the extent that they exist at all. When state unemployment rises,
we find that most lower-income groups raise the fraction of their expenditure outlays
devoted to what we term quasi-fixed expenditure.

Interestingly, we find that the only

specific non-durable consumption item on which these groups lower expenditure is for
the category of entertainment and personal care. Important expenditures such as food and
health do not appear to be affected.
One noteworthy departure from these patterns is that for racial minority groups.
Despite the fact that their income falls when state unemployment rises, we find little
evidence that they alter either their total consumption or their outlay on particular items

23

over the business cycle.

Precisely why these patterns exist is somewhat of a puzzle.

One possible explanation, of course, is due to sampling variability. Given that many of
the estimated effect are of the expected sign but imprecisely estimated, this explanation is
plausible. A possible alternative explanation, however, may be the apparently different
ways in which racial minorities use non-collateralized debt such as store or commercial
credit cards relative to other lower income groups. All of our results for debt are noisy,
but we do find suggestive evidence that blacks might increase debt holding when times
are bad.

In some ways, this result implies that blacks react to reductions in income

associated with business cycle changes precisely as the standard model would predict:
income falls, but so debt is increased to smooth the level and composition of
consumption.

Other lower income groups, such as high school dropouts or single

mothers may not act similarly because they are more credit constrained, leading to the
consumption effects we find. Another alternative explanation is that other groups do not
adjust as much on other dimensions of consumption which we do not explicitly study.
For example, it might be whether a family changes its living arrangements as the business
cycle changes – an issue studied in this volume by Fairlie and London - might differ
across various subgroups of lower income. Combining all components of adjustment in
one analysis would be an interesting effort for future work.

24

References
Ando, Albert and Franco Modigliani. 1963. “The Life-Cycle Hypothesis of Saving:
Aggregate Implications and Tests,” American Economic Review, 53(1), 55-84.
Attanasio, Orazio P., James Banks, Costas Meghir, and Guglielmo Weber. 1995. “Humps
and Bumps in Lifetime Consumption,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No.5350.
Attanasio, Orazio P., Erich Battistin, and Hidehiko Ichimura. 2004. “What Really
Happened to Consumption Inequality in the US?” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No.10338.
Bhattacharya, Jayanta, Thomas DeLeire, Steven J. Haider, and Janet Currie. 2003. "Heat
or Eat? Cold Weather Shocks and Nutrition in Poor American Families." American
Journal of Public Health, 93(7):1149-1154.
Blundell, Richard and Ian Preston. 1998. “Consumption Inequality and Income
Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(2): 603-640.
Branch, E. Raphael. 1994. “The Consumer Expenditure Surveys: A Comparative
Analysis,” Monthly Labor Review 117(12): 47-55.
Browning, Martin and Thomas F. Crossley. 2004. “Shocks, stocks and socks: smoothing
consumption over a temporary income loss,” Centre for Applied Microeconometrics,
University of Copenhagen Working Paper 2004-05.
Julie Berry Cullen, Leora Friedberg, and Catherine Wolfram. 2004. “Consumption and
Changes in Home Energy Costs: How Prevalent is the ‘Heat or Eat’ Decision?”,
University of California-Berkeley Manuscript.
Cutler, David and Larry Katz. 1991. “Macroeconomic Performance and the
Disadvantaged,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1-74.
Dynarski, Susan and Jonathan Gruber. 2004. “Can Families Smooth Variable Earnings?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1997(1), p. 229-303.
Friedman, Milton. 1957. A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Oliver and Jonathan A. Parker. 2002. “Consumption Over the Life
Cycle,” Econometrica, 70(1):47-89.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai. 2003. “Do Consumers React to Anticipated Income Changes?
Evidence from the Alaska Permanent Fund,” American Economic Review, 93(1):297405.

Jappelli, Tullio. 1990. “Who is Credit Constrained in the U. S. Economy?” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 105(1):219-234.
Krueger, Dirk and Fabrizio Perri. 2002. “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption
Inequality? Evidence and Theory,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No.9202.
Lusardi, Annamaria. 1996. “Permanent Income, Current Income, and Consumption:
Evidence from Two Panel Data Sets,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
14(1): 81-90.
Mankiw, N. Gregory. 1982. “Hall’s Consumption Hypothesis and Durable Goods,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 10(3), p. 417-25.
Mayer, Susan E. and Christopher Jencks. 1989. “Poverty and the Distribution of Material
Hardship,” Journal of Human Resources 24(1): 88-113.
Mayer, Susan E. and Christopher Jencks. 1993. “Recent Trends in Economic Inequality
in the United States: Income Versus Expenditures Versus Material Well-Being,” in
Poverty and Prosperity in the USA in the Late Twentieth Century, edited by Edward
N. Wolff. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2003. “Measuring The Well Being of the Poor
Using Income and Consumption. NBER Working Paper #9760.
Modigliani, Franco and Richard H. Brumberg. 1954. “Utility Analysis and the
Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data,” in Kenneth K
Kurihara, ed., Post-Keynesian Economics, New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University
Press.
Parker, Jonathan A. 1999. “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable
Changes in Social Security Taxes,” American Economic Review, 89(4): 959-73.
Rogers, John M. and Maureen B. Gray. 1994. “CE Data: Quintiles of Income Versus
Quintiles of Outlays,” Monthly Labor Review 117(12): 32-37.
Ruggles, Patricia. 1990. Drawing the Line: Alternative Poverty Measures and Their
Implications for Public Policy. Washington, D.C: The Urban Institute.
Souleles, Nicholas S. 1999. “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax
Refunds,” American Economic Review, 89(4): 947-59.
---------. 2000. “College Tuition and Household Savings and Consumption,” Journal of
Public Economics, 77(2): 185-207.

Stephens Jr., Melvin. 2003. “The Consumption Response to Predictable Changes in
Discretionary Income: Evidence from the Repayment of Vehicle Loans,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.9976.
Zeldes, Stephen P. 1989. “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical
Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(2): 305-46.

Figure 1. Mean Across Households Quartely Income, Quarterly Total Expenditures, QFE1
(Home, Vehicles), QFE2 (Home, Vehichle, Insurance, Utilities), and Non_Collaterized Debt
Owed, 1988-2000
10000
9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Year
Total Exp

Home+Vehicle

Home+Veh.+Ins.

NC_Debt

Income

1999

2000

Figure 2a. Annual After-Tax Household Income,
by Year and Income Quartile
80000
70000
60000
50000
40000
30000
20000
10000
0
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Year
All Households

1st Quartile

2nd Quartile

3rd Quartile

4th Quartile

Figure 2b. Annual After-Tax Household Income for Selected Groups,
by Year and Group
80000
70000
60000
50000
40000
30000
20000
10000
0
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

Year
Dropouts

Blacks

Single Mothers

1997

1998

1999

2000

Figure 3. Total Expenditure Over Business Cycle, by Income Quartile
16000

14000

12000

10000

8000

6000

4000

2000

0
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Year
Total

1st quartile

2nd quartile

3rd quartile

4th quartile

1999

2000

Figure 4a. Average Household Expendiures on Home and Vehicle
Payments by Year and Income Quintile, 1988-2000
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Year
Total

1st quartile

2nd quartile

3rd quartile

4th quartile

Figure 4b. Average Expenditures on Home, Vehicle, and Insurance
Payments, by Year and Income Quintile, 1988-2000
6000
5000
4000

3000
2000
1000
0
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

Year
Total

1st quartile

2nd quartile

3rd quartile

4th quartile

2000

Figure 5. Total Non-Collateralized Debt Outstanding, by Year and Income Quartile
7,000

6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Year
Total

1st quartile

2nd quartile

3rd quartile

4th quartile

1999

2000

Figure 6. Share of Total Expenditure Devoted to Quasi-Fixed Expenditures and All Non-Durable Expenditures
Over Life Cycle Under Alternative Definitions
Regression-Adjusted for State, Year Effects

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15

Age
Home + Veh.

Home + Veh. + Ins.

Non-Dur2: (Lusardi)

Non-Dur3: (Parker/Hsieh/Stephens)

Non-Dur1: (Souleles)

Figure 7. Share of Total Expenditures Devoted to Consumption Categories Over the Lifecycle
Regression Adjusted For State and Time Effects
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
26

29

32

35

38

41

44

47

50

53

56

59

62

65

68

71

74

Age
Food

Health

Enter & Per. Care

Utilities

77

80

83

86

89

90

88

86

84

82

80

78

76

74

72

70

68

66

64

62

60

58

56

54

52

50

48

46

44

42

40

38

36

34

32

30

28

26

-0.2

Table 1. Summary Statistics of Key Outcome Variables Across All Households, 1988-2000

Quarterly Total
Expenditures

Quarterly QuasiFixed
Expenditures:
(Payments on
Home, Vehicles)

Quarterly QuasiFixed Expenditures:
(Home, Vehicles,
Insurance)

Debt Owed

8,243
(7,236)

2,142
(2,776)

2,612
(2,942)

2,633
(11,953)

10th Percentile

2,428

125

439

0

Median

6,398

1,580

1,985

140

90th Percentile

15,752

4,717

5,456

7,246

Mean
Std. Dev.

Note: Data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey 1988-2000. See text for details.

Table 2a. Effect of Local Unemployment on Change in Quarterly After-Tax Income
(1)
(2)
(3)
Unemployment Rate

-393.68
(213.81)

Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q2

-458.98
(101.10)**
58.77
(70.28)
287.95
(77.13)**
740.59
(265.25)**

Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q3
Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q4

Unemployment Rate * HS

-91.47
(106.93)
161.26
(117.48)
245.70
(191.51)

Unemployment Rate * SomeColl
Unemployment Rate * CollPlus

Household Income Quartile
Inc_Q2

11,112.81
(460.15)**
22,583.24
(610.36)**
47,848.26
(1,795.02)**

10,769.14
(109.19)**
23,941.94
(167.76)**
52,716.47
(572.54)**

589.98
(154.22)**
1,498.80
(178.66)**
5,776.79
(293.51)**

1,007.29
(703.66)
0.0000
(0.0000)
3,863.95
(1,318.07)**

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

45563

45242

45242

0.02

0.75

0.75

Inc_Q3
Inc_ Q4

Head's Education
High School (HS)
Some College (SomeColl)
College Plus (CollPlus)
Additional Controls
State And Year Fixed Effects
Demographic Variables
Income Group Time Trends
Education Group Time Trends
Observations
R-squared

-233.80
(94.58)*

Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; The standard errors (in parentheses) allow for arbitrary correlation between
observations from the same state over time; Demographic variables include age of the household head, family size, race of the
household head, and marital status; See text for details

Table 2b. Effect of Local Unemployment on Change in Quarterly After-Tax Income
(1)
(2)

Unemployment Rate

Unemployment Rate * Black
Unemployment Rate * Other-Race

-123.48
(74.05)
-269.99
(131.48)*
-24.23
(234.99)

Unemployment * Single Mother

Race
Black
Other Race

-212.83
(181.53)

550.75
(927.44)
-642.81
(2,121.53)

Single Mother

Additional Controls
State And Year Fixed Effects
Demographic Variables
Race-Specific Time Effects
Single Mother Time Effects
Observations
R-squared

-150.57
(70.43)*

1,103.29
(1,158.6365)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

45242
0.75

45242
0.75

Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; The standard errors (in parentheses) allow for arbitrary correlation between
observations from the same state over time; Demographic variables include age of the household head, family size, race of the
household head, marital status, income group variables, and household head education group variables; See text for details

Table 3a. Effect of Local Unemployment on Household Total Expenditure
(1)
(2)
(3)
Unemployment Rate

-116.32
(78.57)

Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q2

-170.82
(65.17)*
-59.62
(54.36)
133.99
(59.20)*
245.99
(161.00)

Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q3
Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q4

Unemployment Rate * HS

66.68
(103.42)
216.19
(146.38)
270.40
(119.22)*

Unemployment Rate * SomeColl
Unemployment Rate * CollPlus

Household Income Quartile
Inc_Q2

1,369.29
(412.73)**
2,362.15
(454.93)**
5,765.89
(1,005.77)**

943.10
(70.56)**
2,514.43
(131.59)**
6,884.21
(252.26)**

774.57
(96.25)**
1,711.74
(144.06)**
2,962.50
(134.40)**

673.51
(665.51)
0.0000
(0.0000)
2,093.64
(751.28)**

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

45563
0.02

45242
0.31

45242
0.31

Inc_Q3
Inc_ Q4

Head's Education
High School (HS)
Some College (SomeColl)
College Plus (CollPlus)
Additional Controls
State And Year Fixed Effects
Demographic Variables
Income Group Time Trends
Education Group Time Trends
Observations
R-squared

-226.17
(103.69)*

Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; The standard errors (in parentheses) allow for arbitrary correlation between
observations from the same state over time; Demographic variables include age of the household head, family size, race of the
household head, and marital status; See text for details

Table 3b. Effect of Local Unemployment on Household Total Expenditure
(1)
(2)

Unemployment Rate

-76.99
(66.94)

Unemployment Rate * Black

0.47
(86.13)
37.80
(123.67)

Unemployment Rate * Other-Race

Unemployment * Single Mother

Race
Black
Other Race

-230.07
(62.21)**

-1,544.31
(610.46)*
-317.80
(867.50)

Single Mother

Additional Controls
State And Year Fixed Effects
Demographic Variables
Race-Specific Time Effects
Single Mother Time Effects
Observations
R-squared

-70.77
(59.06)

1,194.15
(690.99)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

45242
0.31

45242
0.31

Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; The standard errors (in parentheses) allow for arbitrary correlation between
observations from the same state over time; Demographic variables include age of the household head, family size, race of the
household head, marital status, income group variables, and household head education group variables; See text for details

Table 4. Share of Total Expenditures Devoted to Various Items 1988-2000, by Income Quartile

Home + Veh.

Home + Veh
+ Ins.

Food

Health

Entert. & Pers. Care

Utilities

Mean
(Std. Dev.)

0.26
(0.17)

0.32
(0.17)

0.19
(0.11)

0.07
(0.10)

0.08
(0.07)

0.10
(0.07)

Income Quartile 1
Mean
(Std. Dev.)

0.22
(0.18)

0.29
(0.18)

0.23
(0.13)

0.08
(0.11)

0.08
(0.07)

0.13
(0.10)

Income Quartile 2
Mean
(Std. Dev.)

0.24
(0.17)

0.32
(0.17)

0.20
(0.10)

0.08
(0.12)

0.08
(0.06)

0.11
(0.07)

Income Quartile 3
Mean
(Std. Dev.)

0.27
(0.15)

0.34
(0.15)

0.18
(0.09)

0.06
(0.08)

0.08
(0.07)

0.09
(0.05)

Income Quartile 4
Mean
(Std. Dev.)

0.30
(0.15)

0.35
(0.15)

0.15
(0.08)

0.05
(0.06)

0.09
(0.07)

0.07
(0.04)

Note: Data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey 1988-2000. See text for details.

Table 5a. Effect of Local Unemployment Variation on Fraction of Total Expenditures
Devoted to Quasi-Fixed Expendiures of Home and Vehicle Payments
(1)
(2)
(3)
Unemployment Rate

0.0031
(0.0015)*

Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q2

0.0083
(0.0030)**
-0.0076
(0.0030)*
-0.0068
(0.0032)*
-0.0061
(0.0030)*

Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q3
Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q4
Unemployment Rate * HS

-0.0054
(0.0030)
-0.0091
(0.0046)
-0.0089
(0.0045)

Unemployment Rate * SomeColl
Unemployment Rate * CollPlus

Household Income Quartile
Inc_Q2

0.0416
(0.0154)*
0.0276
(0.0194)
0.0498
(0.0173)**

0.0052
(0.0032)
0.0132
(0.0057)*
0.0265
(0.0057)**

-0.0050
(0.0025)
-0.0070
(0.0049)
0.0003
(0.0047)
(0.0098)**

0.0235
(0.0194)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0464
(0.0257)

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

45563

45243
0.15

45243
0.15

Inc_Q3
Inc_ Q4
Head's Education
High School (HS)
Some College (SomeColl)
College Plus (CollPlus)

Additional Controls
State And Year Fixed Effects
Demographic Variables
Income Group Time Trends
Education Group Time Trends
Observations
R-squared

0.0093
(0.0031)**

0.04

Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; The standard errors (in parentheses) allow for arbitrary correlation between
observations from the same state over time; Demographic variables include age of the household head, family size, race of the
household head, and marital status; See text for details

Table 5b. Effect of Local Unemployment on Fraction of Total Expenditures
Devoted to Quasi-Fixed Expendiures of Home and Vehicle Payments
(1)
(2)
Unemployment Rate

0.0023
(0.0018)

Unemployment Rate * Black

0.0050
(0.0045)
0.0043
(0.0038)

Unemployment Rate * Other-Race

Unemployment * Single Mother

Race
Black
Other Race

0.0106
(0.0037)**

-0.0085
(0.0304)
-0.0478
(0.0258)

Single Mother

Additional Controls
State And Year Fixed Effects
Demographic Variables
Race-Specific Time Effects
Single Mother Time Effects
Observations
R-squared

0.0025
(0.0016)

-0.0435
(0.0232)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

45242
0.15

45242
0.31

Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; The standard errors (in parentheses) allow for arbitrary correlation between
observations from the same state over time; Demographic variables include age of the household head, family size, race of the
household head, marital status, income group variables, and household head education group variables; See text for details

Table 6a. Effect of Local Unemployment Variation on Fraction of Total Expenditure Going to Food, Health, Entertainment, and Utilities
Food

Health

Unemployment Rate

-0.0007
(0.0018)

-0.0020
(0.0013)

-0.0024
(0.0007)**

-0.0022
(0.0018)

Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q2

0.0023
(0.0015)
-0.0018
(0.0018)
-0.0038
(0.0021)

-0.0012
(0.0012)
0.0023
(0.0011)*
0.0041
(0.0012)**

0.0032
(0.0011)**
0.0034
(0.0009)**
0.0031
(0.0007)**

0.0027
(0.0017)
0.0030
(0.0021)
0.0035
(0.0025)

-0.0547
(0.0115)**
-0.0455
(0.0145)**
-0.0560
(0.0147)**

0.0062
(0.0087)
-0.0202
(0.0054)**
-0.0336
(0.0061)**

-0.0080
(0.0070)
-0.0063
(0.0067)
-0.0028
(0.0061)

-0.0312
(0.0103)**
-0.0448
(0.0119)**
-0.0573
(0.0140)**

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

45242
0.14

45242
0.23

45242
0.03

45242
0.21

Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q3
Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q4
Household Income Quartile
Inc_Q2
Inc_Q3
Inc_ Q4

Additional Controls
State And Year Fixed Effects
Demographic Variables
Income Group Time Trends
Observations
R-squared

Entertainment & Pers. Care

Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; The standard errors (in parentheses) allow for arbitrary correlation between
observations from the same state over time; Demographic variables include age of the household head, family size, race of the
household head, marital status, and household head education group variables; See text for details

Utilities

Table 6b. Effect of Local Unemployment Variation on Fraction of Total Expenditure Going to Food, Health, Entertainment, and Utilities
Food

Health

Unemployment Rate

-0.0014 -0.0016
(0.0011) (0.0010)

-0.0002
(0.0009)

U.R * Black

-0.0009
(0.0031)
-0.0020
(0.0037)

-0.0009
(0.0011)
-0.0021
(0.0022)

U.R. * Other-Race

U.R. * Single Mother

Black
Other Race

-0.0011
(0.0036)
0.0091
(0.0171)
0.0259
(0.0275)

Single Mother

Additional Controls
State And Year Fixed Effects
Demographic Variables
Race-Specific Time Effects
Single Mother Time Effects
Observations
R-squared

-0.0006
(0.0009)

Ent & Pers. Care
-0.0002
(0.0005)
0.0015
(0.0013)
0.0009
(0.0011)

0.0013
(0.0012)
-0.0138
(0.0070)
0.0156
(0.0176)

0.0152
(0.0194)

0.0003
(0.0005)

Utilities
0.0008
(0.0005)
-0.0040
(0.0019)*
-0.0014
(0.0015)

-0.0035
(0.0016)*
-0.0163
(0.0085)
-0.0167
(0.0083)

-0.0058
(0.0096)

0.0003
(0.0005)

-0.0014
(0.0020)
0.0444
(0.0114)**
0.0027
(0.0096)

0.0101
(0.0099)

0.0036
(0.0130)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

45242
0.14

45242
0.14

45242
0.23

45242
0.23

45242
0.03

45242
0.03

45242
0.21

45242
0.21

Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; The standard errors (in parentheses) allow for arbitrary correlation between
observations from the same state over time; Demographic variables include age of the household head, family size, race of the
household head, marital status, income group variables, and household head education group variables; See text for details

Table 7a. Effect of Local Unemployment on Total Non-Collateralized Debt Owed
(1)
(2)
(3)
Unemployment Rate

-27.26
(59.42)

Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q2

-89.78
(91.61)
1.35
(82.03)
-13.33
(96.69)
252.54
(134.41)

Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q3
Unemployment Rate * Inc_Q4

Unemployment Rate * HS

154.37
(113.87)
195.20
(122.59)
181.33
(165.01)

Unemployment Rate * SomeColl
Unemployment Rate * CollPlus

Household Income Quartile
Inc_Q2

71.68
(591.58)
985.82
(607.38)
1,023.12
(727.07)

266.19
(100.22)*
1,068.45
(126.80)**
1,851.83
(227.67)**

134.96
(112.14)
810.37
(184.47)**
1,414.56
(192.73)**

-829.01
(685.28)
0.0000
(0.0000)
388.04
(849.34)

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

45563

45242
0.04

45242
0.04

Inc_Q3
Inc_ Q4

Head's Education
High School (HS)
Some College (SomeColl)
College Plus (CollPlus)
Additional Controls
State And Year Fixed Effects
Demographic Variables
Income Group Time Trends
Observations
R-squared

-161.45
(123.86)

0.00

Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; The standard errors (in parentheses) allow for arbitrary correlation between
observations from the same state over time; Demographic variables include age of the household head, family size, race of the
household head, marital status, and household head education group variables; See text for details

Table 7b. Effect of Local Unemployment on Total Non-Collateralized Debt Owed
(1)
(2)
Unemployment Rate

Unemployment Rate * Black
Unemployment Rate * Other-Race

-5.99
(58.5)
146.36
(122.38)
-589.51
(366.82)

Unemployment * Single Mother

Race
Black
Other Race

-162.43
(101.27)

-1,318.81
(722.14)
2,566.29
(2,089.56)

Single Mother

Additional Controls
State And Year Fixed Effects
Demographic Variables
Race-Specific Time Effects
Single Mother Time Effects
Observations
R-squared

-12.63
(56.97)

-433.94
(610.26)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

45242
0.04

45242
0.04

Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; The standard errors (in parentheses) allow for arbitrary correlation between
observations from the same state over time; Demographic variables include age of the household head, family size, race of the
household head, marital status, income group variables, and household head education group variables; See text for details

