                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        INFLATION BAND TARGETING AND OPTIMAL INFLATION CONTRACTS

                                         Frederic S. Mishkin
                                         Niklas J. Westelius

                                        Working Paper 12384
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12384


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2006




We would like to thank Roc Armenter, Lars Svensson, Carl Walsh, Michael Woodford, John Williams and
participants in seminars at Columbia University, Duke University, the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, the New York Area Workshop on Monetary Policy, the International Monetary Fund and
the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any views expressed in this paper are those of the authors only
and not those of Columbia The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Frederic S. Mishkin and Niklas J. Westelius. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal Inflation Contracts
Frederic S. Mishkin and Niklas J. Westelius
NBER Working Paper No. 12384
July 2006
JEL No. E52, E58

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper we examine how target ranges work in the context of a Barro-Gordon (1983) type
model, in which the time-inconsistency problem stems from political pressures from the government.
We show that target ranges turn out to be an excellent way to cope with the time-inconsistency
problem, and achieve many of the benefits that arise under practically less attractive solutions such
as the conservative central banker and optimal inflation contracts. Our theoretical model also shows
how an inflation targeting range should be set and how it should respond to changes in the nature
of shocks to the economy.


Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 817
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

Niklas J. Westelius
Department of Economics
Hunter College, CUNY
695 Park Avenue
New York, NY 10021
niklas.westlius@hunter.cuny.edu
1. Introduction

         With the development of the literature on the time-inconsistency problem in Kydland
and Prescott (1977), Calvo (1978) and Barro and Gordon (1983), there has been an
increasing recognition both by policymakers and the academic literature that solving the
time-inconsistency problem is crucial to the successful conduct of monetary policy. The
time-inconsistency problem arises because there are incentives for the monetary policymaker
to try to exploit the short-run tradeoff between employment and inflation to pursue short-run
employment objectives using expansionary monetary policy, although the result is poor long-
run outcomes – higher inflation, with no benefit on the output front.
         Two approaches have been suggested in the literature to cope with the time-
inconsistency problem: appointment of a conservative central banker (Rogoff, 1985) or
adoption of optimal contracts for monetary policymakers (Walsh, 1995). Although both
these approaches have attractive theoretical properties, they are difficult to implement in
practice. It is likely to be quite difficult to find a central banker with the “right” preferences
and it is hard to believe that politicians would naturally want to appoint central bankers with
different preferences than theirs. Also, an opportunistic government would also be unlikely
to appoint a conservative central banker, so that a regime based on having a conservative
central banker is unlikely to be stable over time.
         Optimal inflation contracts, usually thought of as pecuniary contracts between the
government and the monetary authorities, are also unattractive because central bankers are
not paid very highly, and this is particularly true in the United States, where the chairman of
the Board of Governors is paid far less than many economics professors. Thus, it is highly
unlikely that governments would be willing to write an inflation contract that would give a
central banker sufficient incentives to produce optimal policy. Furthermore, public officials
are almost never paid on the basis of their performance and we know of no central banker
anywhere in the world that has performance-based pay. It also seems politically untenable
to write an explicit inflation contract in which the central bank is rewarded for undershooting
the optimal inflation rate.1 Finally, in order for the inflation contract to be optimal it requires

1
  Svensson (1997) also points out that if a low inflation level is associated with high unemployment, then an
inflation contract may be politically difficult to implement since it rewards a central banker when inflation is
low.


                                                                                                                   3
that we know how much the central banker values his office and that the monetary costs
inflicted on the central baker would have to be translatable into utility units. This feature
seems unappealing from a practical standpoint.
         This paper argues that inflation band targeting, in which the central bank is assigned a
target range and bears some cost if inflation goes outside the range, presents an alternative
and more feasible approach to address the time-inconsistency problem. Indeed, inflation band
targeting has already been adopted by many central banks. For example, the Reserve Bank of
New Zealand is required to keep inflation within the range of 1-3% and in case of failure the
Governor is subject to dismissal. Bank of England has a target range of plus/minus one
percent around a 2% inflation target, and if it fails the Governor is required to write a public
letter to the government explaining why. We show that inflation band targeting regimes
belong to a specific subclass of inflation contracts characterized by a particularly simple
form, making them easy to adopt.2 In fact, we are not arguing against the feasibility of
inflation contracts in general, but rather the infeasibility of an optimal inflation contract as
discussed above.
         Note that our model only focuses on how inflation targeting can effectively deal with
distortions arising from the time-inconsistency problem.3 This, however, is only one aspect
of inflation targeting and does not exclude additional benefits such as better management of
expectations through improved communication and policy transparency, nor does it preclude
a view of inflation targeting as a commitment mechanism to optimal policy inertia as
emphasized by Giannoni and Woodford (2003).
         Inflation band targeting has several advantages relative to either appointment of a
conservative central banker or optimal inflation contracts. First it eliminates the problem of
finding the perfect central banker with the right preferences. Second, the framework is likely
to be stable over time once the government has agreed to it. Third the target range provides
added flexibility to the inflation targeting regime that is more palatable to politicians. Fourth,
it is a simple framework that is easily implemented, and in contrast to optimal inflation
contracts it does not require knowledge of how much the central banker values his office.


2
  Inflation band targeting regimes are also closely related to a dismissal rule as discussed by Walsh (2002).
3
  We do not address the stabilization bias that the time-inconsistency problem gives rise to in a New Keynesian
framework (e.g Clarida et al, 1999). Instead our analysis focuses on the case where the objectives of the central
bank deviate from what is socially optimal due to political pressure.


                                                                                                                4
         Although inflation band targeting has these attractive features, to our knowledge there
is no research that provides a theoretical treatment of how inflation target bands can be
designed to mitigate the time-inconsistency problem.4 It is not clear that inflation band
targeting has desirable properties. Indeed, some economists, including one of the authors of
this paper, have been skeptical of inflation band targeting because it might produce too much
focus on the edges of the range that can lead to the central bank to concentrate too much on
keeping the inflation rate just within the range, rather than hitting the midpoint of the range
(Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen, 1999, and Mishkin, 2001).
         In this paper we analyze how inflation target ranges work in the context of a Barro-
Gordon (1983) type model, but which has a more realistic setting in that the time-
inconsistency problem stems not from the preferences of the central bank, as in Barro-
Gordon, but instead from political pressures from the government. We demonstrate that
inflation target bands or a range can achieve many of the benefits of these other strategies,
providing a possible reason why this strategy has been used by so many central banks. Our
theoretical model also enables us to outline how an inflation targeting range should be
designed optimally and how it should change when there are changes in the nature of shocks
to the economy.
         To analyze the properties of inflation band targeting, we first examine a canonical
benchmark model of optimal monetary policy and then illustrate the time-inconsistency
problem which derives from discretionary monetary policy when the preferences of the
government differs from those of the central bank. We then demonstrate what the optimal
inflation contract would look like, and then develop the theory of inflation band targeting,
showing how it replicates many of the features of the optimal inflation contract.



4
  Amano, Black and Kasumovich (1997) examines whether the literature on exchange rate target zones can be
applied to inflation band targeting. Erceg (2002) interpret the target range as a confidence interval of inflation
derived from the preferences of the policymakers. The optimal bandwidth should then be chosen to reflect the
desired point on the trade-off locus between inflation and unemployment volatility. Orphanides and Wieland
(2000) recognise that inflation band targeting implies non-linear monetary policy and show that such policy is
optimal when preferences are zone-quadratic or the structure of the economy exhibits zone linearity. Neither of
these papers, however, consider inflation band targeting as a solution to the time-inconsistency problem. Athey,
Atkeson, and Kehoe (2005) consider the Barro-Gordon set up when the central bank has private information
about the state of the economy. Discretion allows the central bank to react to this information but it also gives
rise to a desire to over-stimulate the economy. Thus the public has to decide the degree of discretion is should
give the central bank. The authors show that an inflation cap can implement the optimal solution.


                                                                                                                 5
2. A Canonical Benchmark Model of Optimal Monetary Policy


The structure of the economy is deliberately kept parsimonious in order to bring the intuition
of our result to the forefront. The aggregate supply relationship is described by the simple
expectation-augmented Phillips curve,


                        (       )
        u t = u n + b π te − π t + ε t                                            (1)


where, u n is the natural rate, u t is the realized unemployment rate in period t, ε t is an i.i.d

supply shock with mean 0 and fixed variance σ ε2 , and b is a positive constant. The realized

inflation and expected inflation in period t are denoted by π t and π te , respectively. It is

worth commenting on the fact that equation (1) differs from recent specifications of the New
Keynesian Phillips curve (e.g., Clarida, Gali and Gertler,1999) in two important aspects.
First, expectations are set over current inflation and not over future inflation as is the case
under staggered price/wage setting. Second, the supply shock or cost-push shock, ε t , does

not exhibit persistence. These two assumptions simplify the framework considerably and
allows us to gain a simple and attractive intuition on how inflation band targeting might
mitigate the time-inconsistency problem. The public forms its expectations rationally, i.e.,


        π te = Et −1 [π t ]                                                       (2)


where Et −1 refers to rational expectations formed with the complete information set up until

and including period t-1. The central bank sets the inflation rate directly, but does not have
perfect control i.e.,


        π t = π tcb + z t


where z t is a normally distributed control error with mean 0 and a fixed variance σ z2 .
Additionally, the central bank determines the inflation rate after observing the public’s


                                                                                                     6
expectations and the supply shock. Consequently, since the supply shock is not included in
the public’s information set at t-1, the central bank can mitigate supply shock effects on real
activity by creating surprise inflation.
         Following a large literature we assume that the social welfare function at time t is
specified over the inflation and unemployment rate in the following manner,



         Wt = −
                   1
                   2
                     [       (
                     ωπ π t − π *   )2
                                              (
                                         + ω u ut − u n   )]
                                                          2
                                                                                          (3)



where ω π is the weight on inflation volatility around its socially optimal level π * , and ω u is
the weight on unemployment volatility around its natural level.5
         Now suppose that the monetary authorities could credibly commit to a state-
contingent rule of the inflation rate. The optimal rule can then be derived by maximizing the
sum of current and future discounted welfare levels subject to the Phillips curve and rational
expectations i.e.,


                ⎧∞          ⎫
         Max Et ⎨∑ β iWt +i ⎬                             subject to equations (1) and (2)
          πt
                ⎩ i =0      ⎭


Since there are no endogenous state variables, the maximization problem collapses to a one
period problem. The optimal inflation rate at time t can then be expressed as:


                         ⎛   ωub ⎞
         π top = π * + ⎜⎜              ⎟ε
                                     2 ⎟ t
                                                                                          (4)
                          ω
                         ⎝ π + ω u b   ⎠


Equation (4) indicates that it is optimal to set the inflation rate equal to the social optimal
level of inflation and to respond to shocks that forces the current level of unemployment
away from its long-run level. The shock management depends crucially on the preference
parameters, ωu and ωπ . The higher the relative weight is on unemployment stability the

5
 See Reis (2004) for a formal derivation of the Phillips-curve and the welfare function (3) based on a general
equilibrium framework.


                                                                                                                 7
more volatile is inflation.6 Combining (1) and (4), we can derive the equilibrium
unemployment rate as:


                     ⎛       ωu b 2 ⎞
         ut = u n + ⎜⎜1 −                ⎟ε − bzt
                                       2 ⎟ t
                                                                                     (5)
                     ⎝    ωπ +  ω  u b   ⎠


According to (4) and (5), average inflation and unemployment are equal to their target
values. By substitution (4) and (5) into the welfare function we can obtain the unconditional
expected welfare level in equilibrium as:



         E [W ] = −     [ω π Var (π ) + ω uVar (u )]
                      1
                                                                                     (6)
                      2
where,
                                      2
                     ⎛ ωub ⎞ 2
         Var (π ) = ⎜⎜             ⎟ σ ε + σ z2
                                 2 ⎟
                                                                                     (7)
                       ω
                     ⎝ π + ω u b   ⎠
                                          2
                    ⎛        ωub 2 ⎞ 2 2 2
                    ⎜
         Var (u ) = ⎜1 −                ⎟ σε + b σ z
                                      2 ⎟
                                                                                     (8)
                    ⎝    ω π + ω  u b   ⎠


Since equations (4)-(8) represents optimal monetary policy, we will use this case as a
benchmark in the analysis that follows. Any deviation from the optimal inflation rule
described in equation (4) must hence lead to a decline in welfare.


3. Monetary Policy Under Discretion When Objectives of the Government and the
Monetary Authorities Differ


One undesirable feature of the Barro-Gordon (1983) model, first raised by McCallum (1995)
and elaborated on by Mishkin (2000), is that the time-inconsistency problem by itself does
not imply that a central bank will pursue expansionary monetary policy which leads to
inflation. Simply by recognizing the problem that forward-looking expectations in the wage-

6
 Under the New Keynesian Phillips Curve where expectations are forward-looking, the optimal rule would
display inertia. That is, optimal policy would, as labeled by Woodford (2003), be history dependent.


                                                                                                         8
and price-setting process creates for a strategy of pursuing expansionary monetary policy,
monetary policymakers can decide to “just not do it” and avoid the time-inconsistency
problem altogether.7 Indeed, central bankers are fully aware of the time-inconsistency
problem, but the time-inconsistency problem remains nonetheless because politicians are
able to put pressure on central banks to pursue overly expansionary monetary policy.
         In this paper, we modify the Barro-Gordon (1983) model for two reasons: First it
produces a more realistic setting in which the central bank is unable to pursue optimal
monetary policy because the government may be motivated, for political reasons, to
maximize a different welfare function than (3) under discretion. Although we find our
modification theoretically attractive, the results on the benefits of inflation band targeting
would not differ if we instead used a Barro-Gordon approach in which the time-inconsistency
problem occurs because of the preferences of the central bank. The second reason for
modifying the Barro-Gordon model is more substantive. By modifying the Barro-Gordon
model, we obtain an additional dimension that affects the design of an inflation targeting
regime, the degree to which the central bank can be insulated from political pressures.
         In particular we assume that the relevant utility function for the government can be
described as follows,



         U tg = −
                    1
                    2
                     [   (
                      ωπ π t − π *   ) + (ω
                                     2
                                              u        (
                                                  + δ ) ut − u *   )]
                                                                   2
                                                                                            (9)



If δ > 0 , the government gains some extra utility from lowering unemployment volatility
and if u * < u n the government also gets some extra utility from lowering the unemployment
level below its natural level. We argue that the reason for the government’s utility function to
differ from the social welfare function is that lower unemployment (output) volatility and
lower unemployment both increase the probability of reelection. Hence the government has
two objectives; (1) maximize the public’s welfare level and (2) increase the probability of
being reelected. These objectives are not always aligned. For example, the government may

7
 In the typical Barro-Gordon framework the monetary authorities are assumed to have an overly optimistic
unemployment target (i.e., a target below the natural rate), which produces a desire to exploit the short-run trade
off between inflation and employment and hence an on average higher then optimal inflation rate in
equilibrium. As Blinder (1997) points out, the monetary authorities could simply chose to target the natural rate
and thereby avoid the time-inconsistency problem.


                                                                                                                 9
prefer a more stable and low unemployment rate in order to signal to potential voters that it is
more competent than its political rivals.8 As Persson and Tabellini (2000) points out, this
behavior is rational if agents cannot contemporaneously observe the inflationary effects of
expansionary monetary policy, which is likely since inflation typically lags economic
activity.
         The preferences of the monetary authorities on the other hand are assumed to mirror
the social welfare function. This is because we believe that they are better modeled as
technocrats who understand that they cannot gain utility from being overly expansionary.
However, if the central bank is not fully independent, the government is likely to have some
influence over monetary policy. To incorporate this notion we assume that the monetary
authorities are maximizing the following objective function at time t,


         U tcb = λU tg + (1 − λ )Wt                                                        (10)


where 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1 , and reflects the degree to which the monetary authorities care about the
government’s utility level.9 The parameter λ could thus be thought of as the degree of
political influence over monetary policy.10 It can be shown that equation (10), in its reduced
form, is equivalent to the objective function in the typical Barro-Gordon setting, but has the
added advantage of recovering structural parameters essential to our analysis..
         Clearly, it would be socially optimal if the monetary authorities could credibly
commit to the inflation rule described by equation (4). However, as Kydland and Prescott
(1977) argue, no such commitment exists when policy is discretionary in nature.
Consequently, the monetary authorities, knowing that the public is aware that they are unable
to resist the political influence from the government, do not believe that they can credibly
8
  See Persson and Tabellini (2000) for a survey of this literature. Fair (1978) presents empirical evidence that
the incumbent government is more likely to be reelected in periods of high economic growth.
9
  Cukierman (1992) also models central bank independence. He considers two possibilities: (i) the government
and the central bank has the same objective function but the politicians have a lower discount factor β than the
central bank (ii) the government has a greater desire than the central bank to create surprise inflation. He then
measures the degree of central bank independence as the weighted average of the government’s and the central
bank’s objective functions.
   In our model λ is exogenously determined. However, it is quite possible that λ would be positively related
10

to u − u and δ . That is, the greater the preference misalignment between the government and the central
    n       *

bank, the more influence the government tries to exert over the central bank.



                                                                                                              10
manipulate inflation expectations. That is, they take inflation expectations as given when
maximizing U tcb . The optimization problem facing the monetary authorities under discretion
can then be described as follows:


               ⎧∞            ⎫
        Max Et ⎨∑ β iU tcb+i ⎬                   s.t.      equation (1)
         πt
               ⎩ i =0        ⎭


where π te+i , for all i are taken as given. Since there are no endogenous state variables the
maximization problem collapses into a one period specification. The first order condition
gives us the following reaction function of the central bank:


                        (ω u + δ )                      ⎛ ω u + λδ ⎞
                                                                   ⎟⎟b(u t − u n )
        π tcb = π * +                λb(u n − u * ) + ⎜⎜                             (11)
                          ωπ                            ⎝    ω π    ⎠


Equation (11) suggests that, under discretion, the monetary authorities have three concerns
when determining π t . The first is to set inflation as close as possible to the social optimal

level of inflation, π * , i.e., the long-run inflation target. The second concern is to appease the
pressure from the government by raising the inflation rate above its long-run target in order
to push the unemployment rate closer to u * . As equation (11) shows, if the unemployment
target of the government coincides with that of the central bank, the pressure on the central
bank to inflate the economy disappears. The third concern of the monetary authorities is to
stabilize unemployment around its natural rate. By adjusting the inflation rate the monetary
authorities can mitigate the effect of a supply shock on real activity. Notice that the response
to a supply shock is increasing in δ . The higher δ is, the greater is the pressure from the
government on the central bank to stabilize real activity relative to inflation.
        Let us solve for the long-run equilibrium levels of the inflation and unemployment
under discretion. The private sector forms its expectations rationally but cannot observe the
supply shock, ε t . Taking the expectations of (11) using equation (1) we get the following
expressions for the equilibrium inflation and unemployment rate:




                                                                                                  11
                     (ωu + δ )                        ⎛    (ωu + λδ )b ⎞⎟
        πt = π * +               λb(u n − u * ) + ⎜⎜                        ε
                                                                         2 ⎟ t
                                                                                 + zt   (12a)
                        ωπ                            ⎝ ωπ + (ω u + λδ )b ⎠


                     ⎛    (ω u + λδ )b 2             ⎞
        u t = u n + ⎜⎜1 −                            ⎟ε t − bz t
                                                     ⎟                                  (12b)
                     ⎝ ωπ + (ω u + λδ )b
                                         2
                                                     ⎠


Equation (12a) and (12b) tell us several interesting facts regarding the determinants of the
level and volatility of equilibrium inflation and unemployment. First, the expected long-run
unemployment rate is simply equal to the natural rate. Secondly, expected long-run inflation
is above the social optimal level and equal to:


                       (ω u + δ )
        π LR = π * +                λb(u n − u * )                                      (13)
                         ωπ


This inflation bias arises in our model because the central bank is not fully independent. That
is, the monetary authorities will on average be pressured by the government to inflate the
economy. The central bank will raise inflation until the marginal cost of pushing inflation
above its socially optimal rate equals the perceived marginal benefits from giving in to
political pressure. However, since the public behaves rationally it will expect a higher level
of inflation and hence there is no impact on real activity on average. Figure 1 illustrates this
result assuming that π * = 2%. Inflation expectations and inflation are measured on the x-axis
and the y-axis, respectively. The dotted 45-degree line represents all the feasible equilibrium
points. The solid line represents the central banks optimal inflation level given the public’s
inflation expectations under discretion (assuming that the supply shock is zero). The
intersection of these two schedules represents the steady state level of inflation. The figure
indicates an equilibrium inflation of approximately 2.8% and thus a bias of 0.8%.
       From (12a) and (12b) we can derive the long-run inflation and unemployment
volatility under discretion as:




                                                                                                 12
                            (ω u + λδ )b ⎞⎟ 2 2
                                                2
                      ⎛
         VarD (π ) = ⎜⎜                   2 ⎟
                                              σε +σ z
                      ⎝ ω π + (ω u + λδ )b ⎠                                                (14a)


                           (ω u + λδ )b 2 ⎞⎟ 2 2 2
                                                    2
                      ⎛
         VarD (u ) = ⎜⎜1 −                2 ⎟
                                              σε +b σ z                                     (14b)
                      ⎝ ω π + (ω u + λδ )b ⎠


When comparing equations (14a) and (14b) with equations (7) and (8), we see that if λδ > 0 ,
then inflation (unemployment) volatility is excessively high (low) under discretion. The
excess inflation volatility is negatively related to the degree of central bank independence
and positively related to how much the government cares about stabilizing real activity
relative to the central bank. Figure 2 shows the central bank’s optimal inflation rate (y-axis)
given the level of the supply shock (x-axis). The dashed line represents the optimal rule
derived in section 2 and the solid line represents the supply shock management under
discretion. Note that the slope of the reaction function is flatter under the optimal rule; hence
there is excess inflation volatility under discretion.11
         Another interesting result is that our simple model predicts that the level of inflation
is positively correlated with the volatility of inflation through the stabilization bias
parameter, δ . Svensson (1997) derives a similar prediction by introducing employment
persistence. In his model, the persistence insures that surprise inflation has a positive effect
on employment in the future and thus provides an additional incentive for the policymakers
to both be overly expansionary and react stronger to supply shocks. In equilibrium this
causes a larger inflation bias and more volatile inflation than in the absence of employment
persistence. In contrast, the positive relationship between the level and volatility of inflation
in our model stems entirely from the government’s desire to push unemployment volatility
below its socially optimal level.




11
   Svensson (1997) also finds inflation volatility too high under discretion. However, the source of the distortion
stems from persistence in employment. If supply shocks have a persistent effect on employment, then there is
an extra incentive for the monetary authorities to mitigate the effect of the supply shock on real activity.
Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) examine discretionary monetary policy in a New Keynesian framework and
find that persistence in the cost-push shock leads to excess inflation volatility. This, however, is due to the
forward looking behavior of price setters in the economy which is absent in our and Svensson’s (1997) models.


                                                                                                                13
         Given equations (13) and (14), the unconditional expected welfare level in
equilibrium can be expressed as:



                     [   (         )
         E [W ] = − ωπ π LR − π * + ωπ VarD (π ) + ωuVarD (u )
                   1
                   2
                                 2
                                                                 ]               (15)



Comparing (15) to (6) we can identify three determinants of the welfare distortions under
discretion:


(i)    The government’s unemployment target, u * : Given the level of independence, the more
       misaligned the government’s unemployment target is with the natural level, the higher
       is the long-run inflation bias and the lower is welfare.


(ii)   The government’s stabilization bias, δ : Given the level of independence, the
       government’s excessive weight on unemployment stability has two negative effects on
       overall welfare. First, the more misaligned the government is with the monetary
       authorities regarding the stabilization objective the smaller is the unemployment
       volatility and hence the greater is inflation volatility. Second, the inflation bias is
       positively related to δ . This stems from the cost structure of the welfare function. The
       higher δ is, the higher is the perceived cost by the government of any given difference
       between the natural rate and the government’s unemployment target and the more
       pressure it will lever on the monetary authorities to be overly expansionary


(iii) Degree of political influence: Since incomplete central bank independence allows the
       government to affect monetary policy decisions, the degree of political influence affects
       both the inflation bias and inflation volatility. That is, an increase in political influence
       causes a rise in the average level and volatility of inflation. This positive relationship is
       consistent with empirical evidence (see Alesina and Summers (1993) and Franzese
       (1998)).




                                                                                                  14
3.1 Complete Independence under Discretion


The previous section suggests that a simple way of reducing the excess inflation level and
volatility is to decrease the influence that the government has over monetary policy i.e.,
lowering λ . It is instructive to consider the situation when the central bank is completely
independent ( λ = 0) . In this case the reaction function (12) of the monetary authorities is
reduced to:


                      ⎛ ωu ⎞
        π tcb = π * + ⎜⎜
                        ω
                              (
                           ⎟⎟b u t − u n   )                          (16)
                      ⎝ π⎠


The expression shows that the monetary authorities no longer have a desire to on average
push inflation above its social optimal level. Additionally, the stabilization bias is not present
anymore. In a sense the technocrats are now left alone to conduct monetary policy. Taking
the expectation of (16) and using equation (1), it is clear that equilibrium inflation and
unemployment are now equal to equation (4) and (5), respectively. Hence if the central bank
is completely independent, then it does not matter whether monetary policy is discretionary
in nature or simply follows a pre-specified rule. The optimal inflation path will be
implemented. This result arises because the public is aware that, although monetary policy is
discretionary, there exists no incentive for the monetary authorities to systematically exploit
the short-run relation between unemployment and inflation. Hence, no commitment is
necessary. As Svensson (1997) and Blinder (1997) point out, if the monetary authorities
simply target the natural rate of unemployment the time-inconsistency problem disappears.
They argue that this is exactly what central banks do today. Our framework is consistent with
this view, but only if the monetary authorities can operate without pressure from the
government.
       It is worth noting that in the typical New Keynesian framework in which future
expected future inflation appears as an argument in the Phillips curve, complete
independence would not be enough to ensure that optimal monetary policy is implemented
under discretion. As Clarida et al (1999) show, in that case discretionary monetary policy
would still lead to a stabilization bias even if the central bank maximized the correct welfare


                                                                                                15
function. By using a standard neoclassical Phillips curve in which current, not future,
expected inflation is an argument in the Phillips cure, we can avoid this aspect of optimal
policy and concentrate on the distortions that arise due to political pressure. Thus, in our
setting, it will be convenient to view equation (16), as the optimal reaction function under
discretion.


4. Optimal Inflation Contracts


In order to understand the relationship between inflation band targeting and optimal inflation
contracts, we need to examine the approach to reduce the welfare distortions under discretion
suggested by Walsh (1995) and Persson and Tabellini (1993). The idea is to write a contract
between the government and the monetary authorities which penalizes the monetary
authorities if they deviate from the optimal level of inflation. At first it might appear bizarre
for the government to agree upon a contract that will limit their ability to influence monetary
policy. The point is, however, that the contract is written before expectations are determined
and thus before the government is faced with the temptation to exploit the short-run trade-off
between inflation and unemployment. Realizing its inability to refrain from this temptation
once it arises, the government is willing to tie its hands by accepting the contract.
         Most of the literature considers linear contracts that inflict a constant marginal
penalty on the central bank when it raises inflation above its optimal level. As Svensson
(1997) shows, these contracts are equivalent to the case of appointment of a target-
conservative central banker.12 We will now show that a quadratic inflation contract can
eliminate both the inflation bias and the excess volatility in our model. Additionally, this
quadratic inflation contract is equivalent to the combination of a target-conservative and
weight-conservative that we describe in appendix A.
         Define the quadratic inflation contract as an added penalty structure to the central
banks objective function U tcb defined by equation (10) i.e.,




12
  We refer to a target-conservative central banker as one that has an inflation target lower than the optimal rate.
Svensson (1997) does not use the term “target-conservative central banker.” Instead, he refers to this set-up as a
constant inflation targeting regime.


                                                                                                                16
                                β
                    (
       U tcb − α π − π * −  )   2
                                  (π − π )
                                        * 2
                                                                                     (17)



The first linear term of the contract inflicts a positive constant marginal cost on the monetary
authorities when inflation is raised above the socially optimal level and thus can undo the
inflation bias. The second quadratic term of the contract inflicts an increasing marginal cost
and will hence discourage the monetary authorities from reacting too strongly to supply
shocks and thus can undo the stabilization bias. The first order condition of the maximization
problem can be expressed as:


        ∂U tcb
        ∂π tcb
                    [               ]
               − α + β (π − π * ) = 0                                                (18)



The second term of expression (18) is the marginal cost that the quadratic contract inflicts on
the monetary authorities. Deriving the new reaction function from (18) we have:


                     ⎡ (ω u + δ )λb(u n − u * ) − α ⎤ ⎛ ω u + λδ   ⎞
        π   cb
                 =π +⎢
                    *
                                                    ⎥ + ⎜⎜         ⎟⎟b(u t − u n )   (19)
                                 ωπ + β             ⎥⎦ ⎝ ωπ + β
            t
                     ⎢⎣                                             ⎠


Clearly the optimal parameters of the inflation contract must transform (19) into (16). This is
true under the following parameterization:


                                                            ⎛ ωπ ⎞
       α = (ω u + δ )λb(u n − u * )           and,   β = λδ ⎜⎜   ⎟⎟
                                                              ω
                                                            ⎝ u⎠


Figure 3 shows the relationship between the marginal cost imposed by the optimal inflation
contract on the monetary authorities for different levels of inflation (see the dashed line). As
indicated by expression (18) the marginal cost is positive at the optimal inflation level and
increases linearly as inflation rises. In the appendix we show that this solution is indeed
equivalent to the optimal conservative central banker.




                                                                                                17
5. Modeling Inflation Band Targeting


Inflation band targeting regimes can be seen as a subset of the class of inflation contracts.
The government and the monetary authorities agree upon an inflation range within which
inflation must be kept, and if the central bank fails to contain inflation within the specified
range some form of punishment is inflicted on the monetary authorities. There are two main
components of inflation band targeting; (1) the specified range and (2) the degree of
accountability. Let us denote the upper and lower boundaries of the target range by π and
π , respectively, and the cost of overshooting (undershooting) the range by C .13 Because the
monetary authorities cannot perfectly control inflation there will always be a positive
probability of failing to hit the target range. The new objective function facing the central
bank at time t can thus be written as:


         U tcb − C{1 − F (π − π )} − C{F (π − π )}                                         (20)


where U tcb is defined by (10) , F (•) is the cumulative distribution function of the control

error zt , π = π * + BW , and π = π * − BW . For example, an inflation band target of 1-3%

can be described by π * = 2 and a bandwidth of BW = 1 . The F.O.C can be derived as:


         ∂U tcb
         ∂π tcb
                     [
                − C f (π * + BW − π ) − f (π * − BW − π ) = 0    ]                         (21)



The first term of expression (21) corresponds to the F.O.C under discretion. The second term
is the marginal cost of missing the target range. Comparing (18) and (21) we can see how
similar the set-up is to an inflation contract. The difference is simply the functional form of
the marginal cost structure.


13
  The framework suggests that the edges of the target range are “hard” in the sense that there is a zero tolerance
of missing the range. Svensson (2001) on the other hand has argued for “soft” edges in order to avoid
unnecessary instability in output, and interest rates. Although there might be advantages to “soft” edges, our
results indicate that “hard” edges do quite well in getting close to the optimal contract and much better than we
thought.


                                                                                                               18
        In fact, equation (21) suggests that the set of contracts involving inflation band
targeting could be broadened further. For example, we could allow for an asymmetric
accountability structure, greater penalties for larger deviations from the target, a midpoint
that differs from the social optimal level, or simply defining an upper boundary but not a
lower one, a so-called inflation cap. It is clear that such generalizations of the framework
would allow us to find an optimal design that could move us even closer to optimum than the
set-up that we consider here. However there are several reasons why we are not taking this
direction. First, in many inflation band targeting regimes the main cost of missing the target
range is the embarrassment effect and there is little reason for this cost to be asymmetric.
Additionally, from a practical point of view, it is inherently difficult to set the right level of
accountability in the first place, and it would be even harder to specify the correct difference
between levels of accountability assigned to the lower and upper boundary. Second, setting a
midpoint lower than the optimal inflation level may be politically infeasible. Indeed, the
more opportunistic the government is the lower the midpoint has to be in order to offset the
increased inflation bias. For the same reasons we objected to optimal inflation contracts in
which the central bank is rewarded for undershooting the optimal inflation rate, we believe
that setting a midpoint below the social optimal inflation rate is politically untenable. We
believe there is little incentive for a government to agree to such an arrangement. Third, as
Eggertson (2004) shows, discretionary policy could under certain circumstances give rise to a
reversed inflation bias i.e., a deflation bias. In that case an inflation floor would be needed
and just having an inflation cap would not make much sense. Furthermore, central banks
particularly dislike deflation and the zero inflation level may thus provide an unavoidable
lower boundary.14
        Because we assume that the control error is normally distributed there is no closed
form solution for the reaction function of the central bank. Consequently, in the proceeding
analysis we rely upon simulations in order to understand the effects that the inflation range
has on the long-run inflation level and volatility. 15 The parameter values chosen for the

14
   For example, Switzerland only specifies an upper boundary of 2%, but has made it clear that they would not
accept deflation.
15
   The first order condition is derived under the assumption of i.i.d supply shocks. We do this to make our
analysis of the inflation band target more tractable. One way in which previous literature has incorporated
persistence in the unemployment rate is by including a lagged unemployment rate in the Phillips curve (e.g.,
Svensson (1997)). This would not change our result substantially as long as inflation stays within the target


                                                                                                            19
simulation exercises are based on U.S. annual inflation and unemployment data. The slope of
the Philips curve, b, is equal to 0.64 as suggested by Reis (2004). The standard deviations of
the control error and supply shock are set at 0.6 and 1, respectively.16 The natural rate is
assumed to be 4% and the optimal level of inflation is set at 2%.17 The preference parameters
of the social welfare function and the degree of political influence are obviously chosen in a
more ad hoc manner. We assume that unemployment and inflation stabilization are given
equal importance (i.e., ωπ = ωu = 1) and that the degree of independence is 0.5. 18 The latter
implies that the central bank puts an equal weight on the utility of the government and the
social welfare level. We further assume that the government has an unemployment target of
3.5% ( i.e., u n − u * = 0.5% ) and cares 5 times as much about controlling unemployment
versus inflation volatility (i.e., δ = 4). Obviously these numbers are not based on any
empirical estimates, but they do not seem too unrealistic. The annual inflation bias amounts
to approximately 0.8.


5.1 The Marginal Cost Structure




range. However, if the supply shock is large, the persistence in unemployment would cause inflation to be
outside the range for several periods. In this case the central bank would pay the cost (C) every period until
inflation converges within the target range. In reality, this repeated violation may cause the public to doubt the
commitment by the central bank. Consequently, it may be optimal for the central bank to specify a state
contingent inflation target range as long as inflation is outside the original target band. Indeed, this is exactly
what occurred in 2003 in Brazil. Alternatively, if a country is adopting an inflation band targeting regime while
inflation is well above its long-run target, such as in Canada and Chile, then it may be optimal to start with a
appropriately specified midpoint target and then continuously adjust it until it converges to the desired long-run
rate.
16
   Using survey data on inflation expectations since 1978 (provided by the University of Michigan’s Research
Survey Center) and the implicit GDP deflator we estimate the volatility of the control error to be approximately
0.6. Our estimate for the volatility of the supply shock is approximately consistent with Hodrick-Prescott
filtered annual average unemployment data since 1970.
17
   The value of the natural rate is probably a low estimate for the U.S. However, the level of the natural rate is
not important in our simulations. It is the difference between the government’s unemployment target and the
natural rate that is relevant. The optimal inflation rate of 2% is chosen because several existing inflation
targeting regimes centers the target range on this level.
18
   The equal weights could be viewed as a reflection of the dual mandate that the Federal Reserve is working
under. Other central banks such as the European Central Bank has a hierarchical mandate where price stability
is its foremost objective, perhaps indicating a lower weight on unemployment volatility relative to inflation
volatility. The measure of political influence is consistent with Cukierman’s (1992) estimate of the legal
independence of the Fed during the 80s. Cukierman’s index ranges from zero (minimal independence) to one
(maximium independence). He estimates the overall legal independence of the Fed to be 0.51.


                                                                                                                20
The key to inflation band targeting is to understand how the marginal cost structure affects
monetary policy under discretion. Figure 3 shows the marginal cost structure for inflation
band targeting as a function of the inflation level, assuming a normally distributed control
error. The solid line represents the marginal cost under inflation band targeting while the
dashed line the marginal cost of the optimal inflation contract. The bandwidth is set at 1.2%
and that accountability level at 3.19 There are several characteristics of the marginal cost
structure under inflation band targeting worth pointing out:


(i)     Symmetric around the midpoint: The marginal cost is symmetric around the midpoint
        of the target range. Since the band is centered around the social optimal level of
        inflation, the cost of over and undershooting the target range is the same. Hence the
        marginal cost must be zero at the midpoint. If the inflation rate is above (below) the
        midpoint, the marginal cost is positive (negative) and encourages the monetary
        authorities to lower (raise) inflation. Consequently, inflation band targeting reduces
        the incentives of the monetary authorities to give in to political pressure and over-
        stabilize real activity. Additionally, since the marginal cost of increasing inflation
        above its socially optimal level is relatively higher than under discretion, the inflation
        bias must be lower. However, because the marginal cost is zero at the midpoint it is
        impossible to completely eliminate the inflation bias. Notice that this is in contrast to
        the inflation contract which allows for a positive marginal cost at the socially optimal
        level of inflation and can therefore completely eliminate the inflation bias.


(ii)     Increasing marginal cost inside the range: The marginal cost of missing the target
        range increases as inflation moves away from the midpoint and towards the edges of
        the range. It peaks approximately at the boundaries. 20 Hence, similar to the optimal
        inflation contract, the slope of the marginal cost structure is positive within the target

19
   These values were chosen to provide the clearest picture of the marginal cost structure under inflation
targeting regime. As Table 1(b) shows, the optimal design corresponds to a bandwidth of 1.2% and a level of
accountability of 5.
20
   The maximum marginal cost occurs when
                       ⎡
                               2
                                  BW (π * − π )        2
                                                          BW (π * − π ) ⎤
          π = π * + BW ⎢1 + e σ 2               1 − eσ
                                                        2

                                                                        ⎥
                                                                          .
                       ⎣                                                ⎦
Hence the maximum marginal cost occurs outside the boundaries of the target range. However, as BW / σ
becomes large the maximum marginal cost approaches the boundary .


                                                                                                              21
         range. However, in contrast to the optimal inflation contract, the normality of the
         error term makes the marginal cost non-linear and therefore prevents the regime from
         completely eliminating the excess inflation level and volatility within the target
         range.21


(iii)    Decreasing marginal cost outside the range: As inflation goes beyond the bandwidth
         the absolute value of the marginal cost decreases.22 The diminishing marginal cost
         outside the range is due to the probability distribution of the control error. The further
         away the optimal inflation rate is from the edges of the target range the less likely it is
         for the realized inflation to fall within the target range. That is, the marginal cost of
         exiting the target range is close to zero when inflation is well outside the target range
         and will therefore have no impact on monetary policy. For example, if the economy is
         hit by a large supply shock, the central bank might find it optimal to set the inflation
         rate outside the target range. At that point there is no incentive for the monetary
         authorities to restrain themselves from giving in to political pressure. As a result, the
         inflation level and volatility outside the target range remain close to their levels under
         discretion. As is clear from figure 3, the optimal inflation contract does not suffer
         from this drawback since the slope of the marginal cost structure does not depend on
         how far inflation is from its optimal level.


From the preceding discussion, it seems natural to design the optimal inflation band target in
such a way that it approximates the marginal cost structure of the optimal inflation contract.
The set-up presented in the previous section identifies two determinants of the shape of the
marginal cost schedule.


(i)      Bandwidth (BW): Figure 4(a) shows the effect that a change in the bandwidth has on
         the marginal cost schedule. An increase in the bandwidth flattens the marginal cost
         around the midpoint, while a decrease has the opposite effect. An increase in the

21
   In Appendix B we show that under a quadratic distribution of the control error the marginal cost structure is
indeed linear within the target range.
22
   As indicated in the previous footnote, the marginal cost is actually increasing within a small interval
immediately outside the boundaries. However, when the bandwidth is reasonable large relative to the control
error this interval becomes very small.


                                                                                                               22
         bandwidth would hence increase the incentives within the target range to give into
         political pressure.23


(ii)     Accountability ( C ): Figure 4(b) shows how a change in the degree of accountability
         affects the marginal cost structure. An increase in the cost of missing the target range
         increases the marginal cost proportionally at any given inflation level. Hence,
         increasing the degree of accountability should make the monetary authorities less
         inclined to give into political pressure.


5.2 Reaction Function of the Central Bank under Inflation Band Targeting


To show how inflation band targeting affects equilibrium inflation and volatility we proceed
by simulating the reaction function of the central bank. Figure 5 shows the central bank’s
optimal inflation rate as a function of expected inflation. The solid and dashed lines represent
the reaction function under inflation band targeting and pure discretion, respectively. Again,
the bandwidth is 1.2% and the degree of accountability is 3. The supply shock is assumed to
be zero. The first thing to notice is that the central bank has a relatively more muted response
to changes in expected inflation within the target range than under discretion. This is because
the target range imposes an additional marginal cost of raising inflation above the midpoint.
The public understands this and expects a lower inflation level than under discretion. The
lower equilibrium level of inflation is represented by the intersection between the solid line
and the dotted 45-degree line.
         Figure 6 shows the central bank’s desired inflation rate as a function of the realized
supply shock. The solid and dashed line represents the reaction function under inflation band
targeting and pure discretion, respectively. In order to focus on the effect that the target range
has on shock management we eliminate the inflation bias by setting the government’s
unemployment target equal to the natural rate. The response of the monetary authorities to a
given supply shock is clearly lower within the target range relative to pure discretion. Indeed,

23
   Interestingly, if the bandwidth is smaller than one standard deviation of the control error i.e BW < σ Z , then
the slope of the marginal cost structure (close to the midpoint) is increasing when the bandwidth is widened.
This is due to the increasing absolute value of the slope of the normal PDF that occurs within one std away from
its mean.


                                                                                                               23
the supply shock response within the range is approximately the same as under the optimal
rule. However, if the supply shock is large such that the desired inflation rate is outside the
range, then the response by the monetary authorities is similar to that under pure discretion.
This means that inflation band targeting reduces inflation volatility within but less so outside
the target range.


5.3 Optimal Bandwidth and Accountability


Figures 7(a)-(d) show the effect that the bandwidth has on welfare, equilibrium inflation and
inflation/unemployment volatility, respectively. Figure 7(d) illustrates that a narrow
bandwidth may result in high inflation volatility since the probability of missing the inflation
target is great. On the other hand, a wide bandwidth does little to reduce volatility within the
target range and hence can also generate high inflation volatility. Figure 7(b) and 7(d)
therefore suggested that, given an initial narrow (wide) bandwidth, a widening of the
bandwidth may indeed reduce (increase) inflation volatility and increase (decrease)
unemployment volatility. Figure 7(c) depicts the relationship between the bandwidth and
equilibrium inflation. A narrow bandwidth suggests a higher marginal cost, given the
inflation level, and thus should reduce the inflation bias. However, if the bandwidth is too
narrow the probability of missing the target range may be so high that the inflation bias is
greater than under a wider bandwidth. This is because inflation outside the target range
remains close to its level under discretion. Hence an increase in the probability of missing the
target range causes a rise in inflation expectations and forces the monetary authorities to
increase inflation on average in order to alleviate the downward pressure on real activity.24
Figure 7(c) also highlights that the inflation bias can never be fully eliminated with a
symmetric inflation band target. As mentioned earlier, this is because the marginal cost due
to the target range is zero at the social optimal level of inflation.25 Figure 7(a) shows the
resulting welfare level under various bandwidths. A too narrow bandwidth results in a high

24
   Additionally when the bandwidth is below one standard deviation of the control error, any further reduction
in the bandwidth decreases the slope of the marginal cost curve and hence causes inflation to rise. Also notice
that the equilibrium inflation rate is outside the target range for bandwidths that are extremely narrow (see
section 5.6.)
25
   If the midpoint is allowed to be lower than the social optimal level or the level of accountability at the upper
boundary is higher than that of the lower boundary, then it is possible to eliminate the bias completely.


                                                                                                                 24
probability of missing the target range and will hence produce a high level and volatility of
inflation. On the other hand, a too wide bandwidth, while decreasing the probability of
missing the target range, does little to reduce the inflation level and volatility within the
target range. Additionally, at the optimal level of the bandwidth (i.e., 1.2), the welfare level is
not very sensitive to changes in the bandwidth. This suggests that the cost of deviating from
the optimal bandwidth may not be very large. Indeed, this may be one reason why inflation
band targeting is an attractive regime to implement in practice.
        Figures 8(a)-(d) show the effect that the degree of accountability has on welfare,
equilibrium inflation and inflation/unemployment volatility, respectively. Not surprisingly,
figures 8(c) and 8(d) show that increased accountability reduces both the inflation level and
inflation volatility. Of course, a higher level of accountability also increases unemployment
volatility. Consequently, as shown in figure 8(a), there exists a welfare maximizing level of
accountability that trades off the reduction in the inflation bias and volatility against a higher
level of unemployment volatility. In practice the level of accountability is probably the
hardest parameter to specify optimally. However, if the overall welfare benefit of having
monetary policy respond optimally to supply shocks is relatively small, then a too high level
of accountability that reduces the inflation bias significantly, but over-stabilizes inflation, is
less costly than a too low level of accountability which gives rise to a high inflation bias and
under-stabilizes inflation.
        Table 1(a) shows the inflation level, inflation/unemployment volatility, and welfare
under discretion and under the optimal rule/optimal contract for various values of δ and u * .
The inflation level under discretion varies from 2% to 4.24% while the standard deviations of
inflation and unemployment lie within the intervals of 0.92-1.14% and 0.57-0.67%,
respectively. The optimal rule (and the equivalently optimal inflation contract) implies an
inflation and unemployment volatility of approximately 0.75 and 0.81 standard deviations,
respectively. Table 1(b) shows the inflation level, inflation/unemployment volatility, and
welfare under the optimal inflation band targeting regime. It also shows the corresponding
optimal values of the bandwidth and degree of accountability.
        From these simulations we can see that the inflation band targeting regime does very
well in reducing both the inflation bias and the excess volatility. Of course, as mentioned in
section 5.1, it cannot completely eliminate the welfare losses that arise under full discretion.


                                                                                                 25
For example, the lowest welfare level under discretion is -3.31 ( δ = 6 and u * = 3 ). This is a
welfare loss of 2.7 relative to the optimal rule/inflation contract. The optimal inflation band
target increases the welfare level to -0.67 which is only 0.06 lower than the optimal
rule/inflation contract. This corresponds to approximately a 98% reduction of the initial
welfare loss.
         Table 1(b) shows that the inflation volatility under the optimal inflation targeting
regime is lower than under the optimal rule/inflation contract while the opposite is true for
unemployment volatility. The reason is that the band target attempts to eliminate both the
excess volatility and the inflation bias. However, at the point where the excess inflation
volatility is eliminated, the marginal benefits from reducing the inflation bias is still greater
than the marginal cost of over-stabilize inflation. Hence inflation (unemployment) volatility
will be below (above) its optimal level.
         Table 1(b) also tells us how to design an optimal inflation band target under various
values of δ and u * .The bandwidth only varies between 0.9 to 1.4 while the degree of
accountability varies between 2.1 to 8.8. Furthermore, the optimal bandwidth does not seem
to be affected much by the degree of the governments volatility bias, i.e., δ . Indeed, this
distortion is most effectively reduced by a high degree of accountability since it reduces both
the inflation bias and volatility. However, the simulations seem to suggest that a country
where the government has a relatively low unemployment target (i.e., a low u * ) should have
both a tighter band and a higher degree of accountability.
         Finally, in order to asses the likelihood of missing the target range, it may be
convenient to express the optimal bandwidth in terms of standard deviation of inflation. The
final matrix in table 1(b) shows that there is little variation in this measure across our set of
simulation. Indeed, it varies between 1.39 and 1.89. Assuming that the inflation rate is at the
midpoint and that the inflation distribution is approximately normal, these numbers would
indicate that the optimal inflation band targeting regime implies a 5-17% probability that the
target range will be breached.26 Intuitively this makes sense since the marginal cost structure




26
  The distribution of inflation will not be normally distributed under inflation band targeting, but will have
thicker tails because of the non-linear cost structure. However, the normal distribution is still likely to provide a
good approximation.


                                                                                                                  26
is fairly close to that of the optimal inflation contract as long as realized inflation is not too
far outside the target range.
        Indeed, these numbers for the optimal bandwidth are not out of line with what we see
in countries that have adopted inflation band targets. In a sample of fourteen countries in
which there has been a stable operating framework for at least two years and where the
country was not in the middle of an ongoing adjustment from high to low inflation, the
average ratio of bandwidth to standard deviation is 1.7, well within the range of what our
simulations find.27


5.4 Supply Shocks and Optimal Design


Because of the quadratic form of the welfare function any theoretical solution which
completely eliminates the welfare distortions has to be characterized by a linear marginal
cost structure. This means that the level of supply shock volatility becomes irrelevant to the
optimal design of the inflation contract. One interesting feature of the inflation band targeting
set-up is that its optimal design is sensitive to the level of supply shock volatility.
         Table 2, shows how the optimal design of inflation band targeting changes as the
volatility of the supply shock increases. The basic intuition for changing the width of the
inflation bands and the degree of accountability is that higher supply shock volatility makes it
more likely that inflation will end up outside the target range. As the first two rows of table 2
show, in this case it becomes optimal to increase both the bandwidth and the degree of
accountability. The widening of the bandwidth makes it more likely that inflation will be
contained within the boundaries of the target range. On the other hand, the inflation volatility
within the target range increases. The increase in the degree accountability reduces this
problem by making it increasingly costly to deviate from the socially optimal level of
inflation i.e., the slope of the marginal cost structure within the target range increases. It is



27
  The data was collected from the IFS and individual central banks. The fourteen countries included in the
sample are Australia, Canada, Chile, Czech Republic, Israel, Iceland, Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, and U.K. Note however, the variation in this measure for individual countries is
quite high, ranging from 0.4 to 3.9. One problem with this calculation (because it is for individual countries
over very short sample periods) is that the standard deviation of inflation for the particular sample period may
not accurately reflect the unconditional standard deviation because the sample period is unusual.


                                                                                                             27
also worth pointing out that the ability of the inflation band targeting regime to reduce
welfare distortions is lower at higher levels of supply shock volatility.
       One potentially important implication of table 2 is that developing countries, which
typically are characterized by greater supply shock volatility, should implement an inflation
band targeting regime with a high degree of accountability and a wide target range. In
addition, they will benefit less from an inflation band targeting regime relative to countries
that are less prone to large supply shocks.


5.5 Central Bank Independence as a Mean of Reducing Welfare Distortions


As is clear from previous discussions, a reduction in the political influence over monetary
policy (i.e., λ ) would reduce the welfare distortions under discretion. There are potentially
many ways to achieve such a reduction. First, the obvious way to limit political influence is
to increase central bank autonomy. Second, an increased degree of transparency and better
communication with the public by the central bank could potentially prevent the government
from using monetary policy for reelection purposes. Third, legislation such as the Maastricht
treaty could clarify the goals of monetary policy and make it harder for the government to
influence monetary policy outcomes. Indeed, all these approaches to decrease λ seem to be
present in the inflation band targeting regimes that has been implemented in reality. Since
different countries are likely to allow different degree of political influence, it would be
instructive to examine how the optimal design would change as λ changes.
       Table 3, displays the optimal degree of accountability and bandwidth, as well as
welfare levels, for various levels of political influence. From our analysis of discretionary
monetary policy, we know that the more influence the government has over monetary policy
the higher is the equilibrium inflation level and volatility. Thus, as table 3 indicates, just by
reducing λ , there is a substantial improvement in welfare even without the use of inflation
band targeting. Therefore insulating the central bank from political influence through
communication strategies, price stability mandates and legislated central bank independence
are another important dimension of institutional design to improve monetary policy
performance.




                                                                                                 28
        Since a higher degree of accountability reduces both the inflation level and volatility,
it seems reasonable to expect that a country with a relatively less independent central bank
should implement an inflation band framework with a relatively higher degree of
accountability. Table 3 clearly shows that this implication holds. The relationship between
political influence and the optimal bandwidth, however, is less obvious. Indeed, as we see in
table 3, the optimal bandwidth does not seem to change much with changes in λ and does not
have a monotonic relationship with λ .


5.6 When does Inflation Band Targeting not help?


Inflation band targeting does not always improve the discretionary outcome. It may be the
case that the equilibrium inflation rate lies outside the target range. In fact, figure 9 shows the
case where the reaction function of the central bank intersects the 45-degree line at the same
point as under discretion. This situation is likely to arise if the initial inflation bias is large,
the target range is very narrow, and the degree of accountability very low. Under these
circumstances the marginal cost of giving in to political pressure is not high enough to make
the framework credible. Rational agents realizing this will still expect an inflation rate
identical to that under discretion.
        The optimal bandwidth of the target range is easy to calculate, so unless the designers
of the inflation band target are incompetent, it is unlikely that they would choose a target
range that is too narrow. However, there well may be limits on how high accountability can
be set. We have seen an example of this in Europe with the implementation of the Growth
and Stability Pact in which countries are supposed to be fined if they exceed the deficit limit
of 3% of GDP. However, when countries have exceeded this deficit limit there has been a
reluctance to fine them. It is true that there still has been a cost for these countries when they
exceed the deficit limit, but it does illustrate that accountability may be limited because if a
punishment is felt to be too draconian, it will not be imposed. This has an important
implication. In order to avoid needing a level of accountability (C) that is unenforceable, the
inflation bias needs to be kept low and this requires that the amount of political influence
over the central bank ( λ )needs to be limited. This analysis thus provides another reason




                                                                                                       29
why the measures to promote central bank autonomy mentioned in the previous section are
important elements of a well-designed inflation targeting regime.
        It is also possible that the there exists multiple equilibria. Figure 9(b) shows the same
cases as in 9(a) but with a higher degree of accountability. The reaction function crosses the
45-degree line three times. The first equilibrium occurs within the target range but very close
to the upper boundary. The second equilibrium occurs outside the target range but at a lower
inflation level than the original inflation level under discretion. However, this equilibrium is
not stable. If inflation expectations falls below the second equilibrium inflation will converge
towards the equilibrium inside the target range. On the other hand, if for some reason
expected inflation falls above the second equilibrium then inflation will converge to the
initial inflation level under discretion.
        Figure 9(c) shows how the framework in 9(a) and (b) can be made stable by
increasing the degree of accountability further. The equilibrium inflation is well inside the
target range and the there is no other equilibrium outside the target range.


6. Conclusion


        In this paper we have examined how target ranges work in the context of a Barro-
Gordon (1983) type model, but which has a more realistic setting in that the time-
inconsistency problem stems not from the preferences of the central bank, as in Barro-
Gordon, but instead from political pressures from the government. In contrast to conjectures
in the literature that are skeptical about the benefits of inflation target ranges, we find that
target ranges turn out to be an excellent way to cope with the time-inconsistency problem and
provide incentives that get monetary policy to be very close to optimal policy in which the
time-inconsistency problem is avoided altogether.
        Our theoretical model also shows how an inflation targeting range should be set and
how it should respond to changes in the nature of shocks to the economy. We find that
inflation band targeting has a marginal cost structure that is very close to that of the optimal
inflation contract as long as realized inflation is not too far outside the target range. This tells
us that the target range has to be wide enough so that realized inflation ends up inside it most
of the time, and this also tells us that the more uncertainty there is about the inflation process,



                                                                                                   30
the wider the target range has to be. Indeed, this is what we actually find in practice, where
emerging market countries, which are more likely to have more uncertainty about inflation
outcomes, tend to choose wider target ranges.
       The theoretical framework here thus shows how inflation band targeting has desirable
characteristics and why central banks who target inflation have adopted target ranges as part
of their monetary policy framework.




                                                                                             31
References


Athey, Susan, Atkeson, Andrew, and Patrick Kehoe (2005), “ The Optimal Degree of
Discretion in Monetary Policy,” Econometrica, 73(5), 1431-1476.


Amano, Robert, Black, Richard and Marcel Kasumovich (1997). “A Band-Aid Solution to
Inflation Targeting,” Working Papers, Bank of Canada, 97-11.


Alesina, Alberto., and Lawrence H. Summers (1993). “Central Bank Independence and
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 25(2), 151-162.


Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon (1983). “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a
Natural Rate Model,” Journal of Political Economy, 91(4), 589-610.


Bernanke, Ben S., Laubach, Thomas, Mishkin, Frederic S. and Adam S. Posen (1999).
Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the international Experience (Princeton: Princeton
University Press).


Blinder, Alan S. (1997). “What Central Bankers Can Learn from Academics – and Vice-
Verca,” Jounal of Economic Perspectives, 11(2): 3-19.


Calvo, Guillermo (1978). “On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in the Monetary
Economy,” Econometrica,46(6):1411-1428.


Clarida, Richard, Gali, Jordi, and Mark Gertler (1999). “The Science of Monetary Policy: A
New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37 (4): 1661-1707.


Cukierman, Alan (1992). Central Bank Strategy: Credibility and Independence – Theory and
Evidence (Cambridge: MIT Press).




                                                                                           32
Eggertsson, Gauti (2004). “The Deflation Bias and Committing to Being Irresponsible,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Forthcoming


Erceg, Christopher J. (2002). “The Choice of an Inflation Target Range in a Small Open
Economy,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 92(2):85-89.


Fair, Ray C. (1978). “The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 60:159-173.


Franzese, Robert J. (1999). “Partially Independent Central Banks, Politically Responsive
Governments, and Inflation,” American Journal of Political Science, 43 (3):681-706.


Giannoni, Marc, and Michael Woodford (2003). “Optimal Interest-Rate Rules: I. General
Theory,” NBER Working Paper #9419.


Kydland, Finn., and Edward Prescott (1977). “Rules Rather than Discretion: The
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (3): 473-492.


McCallum, Bennett T. (1995). “Two Fallacies Concerning Central-Bank Independence,”
American Economic Review,” 85(2): 207-11


Mishkin, Frederic S. (2000). “What Should Central Banks Do?” Federal Reserve Bank of
St.Louis Review, 82(6): 1-13.


Mishkin, Frederic S. (2001). “Issues in Inflation Targeting,“, in Price Stability and the Long-
Run Target for Monetary Policy, (Bank of Canada: Ottawa, Canada, 2001): 203-222.


Orphanides, Athanasios and Volker Wieland (2000), “Inflation Zone Targeting,” European
Economic Review, 44(7): 1351- 1387.




                                                                                             33
Reis, Ricardo (2003). “Where is the Natural Rate? Rational Policy Mistakes and Persistent
Deviations of Inflation from Target,” Advances in Macroeconomics, 3(1): 1-38


Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (1993). “Designing Institutions for Monetary
Stability,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 39:53-89.


Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000). Political Economies: Explaining Economic
Policy (Cambridge: MIT Press).


Rogoff, Kenneth (1985). “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Target,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100(4):1169-89.


Svensson, Lars E. O. (1997). “Optimal Inflation Targets, “Conservative” Central Banks, and
Linear Inflation Contracts,” American Economic Review, 87(1):98-114.


Svensson, Lars E. O. (2001). “Independent Review of the Operation of Monetary Policy in
New Zealand,” Federal Reserve Bank of New Zealand.


Walsh, Carl (1995). “Optimal Contracts for Central Bankers,” American Economic Review,
85:150-67.


Walsh, Carl (2002). “When Should Central Bankers be Fired,” Economics of Governance,
37:1-21.




                                                                                            34
Appendix A: Analysis of Appointment of a Conservative Central Banker


One of the most prominent remedies that the literature has put forth in order to reduce the
welfare distortions that arise under discretion is to appointment of a conservative banker.
There are two ways in which a central banker can be conservative: (1) he can be weight-
conservative, that is put a higher weight on inflation volatility than is socially optimal, (2) he
can be target-conservative, that is have an inflation target below the social optimum.


Weight-Conservative Central Banker


The approach of the weight-conservative central banker was first suggested by Rogoff
(1985). In his model, as in most of the literature on the inflation bias problem, he assumes
that the monetary authorities are targeting a “too low” unemployment rate. In equilibrium,
under rational expectations, the low unemployment target then leads to an inflation bias.
Rogoff shows that by appointing a weight-conservative central banker the inflation bias can
be reduced, but only at the expense of higher unemployment volatility. Since there is no
initial excess inflation volatility in Rogoff’s model, the increased unemployment volatility is
welfare reducing.28
        A common criticism of this general framework is that central bankers are technocrats
and do not have an inherent desire to push unemployment below its natural rate (see Blinder
(1997)). Our model, however, is not subject to this criticism since we assume that the central
bank is targeting the right level of unemployment. It is the government that has an overly
optimistic unemployment target. Hence, it is only through the assumption of incomplete
independence that the inflation bias arises. This distinction turns out to be important when
analyzing the effects of the appointing a weight-conservative central banker.
        Let us start by specifying the preferences of the weight conservative central banker as
follows:



         U tC = −
                    1
                    2
                     [   (
                      ωπ π t − π *   )
                                     2
                                               (
                                         + ω uC u t − u n   )]
                                                            2
                                                                                        (A1)

28
  Of course, when there is an initial excess inflation volatility (i.e., too low unemployment volatility), the
increase in unemployment volatility is likely to be welfare improving (see Lockwood, Miller and Zang (1995)).


                                                                                                           35
        By Substituting U tC for Wt in equation (10) we get the new objective function of the
central bank:


        U tcb = λU tg + (1 − λ )U tC .


Solving the modified maximization problem facing the monetary authorities, we can derive
the new reaction function as:


                (ω u + δ )                    ⎛ ω u + λδ + (1 − λ )(ω uC − ω u ) ⎞
π tcb = π * +                λb(u n − u * ) + ⎜⎜                                 ⎟b(u t − u n )          (A2)
                  ωπ                                        ωπ                   ⎟
                                              ⎝                                  ⎠


From equation (A2) it is clear that ω uC only enters into the third term and will not impact the
source of the inflation bias. Hence, a weight-conservative central banker reduces the inflation
volatility, but it does not affect the inflation bias.
        This result is different from Rogoff (1985) who finds that a weight-conservative
banker is able to reduce the inflation bias. The reason for our result being different is that
the government, not the central bank, advocates the low unemployment target. Hence, the
political pressure to systematically exploit the short-run Phillips curve in order to push
unemployment below its natural rate remains and so appointing a weight-conservative central
banker does not reduce the inflation bias. We believe that our result is intuitively more
sensible than Rogoff’s. Ironically, since there is an initial excess inflation volatility in our
model, the reduction in inflation volatility is welfare improving and not welfare reducing as it
is in Rogoff’s set-up.
        Comparing equation (A2) to the optimal reaction function under discretion (16), we
can derive the preferences of the optimal central banker (i.e., the weight, ω uC , which
neutralizes the impact of the parameters λ and δ on the stabilization objective) as:


                              λ
        ω uC = ω u −               δ                                                              (A3)
                        (1 − λ )


                                                                                                                36
From equation (A3) we can also see that there is a limit to how low the weight can be. That
is, depending on δ and the degree of political oversight, λ , it might not be feasible to
eliminate all the excess inflation volatility.


Target-Conservative Central Banker


Svensson (1997) shows that by appointing a central banker with an inflation target lower than
the socially optimal level, the inflation bias can easily be eliminated. However, he also
emphasizes that the target-conservative central banker does not affect the excess inflation
volatility arising under discretion. . Unlike Svensson’s model, where the source of the
inflation bias is internal to the central bank (i.e., it is the central bank that has a “too low”
unemployment target), in our set-up the inflation bias stems entirely from political influence
over monetary policy.
         To see the implication of this difference we denote the new inflation target by π T ,
and express the central bank’s new objective function as:


         U tcb = λU tg + (1 − λ )U IT t                                                       (A4)


where,

         U tIT = −
                     1
                     2
                       [
                       ωπ (π t − π T ) + ω u (u t − u n )
                                      2                  2
                                                              ]                               (A5)



and with U tg remaining equal to (9). Solving the modified maximization problem facing the
monetary authorities, we can derive the new reaction function as:


              ⎡                         (ω u + δ )                 ⎤ ⎛ ω u + λδ ⎞
π tcb = π * + ⎢(1 − λ )(π T − π * ) +                λb(u n − u * )⎥ + ⎜⎜       ⎟⎟b(u t − u n )      (A6)
              ⎣                           ωπ                       ⎦ ⎝    ω π    ⎠




                                                                                                            37
From equation (A6), it is clear that π T does not affect the stabilization objective of the
monetary authorities. Hence, the target-conservative central banker can only reduced the
inflation bias not the excess inflation volatility. Comparing (A6) to the optimal reaction
function under discretion (16), it is then straightforward to derive the optimal inflation target
as:


                       ⎛ 1 ⎞ (ω u + δ )
            πT =π* −⎜          ⎟        λb(u n − u * )                              (A7)
                       ⎝ 1 − λ ⎠ ω π




That is, the central bank’s optimal inflation target is lower than the socially optimal inflation
rate, i.e., π T < π * . Similarly, Svensson (1997) derives the optimal inflation target to equal
the social optimal level of inflation less the initial inflation bias. A potentially important
difference between the optimal inflation target derived by Svensson (1997) and equation
(A7) is that the differential between the target and the social optimal level is, in our case,
greater than the initial inflation bias. This stems from the separation of the preferences of the
monetary authorities and the government. In our set up the monetary authorities have to be
even more conservative in order to compensate for the lack of commitment by the
government to the new inflation target.


Combining the Weight-Conservative and Target-Conservative Central Banker


When a weight-conservative central banker also is target-conservative, then it is possible to
eliminate both welfare distortions existing under discretion. Under this scenario the new
reaction function of the central bank equals:



π   cb         ⎡
                        (
         = π + ⎢(1 − λ ) π − π +
            *             T   *  (ωu + δ )
                                 )                 * ⎤
                                           λb(u − u )⎥ + ⎜⎜
                                               n                                (
                                                          ⎛ ω u + λδ + (1 − λ ) ω uC − ω u   ) ⎞⎟b(u       − un   )
    t
                                   ω                                    ωπ                    ⎟        t
               ⎣                     π               ⎦ ⎝                                      ⎠

Inserting equation (A1) and (A7) into the expression above we get the optimal reaction
function under discretion described in equation (16). Hence, the low inflation target and the




                                                                                                             38
low weight on unemployment volatility ensure that equilibrium inflation level and volatility
are equal to their respective social optimal level.
       To see that the optimal weight-conservative and target-conservative central banker is
equivalent to the optimal inflation contract discussed in the text, we can simply rewrite α
and β as


                                                      ⎛ ωπ ⎞ C
        α = ω π (π T − π * )   and     β = (1 − λ )⎜⎜       (          )
                                                           ⎟⎟ ω u − ω u ,
                                                      ⎝ ωu ⎠


       where π T and ω uC are defined by equation (A3) and (A7).




                                                                                              39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
