                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              USING A HEDONIC MODEL OF SOLAR RADIATION TO ASSESS
              THE ECONOMIC EFFECT OF CLIMATE CHANGE: THE CASE OF
                           MOSEL VALLEY VINEYARDS

                                            Orley Ashenfelter
                                            Karl Storchmann

                                          Working Paper 12380
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12380


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Orley Ashenfelter and Karl Storchmann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Using a Hedonic Model of Solar Radiation to Assess the Economic Effect of Climate Change:
The Case of Mosel Valley Vineyards
Orley Ashenfelter and Karl Storchmann
NBER Working Paper No. 12380
July 2006
JEL No. C2, Q5

                                            ABSTRACT

        In this paper we provide a simple, credible method for assessing the effects of climate change
on the quality of agricultural land and then apply this method using a rich set of data on the vineyards
of the Mosel Valley in Germany. The basic idea is to use a simple model of solar radiation to
measure the amount of energy collected by a vineyard, and then to establish the econometric relation
between energy and vineyard quality. Coupling this hedonic function with the elementary physics
of heat and energy permits a straightforward calculation of the impact of any climate change on
vineyard quality (and prices). We show that the variability in vineyard quality in this region is due
primarily to the extent to which each vineyard is able to capture radiant solar energy, so that these
data provide a particularly credible “experiment” for identifying and measuring the appropriate
hedonic equation.
        Our empirical results indicate that the vineyards of the Mosel Valley will increase in value
under a scenario of global warming, and perhaps by a considerable amount. Vineyard and grape
prices increase more than proportionally with greater ripeness, so that we estimate a 3°C increase
in temperature would more than double the value of this vineyard area, while a 1°C increase would
increase prices by about 20 percent.


Orley C. Ashenfelter
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
c6789@princeton.edu
Using a Hedonic Model of Solar Radiation to Assess the Economic Effect of
          Climate Change: The Case of Mosel Valley Vineyards


                                       Orley Ashenfelter
                                        Princeton University
                                                and
                                       Karl Storchmann
                                         Whitman College

                                            June 2006

                                            Abstract


        In this paper we provide a simple, credible method for assessing the effects of climate
change on the quality of agricultural land and then apply this method using a rich set of data
on the vineyards of the Mosel Valley in Germany. The basic idea is to use a simple model of
solar radiation to measure the amount of energy collected by a vineyard, and then to establish
the econometric relation between energy and vineyard quality. Coupling this hedonic
function with the elementary physics of heat and energy permits a straightforward calculation
of the impact of any climate change on vineyard quality (and prices). We show that the
variability in vineyard quality in this region is due primarily to the extent to which each
vineyard is able to capture radiant solar energy, so that these data provide a particularly
credible “experiment” for identifying and measuring the appropriate hedonic equation.
         Our empirical results indicate that the vineyards of the Mosel Valley will increase in
value under a scenario of global warming, and perhaps by a considerable amount. Vineyard
and grape prices increase more than proportionally with greater ripeness, so that we estimate a
3°C increase in temperature would more than double the value of this vineyard area, while a
1°C increase would increase prices by about 20 percent.


1 Introduction
       In this paper we provide a simple, credible method for assessing the effects of climate
change on the quality of agricultural land and then apply this method using a rich set of data
on the vineyards of the Mosel Valley in Germany. The basic idea is to use a simple model of
solar radiation to measure the amount of energy collected by a vineyard, and then to establish
the econometric relation between energy and vineyard quality. Coupling this hedonic
function with the elementary physics of heat and energy permits a straightforward calculation
of the impact of any climate change on vineyard quality (and prices). Although we show that
this approach can, in principle, be applied to any crop grown on any land, the vineyards of the
Mosel are a particularly attractive place to assess this method for measuring the effect that

                                             1
expected climate changes may have on quality and relative prices. Since the vineyards of this
Valley are situated near the far northern boundary feasible for grape production, they differ
enormously in their suitability for grape growing. We show that this variability is due
primarily to the extent to which each vineyard is able to capture radiant solar energy, so that
these data provide a particularly credible “experiment” for identifying and measuring the
appropriate hedonic equation.
       Our approach follows and extends the so-called “Ricardian” approach applied by
Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, and Shaw (1994) to the study of effects of climate change on
agriculture. Their empirical research, based as it is on hedonic models from highly
aggregated data, has been critiqued and extended to consider difficult issues of functional
form and specification by Schlenker, Hanemann, and Fisher (2005) and (2006), and
Deschenes and Greenstone (2006). These more recent studies generally find considerable
heterogeneity in the expected effects of climate change. Depending on the region considered,
climate change may lead to either positive or negative effects on land values, with
considerable uncertainty about the aggregate effect. Our approach follows this more recent
work by studying a very specific area and type of crop and by establishing the economic
relation between solar radiation and farm quality for this crop type. Our approach has the
advantage that it provides a detailed and credible sketch of precisely how global warming
affects crop quality, which is at the heart of discussions of climate change. The disadvantage
of our approach is that it provides only one component of an aggregate estimate of the overall
effect of climate change.
       Our empirical results indicate that the vineyards of the Mosel Valley will increase in
value under a scenario of global warming, and perhaps by a considerable amount. Vineyard
and grape prices increase more than proportionally with greater ripeness, so that we estimate a
3°C increase in temperature would more than double the value of this vineyard area, while a
1°C increase would increase prices by about 20 percent.
       The paper is structured as follows: In Section 2 we explain how solar radiation is
captured by a vineyard and how an energy value can be calculated for each vineyard site
using the basic physics of solar panel construction. Section 3 discusses the data we use for
the analysis, including the data on vineyard quality that we have constructed and the hedonic



                                            2
characteristics of the vineyards we study. In Section 4 we present the estimates of our hedonic
model of vineyard site quality, while Section 5 contains our calculations of the impact of
possible climate change on the quality distribution of vineyard sites. We summarize our
findings in Section 6.


2. Radiation Use Efficiency, Solar Panels, and Vineyards
        Commercial viticulture is found only between 350 and 500 latitude. Located between
49.610 and 50.340 latitude, the vineyards of Germany’s Mosel region are thus at the cold limit
for grape growing. As a result, all Mosel vineyards depend on special site characteristics to
ensure winter survival and ripening (Gladstones, 1992). As we will show, with these growing
conditions a good vineyard site must be, among other things, a natural solar panel,
maximizing the incoming solar radiation with its angle of incidence and orientation.
        A. Radiation Use Efficiency
        Surprisingly, formal research on the influence of light on crop growth dates primarily
from the late 1950s (DeWit, 1959). Some 20 years later Monteith (1977) provided the basis
for calculating the quantitative relationship between intercepted solar radiation (energy) and
the amount of dry biomass produced. This relationship is expressed by the term radiation use
efficiency (RUE), and it measures the mass accumulation in gram dry matter per MJ-1m-2 of
intercepted solar radiation. It is this biomass that represents the economically valuable output
of a plant.
        Subsequent studies have estimated RUE for different crops (Sinclair and Muchow,
1999), and this research continues today. It is likely that the RUE is fairly similar for the
members of a specific crop but varies significantly among crop species. As shown in Table 1,
C4 species such as maize, sorghum, and sugarcane have significantly higher RUE than do the
C3 species, such as potatoes, wheat, barley, rice, soybeans, and sunflowers.1 The only study of
the RUE of grapevines (vitis vinifera) of which we are aware is for the Merlot variety
(Castelan-Estrada, 2001). With an RUE between 0.57 and 0.70 g MJ-1, this study indicates
that, in terms of RUE, vitis vinifera belong to the least efficient plants. It follows that the

1
 C4 crops produce less complicated nutrients, e.g. sugar and starch, whereas C3 crops produce more complex
and higher quality nutrients like oil and protein.



                                                  3
energy intensity of a particular site is far more important for grapevines than it is for wheat or
cauliflower.
       B. Vineyards as Solar Panels
       Only a part of solar radiation reaches the surface of the earth directly (beam radiation).
Another part is scattered by the atmosphere and reaches the surface as so-called diffuse
radiation. The sum of both is referred to as total solar radiation. However, it is apparent that
total solar radiation is highly dependent on the amount, kind and density of clouds, and varies
with time and place. For the sake of simplicity engineers often calculate the so-called
extraterrestrial radiation, that is, the radiation that would be available if there were no
atmosphere (Duffie and Beckman, 1991). This is precisely the simplification we will use to
construct a measure of the differences in solar radiation input provided by the different
vineyards of the Mosel Valley. Since all these vineyards lie in a very small geographical
region, we know that differences across vineyards in total radiation are due primarily to
differences in site characteristics and not to differences in the weather.
       Figure 1 shows the extraterrestrial radiation on a horizontal surface for different
geographical latitudes in the northern hemisphere. It is apparent that there is a large difference
in both the total amount of energy as well as its distribution over the year. While a plane at the
equator receives the maximum energy amount of about 13.2 GJm-2a-1, the incoming radiation
decreases with increasing latitude. With an energy level of 9.1 GJm-2a-1 the Mosel-Saar-
Ruwer region obtains only 2/3 of the total maximum energy amount. Moreover, whereas the
energy flux at the equator is comparatively evenly distributed, the radiation pattern becomes
increasingly focused on June 21 the further north one gets. Daily solar radiation in the north is
often even greater in summer than that at equatorial latitudes because of the north’s long
summer days. As Figure 1 indicates, the farther north one goes, the less energy there is
available during off-peak times in late spring and late summer. For instance, at the end of
October, the main harvest time for Riesling grapes in the Mosel valley, there is only a photon
flux of 13 MJm-2day-1 compared to 37 MJm-2day-1 at the equator, that is, only a third of the
maximal achievable amount.
       This energy deficit at high latitudes can be remedied by the right slope. Figure 2 shows
the solar radiation for the Mosel city of Trier (49.80 north) by inclination (assuming a



                                             4
southern orientation). Although a plane surface only receives 9.1 GJm-2a-1 (as already shown
in Figure 1) increasing inclination enhances the energy level significantly. A tilt of 450
provides more than 40% more energy (12.8 GJm-2a-1), and only 3% less than the maximum
amount achievable at the equator. Moreover, the distribution over the year strikingly
resembles that of the equator; the energy flow from March to October is almost the same.
Hence, a vineyard’s inclination can almost perfectly offset its unfavorable latitude. However,
this does not mean that the steeper vineyards are always better. Vineyards that are tilted more
than 450 receive less energy than those with less inclination (at this latitude), and the energy
received is also more unequally distributed over the course of the year. For example, an
inclination of 950 yields only slightly more solar radiation than a horizontal surface. The
optimal inclination is dependent on the latitude: The farther north, the steeper the optimal site
must be. With respect to the Mosel valley the optimal tilt is about 450.
         The calculations thus far are based on the assumption that the tilted vineyard has a
southern orientation. Figure 3 shows the impact of a different orientation for the vineyard on
solar energy, holding the latitude constant (at Trier’s) and holding the inclination at its
optimal level for this latitude, i.e., 450. A southern aspect is the ideal, and with increasing
deviation from a southern aspect the energy yield falls dramatically. If the tilted vineyard is
west facing, the yearly solar radiation is less than on a horizontal surface (8.9 compared to 9.1
GJm-2a-1 given in Figure 2). A sloping vineyard with north-western aspect receives only 4.7
GJm-2a-1, less than a horizontal plane in the arctic circle.2
         C. Calculation of Solar Radiation
         Given data on the latitude ( ), slope ( ), and orientation ( ) for any vineyard or
agricultural site we show in the Appendix how to calculate a single measure of solar radiation
for each month of the year. We aggregated these monthly figures for the vineyards of the
Mosel to obtain measures of solar radiation during both (a) the critical ripening period for
grapes (September and October) and (b) the full year. These are the data we use in our
hedonic analysis.3 Summary statistics of these measures are contained in the bottom two rows
of Table 4. The data indicate remarkable variability among the vineyards. For example, the

2
  This raises the question of why there are steep vineyards with unfavorable orientations at all: The energy yield
is lower than on a plane surface while the labor costs are considerably higher. It seems likely that these vineyard
sites were selected for non-economic reasons, such as their nearness to a cloister.


                                                     5
annual energy yield ranges from a high of 12.802 GJm-2 to a low of 5.568 GJm-2, or nearly a
130% difference. The total variability in our measure of solar radiation in the crucial ripening
period for grapes is even greater and spans the range from 2.237 GJm-2 to 0.695 GJm-2, or
nearly a 220% difference.
         D. Other Factors that Affect Vineyard Sites
         Gladstones (1992) provides a detailed analysis of several other factors that make
specific geographic sites more or less suitable for the production of high quality grapes.
Important factors include those that reduce diurnal (night-day) temperature differences.
Nearness to a body of water and, especially, soil type are important determinants of diurnal
fluctuations. Thus, the heat storage capacity and solar reflectivity (measured by its albedo
number, ) of some soils is of considerable potential importance in determining the quality of
a vineyard site and we also measure these factors in the empirical analysis below.


3. Data
         Our analysis makes use of data from two different sources on very specific vineyard
sites.4 Unfortunately the definition of these distinct vineyard sites has changed at times so
that our two key sources are not based on precisely the same vineyard definitions. Stöhr et al.
(1981) provide a comprehensive description of all the geographic characteristics of the Mosel-
Saar-Ruwer vineyard sites as they were defined in 1971.5 These data were taken as the
baseline for our calculations. We supplemented these data on the geographic characteristics
of the vineyards with measures of the historical prices of the vineyards based on taxation
records, primarily from the 19th century. Since the latter data were based on finer divisions of




3
 Detailed calculations for individual vineyards are available from the authors upon request.
4
 German vineyard sites have precise names to avoid duplication. A vineyard in the town of Berncastel is a
“Berncasteler.” The “Doctor” vineyard in the town of Berncastel is thus known as the “Berncasteler Doctor” to
distinguish it from any other vineyard named “Doctor.”
5
 The Mosel River is the largest tributary of the Rhine. The grape growing region known as the Mosel, which
runs with the river roughly 206 kilometers northeast from Trier to Koblenz, actually consists of a system of river
valleys that includes the tributaries the Saar and the Ruwer. Thus, the official term for this wine area is “Mosel-
Saar-Ruwer.”

                                                     6
vineyards, that is, smaller vineyard sites, we lose some information by aggregating to the
1971 benchmark.6
        A. Vineyard Price and Quality
        The most difficult aspect of our data construction is the ranking by price of the
respective vineyards. Prices of vineyard sites have been assessed for taxation purposes in the
Mosel since the 17th century. An early example of such a ranking that was made by the
French, who controlled the Mosel area in the early part of the 19th century, is contained in
Table 2. A “repurchase price” was set for the wines of each vineyard, and this formed the
basis for its taxation. However, we rely primarily on the work of the Prussian tax
administration during the mid-19th century for our ranking of vineyards by price. Using the
work started by the French, the Prussians completed a meticulously detailed land register in
the 1830s in order to tax the land according to the value of its production. Using a method
very similar to that used for the classification of Bordeaux wines in 1855 (Penning-Roswell,
1986; Markham, 1998), the value of vineyard sites was taken as proportional to the average
prices for the wines of each vineyard over a 24 year period from 1837 to 1860 (Beck, 1869)7.
The Prussian tax administration distinguished 8 different net yield grades, and in 1869, this
ranking was published by the Government of the King of Prussia (Beck, 1869, 26-33). This
list distinguishes between different vineyards within the various villages. To provide the
detailed location of the vineyard sites the government also published a map of these sites for
the administrative district of Trier, i.e., the upper Mosel, in 1868 (Clotten, 1868); and a
similar map for the lower Mosel, i.e., for the district of Koblenz, in 1897 (Lintz, 1897).
        We use these maps to construct a price-based ranking of the vineyards. Unfortunately
the vineyard sites ranked by price in Beck (1869) are not necessarily identical to those used
by Stöhr et al. (1981) to provide vineyard site characteristics. Accordingly, the maps of 1868
and 1897, respectively, as well as the maps provided by Stöhr et al., were used to apply the
Prussian ranking to contemporary vineyard sites.


6
  For instance, in 1910 there were about 4550 defined vineyard sites within a demarcated area of 6,800 hectares
(Goldschmidt, 1925). The German wine law of 1971 defines only 523 vineyard sites within an area of 11,985
hectares (Stöhr et al., 1981; Statistisches Bundesamt, 1998).
7
  In order to avoid distortions caused by differences in prices across different vintages the optimal estimation
period and the appropriate computational method were discussed in great detail at the time (e.g., Lindauer, 1815;
Flotow, 1820; Gebhard 1824, Schimmelfennig, 1831).

                                                    7
        The estimates we obtained were compared to the vineyard size figures published by
the Prussian government (Beck, 1869). The comparison of these figures as well as the maps
ensures a certain degree of consistency. In addition, any “new vineyards” that did not exist
during the period of the 1869 ranking were excluded from the analysis. As a result, of the 523
currently recognized vineyards, only a total of 344 vineyard sites are included in our analysis.
Finally, the results of our analysis were cross-checked with the “new” vineyard classification
constructed by Stuart Pigott (1995), which is also based on the older Prussian ranking. Our
ranking, like those before, distinguishes eight ordinal grades of vineyard quality, where rank
one denotes the highest quality and rank eight denotes the lowest quality.
        Table 3 provides the frequency distribution of our rankings. It is obvious that the
larger average vineyard site size in the current definitions leads to a leveling out of the quality
distribution compared to older definitions. While the Prussian ranking had 60 vineyards
comprising 44 hectares ranked in the top quality group, the application of the Prussian ranking
to current vineyard sites shows that only one, the Berncasteler Doctor, is ranked wholly in the
top quality category.8 With today’s list of vineyard sites only 10% of all vineyard sites belong
to even the first three ranks, while most fall into ranks six and seven.

         B. Physical Vineyard Site Characteristics
        Data on physical vineyard attributes were taken from Stöhr et al. (1981). For each site
they report the latitude, slope, altitude, orientation, depth of soil, type of soil, and size of the
vineyard. The slope is given as a fraction of the vineyard that is steep, middle or flat. We
constructed the variable “slope” as a weighted average of these slope measures, where 450 is
take as steep, 22.50 is middle, and 00 is flat. Table 3 shows the basic results of our
calculations. The average slope of a Mosel vineyard is very steep, at 380, which is not far
from the optimum of 450, although at least one vineyard is entirely flat.
        Stöhr et al. provide the “prevailing orientation” of the vineyards in 12 categories
according to the entries on a compass. These are, for example, south or south-west. We
assigned a value to the variable “orientation” by the degrees of deviation of the vineyard from
south: 00 for southern orientation, 900 for west or east, and 1800 for north. For instance, an

8
 The size of this vineyard is only 1.0 hectare, which is much smaller than the average vineyard size of 21.2
hectares.

                                                    8
aspect given as south-south-west (SSW) would be measured as 300, which we assume is the
average orientation of the vineyard. When a vineyard had a compound orientation measure,
such as “south and west” we simply assumed a 50/50 relation and defined the deviation from
south as 45o. Overall, the data in Table 3 show that while a south-south-west orientation is the
average, there is considerable variation, with at least one vineyard facing northwest (1350).
        The altitude of a vineyard is given in meters at its lowest and its highest point. The
altitude of these Mosel vineyards ranges between 320m in the Saar valley and 65m near the
Rhine River. Altitude alone seems unlikely to affect a Mosel vineyard’s quality given that all
these vineyards are well below 500 meters (Gladstones, 1992). However, since the impact of
large water bodies on diurnal air circulation is considered important for quality (Gladstones,
1992) we used data on the altitude of the Mosel River to calculate the altitude difference
between the vineyard and the water body. We expect a large difference to have a negative
effect on wine quality and a vineyard’s ranking.
         Stöhr et al. provide measures of the soil’s depth as deep, moderate and flat. We
calculated the depth of the soil as a single variable ranging from 0 to 1 where 1 is deep and 0
is flat. For instance a vineyard like the Erdener Praelat, which is described as deep to
moderately deep, was assigned the value 0.75. The impact of soil depth on wine quality is not
well understood. On the one hand, shallow and rocky soils limit potential vine rooting depth
and provide only restricted water storage capacity. On the other hand, shallow and rocky soils
provide fine drainage and resistance to soil erosion, which is particularly important on slopes.
Since the Mosel region is not characterized as a particularly dry climate, the latter may be the
more important effect (Gladstones, 1992).
        Besides the depth of the soil we also have measures of the kind of soil. This is
particularly important because of the heat storage capacity of certain soils: Heat is absorbed
during the day, which is followed by marked and prolonged re-radiation of warmth at night.
Slate is one of the most heat absorbent soils.9 In fact, the entire Mosel-Saar-Ruwer region is
characterized primarily by different forms of slate, although other soils prevail in the valley
around Trier (sandstone) and between Trier and the border with Luxembourg (limestone).

9
 Because of its low reflectivity of solar radiation (measured by its albedo value) slate is also considered an
important building material for the passive usage of solar energy. Common albedo values are: slate 0.10, wet
sand 0.15, dry sand 0.25, concrete 0.30, and limestone 0.40 (SolVent, 2001).

                                                    9
However, single vineyards often contain many alternative soil types. We distinguish 12 kinds
of soil: weathered slate, slate quartzite, clay slate, greywacke sandstone, quartzite, sandstone,
limestone, gravel, finesoil, alluvial soil, sand, and clay/loam. We simply constructed a set of
dummy variables for these soil types, where the variable takes on a 1 if this soil type exists in
the vineyard and 0 otherwise.
           All these variables are assumed to reflect the average characteristics of the vineyard.
However, within a single vineyard conditions can deviate substantially from this average, and
the deviation is likely to be larger the larger the size of the vineyard. We therefore also
included in our hedonic analyses a measure of the total size of the vineyard. If the uncertainty
associated with vineyard quality leads to lower quality and prices, then we expect larger
vineyards to, other things the same, be of lower quality.
           Though most of the vineyards of the Mosel-Saar-Ruwer region are near one of the
rivers for which they are named, there are a small number of remote vineyards that are
typically located near castles or cloisters. Since these vineyards do not benefit from the
smaller diurnal temperature fluctuations due to proximity to a large water body, we also
introduced a dummy variable that takes on the value unity when a vineyard is remote, and 0
otherwise. We expect it to have a negative effect on vineyard quality.


4. Hedonic Model of Vineyard Quality
            Given the discrete natural order of the dependent variable and the fact that the
differences between the ranks are not necessarily equivalent, we fit our hedonic model using
an ordered probit function.10 In this set up the observed response is taken to depend on a
latent variable yi*, which depends linearly on the explanatory variables Xi:


(1) yi * = X i + ε i ,     with ε i ~ N (0,1)


The observed category of yi is based on yi* and can take on eight values:




10
     See Greene (2003), for example.

                                                10
                 1 if            yi * ≤ γ 1
                     j if γ j −1 ≤ yi * γ j
(2)       yi =
                 .
                 8 if          γ 7 ≤ yi *


The probability of y i being in a particular rank is

         Pr( yi = 1) = Pr( yi * < γ 1 ) = Pr( X i + ε i < γ 1 )
  (3)
                        = Pr(ε i < γ 1 − X i ) = Φ(γ 1 − X i )


         Pr( yi = 2) = Pr(γ 1 ≤ yi * < γ 2 ) = Pr(γ 1 ≤ X i + ε i < γ 2 )
                        = Pr(ε i < γ 2 − X i ) − (ε i ≤ γ 1 − X i )
                        = Φ (γ 2 − X i ) − Φ(γ 1 − X i )
         ...
         Pr( yi = 8) = Pr( yi * ≥ γ 7 ) = Pr( X i + ε i ≥ γ 7 )
                        = Pr(ε i ≥ γ 7 − X i ) = Φ( X i - γ 7 )


where (.) denotes the cumulative normal distribution function.
        The results of the estimation are contained in Table 5 for several specifications of the
basic set of independent variables (X) that determine quality. These vineyard quality
variables, discussed earlier, are listed as the row labels in Table 5. In a first specification
(column 1) we include variables related to soil characteristics and include as separate
variables the three determinants (slope, orientation, and latitude) of our measure of the solar
energy captured by the vineyard. This is a reduced form regression that we use to test the
basic predictions of our model of energy retention. In order to extrapolate the impact of a
change in climate on vineyard quality it is essential that this model of energy retention
provides a reasonable approximation of how heat affects vineyard site quality.
The results in columns 2-3 reflect the imposition of the constraint that the three energy
variables are captured by the specific formula contained in the Appendix. Comparing the
unconstrained results in column 1 to the results in columns 2-3 provides a basic empirical test
of the accuracy of this formula for predicting how solar energy affects vineyard prices.


                                                        11
        In fitting the constrained model we aggregated the variables slope, orientation, and
latitude in two different ways to determine a measure of potential energy. In column 2 we use
a formula that assumes that the energy the plant receives throughout the entire year is the
appropriate measure, while in column 3 we assume that the energy the plant receives in the
fall is the appropriate measure. Neither of these measures is likely to be ideal, but they are
very highly correlated in any event. Moreover, these two extreme cases span all the
reasonable alternatives.
         A comparison of the results indicates that the constrained measure of “fall energy” in
column 3 provides a slightly better fit to the data (judging from the maximized likelihood
ratio) than the measure of “annual energy,” and so we rely on it for further analyses. A
straightforward way to assess the goodness-to-fit qualities of an ordered probit model is a
comparison of predicted and actual results. In Table 6 we use the results of column 3 of Table
5 to assess the model’s predictive quality. Predicted quality ranks are listed in the first
column, while the distribution of the deviations of the actual from the predicted ranks is listed
in the remaining columns for each predicted rank. For example, 85 vineyards are predicted to
be in the largest category, rank 6, of which 54 predictions are correct, 28 are off by one rank,
and 3 are off by two ranks. Overall, the ranks of 50.9% of all vineyards are predicted
correctly, while 42.2% of the predictions are off by a deviation of one rank. Taken together,
the average deviation is only 0.57 quality ranks.
        A test of the constraint that “energy” determines vineyard quality in the precise form
we have assumed may be based on a comparison of twice the difference in the log likelihood
between columns 1 and 3 of Table 5. This test rejects the precise constraint at any reasonable
level of statistical significance, but it is apparent from Table 6 that the constrained measure
captures the major variability in the data. As a result, we use the basic results in column 3 of
Table 5 in simulating the effects of climate change in the analysis below.
        Since the vineyard ranking is defined as 1 being best and 8 being worst, a positive
influence of an independent variable on the quality of the vineyard is indicated by a negative
sign. It is apparent that the potential solar radiation variable has a very significant effect on
the rating of a vineyard site. In addition, slate of any type increases the quality of the
vineyard, especially weathered slate and clay slate. As expected, sand, gravel, and loam have



                                              12
a far lower ability to store heat, and are, by comparison with slate, less advantageous for the
vineyard’s quality.
       The results in Table 5 also provide evidence for the importance of a water body close
to the vineyard. Vineyards that are remote from the Mosel River, and those that are far above
the river, suffer from these features. Both of these factors lead to larger diurnal temperature
fluctuations and thus to lower quality vineyard sites.
       Finally, the estimates confirm the hypothesis that larger sized vineyards, given our
measurements of the other measures of a vineyard’s qualities, do suffer a disadvantage in
quality.
           The estimated coefficients of an ordered probit model must be interpreted with some
                    ∧
care. The sign of       shows the direction of the change in the probability of falling in the
endpoint rankings (yi=1) and (yi=8) when X changes. Pr(yi=1) changes in the opposite
                            ∧                                                               ∧
direction of the sign of        and Pr(yi=8) changes in the same direction as the sign of       . The
effects on the probability of falling in any of the middle rankings are unclear, a priori.


Table 7 reports the marginal effects of the significant variables of the model listed in column
3 of Table 5 that uses the fall radiation variable. Marginal effects are measured relative to the
baseline probabilities given in the first line. As the Table shows, the percentage of vineyard
sites expected to be ranked number one is 0.27%, while the percentage for rank two is 3.32%.
The following set of rows report the effect of a change of ten percent in the value of an
independent variable on these percentages. Thus, an increase in potential solar radiation by
10% will increase the vineyard’s probability of being ranked number one by 1.19% to 1.46%.
Similarly, the probability of being ranked number two will increase from 3.34% to 9.33%.
Since the changes sum up to zero, energy increases entail a drop in the likelihood of being in
rank number six, seven, or eight. Similarly, deeper soil, a greater altitude difference between
the vineyard and the Mosel River, and a larger vineyard size decrease the probabilities of
being in high quality ranks. However, it is apparent that the marginal effect of the solar
radiation variable is very substantial compared to the effects of each of these other variables.




                                                 13
             The marginal effects of the dummy variables were calculated as the effect of the
difference between the values zero and one while holding the other variables at their mean
values. The marginal effects of these variables show the great importance of soil type on
vineyard quality and also the great importance of having a vineyard site that is influenced by
proximity to the Mosel River.


5. Solar radiation and global warming
             Since vineyard quality is dependent on solar energy absorption, it follows that, in a
place like the Mosel Valley, climate change that leads to warmer temperatures will lead to
higher quality wines and prices. Land prices, which represent the capitalized value of these
wine prices, less other costs of production, should therefore also increase. It follows that the
many recent studies that predict that climate change is leading to warmer temperatures also
predict increased land values in areas like the Mosel Valley. In what follows we set out a
simple model that permits us to estimate what the effect of climate change would be on the
overall quality of the Mosel’s vineyards and thus on their prices.
             Most scenarios about global temperature change11 provide a summary measure of
expected temperature changes, whereas we have established the connection between solar
energy reception and vineyard quality. Although there is, of course, a relationship between
solar energy and the Earth’s temperature, the relationship involves a comparison of energy
inflow and outflow. Absorbed energy from the sun is converted to heat, which causes the
Earth to warm up. However, the temperature maximum does not occur at the time of
maximum solar energy input, but later. This lag is the result of the energy storage system and
the resistance to energy flows. Figure 4 shows that, in a simple model, temperature is the
result of the influx of solar energy and the energy radiated by the Earth. Thus, as long as the
net influx is positive temperatures will rise and vice versa. The result is that the temperature
maximum is attained after the influx maximum.
             We use the following simplified model to establish the interrelations between solar
radiation and temperature (see Hartmann (1994) and Andrews (2000)) for the purpose of
simulating the effect of various global warming scenarios on vineyard quality and prices.


11
     See Johns, et. al. (1997).

                                                14
             With radius R and the Earth’s receptive surface           πR 2 , the energy absorbed by the
planet is equal to



(4)    (1 − α )πR 2 S = (energy absorbed by the Earth)

where        is the albedo number of the Earth’s atmosphere and S is the solar constant. We
assume that =.3, which implies that the Earth reflects 30% of the incoming solar energy back
to space.
             If the Earth is assumed to emit like a blackbody 12 the energy radiated from the planet
is, according to the Stefan-Boltzmann law, equal to



(5)       (4πR 2 )σTs 4 = (energy radiated from the Earth),
where Ts is the planet’s surface temperature and                is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant.13
             Setting (6) and (7) equal and solving for the equilibrium temperature yields


(6)    Ts = 4 (1 − α ) S / 4σ

According to equation (8) the Earth’s surface temperature is equal to 255K (or –18oC) which
is well below the measured average temperature of approximately 288K (or 15oC).
             To make this model more realistic it is necessary to incorporate the atmospheric
effects that are associated with the Earth and which act like a greenhouse. If we assume an
atmosphere that absorbs all long-wave terrestrial radiation but is transparent to short-wave
solar radiation, at the top of this atmospheric layer the energy balance remains the same with


             4
(7) σTa          = (1 − α ) S / 4


12
     A blackbody absorbs all the radiant energy it receives, regardless of the wavelength.
13
     The Stefan-Boltzmann constant is equal to 5.67*10-8 JK-1.

                                                       15
where Ta is the atmospheric temperature. Assuming further that             σTs 4 = 2σTa 4 , that is,
half of the energy absorbed by the atmosphere is reflected back to the Earth, we get


(8)    Ts = 4 (1 − α ) S / 2σ

Equation (8) predicts an average temperature of 303K (or 30oC) for the Earth, which is much
closer to the observed value.
             Equation (8) allows us to compute changes in radiant energy associated with any
given temperature variation. Accordingly, a temperature increase of 1oC is associated with
additional radiation energy of 47.43 MJ/month. Similarly, a temperature increase of 2oC or
3oC translates into radiation energy increases of 94.87 and 142.82 MJ/month, respectively.
             Table 8 reports the changes in a vineyard’s probability of being in a certain rank
using the results in Table 7 and various assumptions about the likely magnitude of climate
change. For example, a temperature increase of 1oC corresponds to an increase in potential
solar radiation of 47.43 MJ/month, which changes the likelihood of an average vineyard being
rated number one by 0.32%, that is, from 0.25% to 0.57%. Similarly, the likelihood of being
rated number eight will decrease by 2.13%, that is, from 9.74% to 7.61%. Predicted
temperature increases in the Mosel area for the near term are around 2° C. for moderate
warming scenarios, with higher predicted temperature increases in the longer term. These
three scenarios should provide a general indication of magnitudes to be expected.14
                    As also reported in Table 8, the number of vineyards in each category will
change with increased warming. While in the base scenario only 10 vineyards were rated
quality one, two, or three, a temperature increase of 1oC will lift this number to 18. In
comparison, if temperatures increased by 3oC, 68 vineyards would be rated within the best
three categories.
             In order to convert these changes in vineyard quality ranking into changes in
vineyard prices we weight land values in each quality category by the size of the respective

14
     See, for example, the Hadley Center’s work in Johns, et al. (1997).

                                                       16
vineyards. While the size of each vineyard is given in Stöhr et al. (1981), the land value of
each quality class was taken from land sales surveys provided by the governments of the four
counties that cover the Mosel area (Landkreis Bernkastel-Wittlich, 2004; Landkreis Cochem-
Zell, 2004; Landkreis Mayen-Koblenz, 2004; Landkreis Trier, 2004). The surveys provide
average sales prices of vineyard land in 2003, differentiated by municipality and vineyard
quality level. This permits us to estimate vineyard specific market prices15. From these data
we calculated average land values for each quality category. The land values range from
0.50 per m2 for vineyards in quality category 8 to             130 per m2 for vineyards in quality
category 116.
          Table 9 reports the hectares of vineyards in each quality category and in each
scenario. While in the baseline scenario only 30 hectares of vineyards are within the top three
quality ranks, a temperature increase of 1oC would put more than 100 hectares in these
categories. These temperature increases also lead to higher predicted land values. In fact,
because of the steeply increasing land prices as we move from lower to higher quality
vineyards, the change in land values is proportionally greater than the increase than the mere
increase in temperatures. While a 1oC increase results in an increase in the total vineyard land
value of 20% (from 231 million to 276 million), a 3oC increase in temperature will double
the overall land value.




7. Conclusion
          The basic results in this paper show how the link between temperature and solar
radiation can be used to construct a structural model to predict changes in agricultural land
prices and crop values associated with climate change. The key to building this relationship is
to establish the hedonic relation between the determinants of solar radiation received by an
area and land values. For vineyard areas many of the key hedonic characteristics of the
vineyard are related to energy absorption, which leads to an important effect of climate

15
   The reported sales prices reflect only the land value and do not include the value of vines that might be planted
on it.
16
   Our calculations are based on the following land values per m2: 130 (rank 1), 20 (rank 2), 10 (rank 3),
7 (rank 4), 4 (rank 5), 2 (rank 6), 1 (rank 7), and 0.50 (rank 8). It is apparent from these calculations that
the prices drop dramatically with quality.

                                                     17
change on crop quality. Grape vines have very low radiation use efficiency (RUE), and no
doubt the hedonic relationship we estimate is related to this fact. It seems that further
research might be usefully guided by measuring the hedonic relationship of solar energy
received for crops with different RUE’s.
         Although our purpose here has been to use this hedonic relationship to evaluate the
effect of climate change on land values, it should be clear that, to the extent other
undeveloped vineyard areas may exist in the world, this relationship could be used to evaluate
the economic viability of new planting. In short, this hedonic relationship could be used for
determining vineyard site selection in undeveloped areas.
         Our empirical results indicate that climate change may result in considerable
increases in the value of the Mosel Vineyard region because of increasing wine quality. A
moderate 1°C temperature increase would lead to an aggregate increase in land value of 20
percent, while an increase of 3°C would more than double the land value.
       There are several limitations of these results. First, our empirical analysis does not
take account of general equilibrium effects that might result in a restructuring of land prices.
The Mosel Valley is suited primarily for grape growing only, so a chance in the relative price
of vineyards of different quality induced by climate change could have a dramatic effect on
our calculations. Second, our results provide only a small part of an overall appraisal of the
role of climate change on agricultural values.



                                           References

Andrews, D.G. (2000), An introduction to atmospheric physics. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.

Beck, O. (1869), Der Weinbau an der Mosel und Saar. Nebst einer vom königlichen
Katasterinspekteur Steuerrath Clotten zu Trier angefertigten Weinbaukarte. Selbstverlag der
königlichen Regierung zu Trier. Trier.

Bernkasteler Ring (1999), 100 Jahre Bernkasteler Ring 1899 – 1999. Krämer-Druck,
Bernkastel-Kues.

Castelan-Estrada, M. (2001), Répartition de la biomasse chez Vitis vinifiera ; rendement de
conversion du rayonnement solaire global et coûts energétiques. Doctoral dissertation at



                                             18
Institut National Agronomique Paris-Grignon. INRA Bordeaux.
online: http://www.bordeaux.inra.fr/ECAV/doc/castelan.pdf

Clotten (1868), Saar und Mosel Weinbaukarte für den Regierungsbezirk Trier. Lintz Verlag,
Trier.

Davidson, R. and MacKinnon, J. (1993), Estimation and inference in econometrics. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

Deschenes, O and M. Greenstone (2006), The Economic Impacts of Climate Change:
Evidence from Agricultural Profits and Random Fluctuations in Weather, MIT Department of
Economics Research Paper No. 04-25.

Diemer, E. (1937), Deutschlands Weinbauorte und Weinbergslagen. 4th edition, Verlag der
Deutschen Wein-Zeitung, Mainz.

Duffie J.A., Beckman, W. A. (1991), Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes. 2nd edition,
John Wiley & Sons Inc, New York.

Environmental Protection Agency (2002), The soil and water assessment tool SWAT 2000,
Appendix A. Texas Water Resources Institute, Temple/TX.

Farquharson, J.E. (1986), The Agrarian Policy of National Socialist Germany. In: Moeller, E.
(ed.), Peasants and Lords in Modern Germany: Recent Studies in Agricultural History. Allen
& Unwin, Boston.

Flotow, G. Von (1820), Versuch einer Anleitung zu Abschätzung der Grundstücke nach
Classen, besonders zu Behufe einer Grundsteuer-Rectification. Hartmann, Leipzig.

Gebhard, G. (1824), Grundsteuer-Kataster aus der Messung und dem Reinertrage der
einzelnen Grundstücke entwickelt. Finsterlin, München.

Gladstones, J. (1992), Viticulture and Environment. Winetitles, Adelaide.

Goldschmidt, F. (1925), Deutschlands Weinbauorte und Weinbergslagen. 3rd edition. Verlag
der Deutschen Wein-Zeitung, Mainz.

Greene, W. (2003), Econometric analysis. 5th edition. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New
Jersey.

Hartmann, D.L. (1994), Global physical climatology. Academic Press: San Diego and New
York.

Hay, R. K. and Walker, A.J. (1989), An Introduction to the Physiology of Crop Yield.
Longman Scientific, Essex.

Heger, J.P. (1905), Die Klassifikation der Moselweine in alter und neuer Zeit. In: Trierische
Chronik. Vol. 1, no. 6, pp.81-89.

                                           19
Iqbal, M. (1983), An Introduction to Solar Radiation. Academic Press, Toronto.

Johns, T.C., R.E. Carnell, J.F. Gregory, J. Mitchell, C. Senior, S. Test, and R.A. Wood
(1997), “The Second Hadley Centre Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere GCM: Model Description,
Spinup and Validation,” Climate Dynamics, Vol. 13, 103-134.

Klein, S.A. (1977), Calculation of Monthly Average Insolation on Tilted Surfaces. In: Solar
Energy, Vol. 19, pp. 325-329, Vol. 20, p. 441 (erratum), and Vol. 25, p. 287 (comment).

Koch, Fr. W. (1881), Der Weinbau an der Mosel und Saar. Verlag der Fr. Lintz’schen
Buchhandlungen/Trier.

Koch, H.-J. (1998), Der Weinlagename als Herkunftsangabe und Qualitätshinweis.
Rechtsgeschichte, aktuelle Regelungen, Reformvorschläge (Schriften zur Weingeschichte. Nr.
123), Gesellschaft für Geschichte des Weines e.V., Wiesbaden.

Landkreis Bernkastel-Wittlich (2004), Bericht über den Grundstücksmarkt im Landkreis
Bernkastel-Wittlich. Bernkastel 2004.

Landkreis Cochem-Zell (2004), Bericht über den Grundstücksmarkt im Landkreis Cochem-
Zell, Cochem.

Landkreis Mayen-Koblenz (2004), Bericht über den Grundstücksmarkt im Landkreis Mayen-
Koblenz, Vermessungs- und Katasteramt, Koblenz .

Landkreis Trier (2004), Bericht über den Grundstücksmarkt im Landkreis Trier,
Vermessungs- und Katasteramt, Trier.

Lindauer, J. (1815), Beweis, dass die in acht Procenten des Rohertrages ausgesprochene
Grundsteuer gerecht und national-ökonomisch sey. Und: dass der Rohertrag der Grundstücke
zur Grundlage ihrer Werthes-Schätzung angenommen werden könne. München.

Le Ministre des Finances de la France (1811), Receuil méthodique des lois, décrets,
réglemens, instructions et decisions sur le cadastre de la France. Paris.

Lintz, F. (ed.) (1897), Mosel Weinbaukarte für den Regierungsbezirk Coblenz. Lintz Verlag,
Trier.

Lintz, J. (1925), Saar und Mosel Weinbaukarte für den Regierungsbezirk Trier. 5th edition.
Lintz Verlag, Trier.

Markham, D. (1998), 1855: a history of the Bordeaux classification. McGraw-Hill, New
York.

Mendelsohn, R., Nordhaus, W.D., and D. Shaw (1994), “The Impact of Global Warming on
Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis,” American Economic Review, Vol. 84, 753-771.


                                           20
Meyer, F. (1926), Weinbau und Weinhandel an Mosel, Saar und Ruwer. Görres-Druckerei,
Koblenz.

Milthorp, F.L. and Moorby, J. (1979), An Introduction to Crop Physiology. 2nd edition,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Monteith, J.L. (1977), Climate and the efficiency of crop production in Britain. In:
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B – Biological Sciences,
Vol. 281, pp. 277-294.

Müller, M. (1980), Säkularisation und Grundbesitz. Zur Sozialgeschichte des Saar-Mosel-
Raumes 1794-1813. Harald Boldt Verlag, Boppard.

Penning-Roswell, E. (1986), Wines of Bordeaux, 6th edition, Penguin Bookds, London.

Pigott, S. (1995), The Wine Atlas of Germany and Traveler’s Guide to the Vineyards.
Mitchell Beazley Ltd., London.

Salisbury, F. and Ross, C.W. (1992), Plant Physiology. 4th edition, Wadsworth Publishing
Company, Belmont/CA.

Schieder, W. (1991), Säkularisation und Mediatisierung in den vier rheinischen Departements
1803-1813. Vol. 1-4, Harald Boldt Verlag, Boppard.

Schimmelfennig, F.G. (1831), Historische Darstellung der Grundsteuer-Verfassungen in den
Preußischen Staaten. Logier, Berlin.

Schlenker, W., Hanemann, W.M., and A. Fisher (2005), “Will U.S. Agriculture Really
Benefit from Global Warming?: Accounting for Irrigation in the Hedonic Approach,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 95, 395-406.

Schlenker, W., Hanemann, W.M., and A. Fisher (2006), “The Impact of Global Warming on
U.S. Agriculture: An Econometric Analysis of Optimal Growing Conditions,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 88, 113-125.

Sinclair, T.R. and Muchow, R.C. (1999), Radiation use efficiency. In: Advances in
Agronomy, Vol. 65, pp. 215-265.

Smart, R.E. (1973), Sunlight interception by vineyards. In: American Journal of Enology and
Viticulture, Vol. 24, pp. 141-147.


Smart, R. E. (1976), Implications of the radiation microclimate for productivity of vineyards.
Doctoral thesis, Cornell.

SolVent (2001), http://www.brunel.ac.uk/research/solvent/pdf/climate.pdf




                                           21
Statistisches Bundesamt (1998), Fachserie 3, Land- und Fortstwirtschaft, Fischerei, Reihe
3.1.5 Landwirtschaftliche Bodennutzung. Wiesbaden.

Stöhr, W., Cüppers, H., Fass, K.-H. (1981), Mosel-Saar-Ruwer. (Ambrosi, H. And Breuer B.
(ed.), Vinothek der deutschen Weinberg-Lagen.). Seewald. Stuttgart.

Tornow, W. (1972), Chronik der Agrarpolitik und Agrarwirtschaft des Deutschen Reiches
von 1933-1945. Berichte über Landwirtschaft, N.F., Sonderheft 188, Paul Parey, Hamburg.

Winter-Tarvainen, A. (1992), Weinbaukrise und preußischer Staat. Preußische Zoll- und
Steuerpolitik in ihren Auswirkungen auf die soziale Situation der Moselwinzer im 19.
Jahrhundert. (Trierer Historische Schriften, Band 18). Verlag Trierer Historische
Forschungen. Trier.




                                           22
                                                   Appendix

From Duffie and Beckman (1991) as well as Iqbal (1983) we calculate the daily
extraterrestrial solar radiation H Oβγ as


H Oβγ = (12 / π ) I SC EO (cos β sin δ sin φ | ω ss − ω sr | π / 180
             − sin δ cos φ sin β cos γ | ω ss − ω sr |
            + cos φ cos δ cos β | sin ω ss − sin ω sr |
            + cos δ cos γ sin φ sin β | sin ω ss − ω sr |
            + cos δ sin β sin γ | cos ω ss − cos ω sr |)

with

                            − xy − x 2 − y 2 + 1
ω sr = min ws , cos −1
                                     x2 +1


                                − xy + x 2 − y 2 + 1
ω ss = − min ws , cos −1
                                       x2 +1

for γ > 0 , i.e., the surface is oriented toward the east and


                            − xy + x 2 − y 2 + 1
ω sr = min ws , cos   −1

                                     x2 +1


                                − xy − x 2 − y 2 + 1
ω ss = − min ws , cos      −1

                                       x2 +1

for γ < 0 , i.e., the surface is oriented toward the west, where


        cos φ     sin φ
x=              +
     sin γ tan β tan γ


                sin φ     cos φ
y = tan δ               −
             sin γ tan β tan γ


                                                       23
ω s = cos −1 (− tan φ tan δ ) .


With
I SC      Solar Constant (4.921 MJ/m2 hr)
Eo        Eccentricity Correction Factor (tables for each day of the year)
β         Slope, the angle between the plane of the surface and the horizontal, 0 o ≤ β ≤ 180 o ,
          ( β > 90 o implies that the surface is downward facing).
δ         Declination, the angular position of the sun at solar noon (i.e., when the sun is on the
          local meridian) with respect to the plane of the equator, north positive,
           − 23.34 o ≤ δ ≤ 23.45 o (tables for each day of the year)
φ         Latitude, the angular location north or south of the equator, north positive
           − 90 o ≤ φ ≤ 90 o
γ         Surface azimuth angle, the deviation of the projection on an horizontal plane of the
          normal to the surface from the local meridian, with zero due south, east positive, and
          west negative; − 180 o ≤ γ ≤ 180 o
ω ss      Sunset hour angle for a tilted surface
ω sr      Sunrise hour angle for a tilted surface
ωs        Sunrise hour angle for a horizontal surface.



The daily extraterrestrial solar radiation was multiplied by the number of days of the
respective month in order to obtain the monthly value. Data for the characteristic average day
for each month are contained in Klein (1977), and values for the eccentricity correction factor,
Eo , and the declination, δ , respectively, are given in Appendix Table 1.




                                             24
                             Appendix Table 1
            Characteristic Eccentricity Correction Factor and Declination

   month          day of the    Day of the         Eo              δ
                   month          year
January              17            17            1.0340          -20.88
February             16            47            1.0251          -12.53
March                16            75            1.0108           -1.93
April                15           105            0.9932            9.60
May                  15           135            0.9780           18.77
June                 11           162            0.9692           23.09
July                 17           198            0.9673           21.34
August               16           228            0.9746           13.94
September            15           258            0.9885            3.27
October              15           288            1.0058           -8.30
November             14           318            1.0222          -18.11
December             10           344            1.0319          -22.28

According to Klein (1977) and Duffie and Beckman (1991).




                                  25
                                          Table 1


                 Solar Radiation Efficiency of Selected Crops
                  crop                                                  RUEmaxa)
C4 species        Sugarcane                                             2.0
                  Maize                                                 1.8
                  Grain Sorghum                                         1.7
C3 species        Potato                                                1.7
                  Wheat                                                 1.6
                  Sunflower                                             1.6
                  Rice                                                  1.4
                  Soybean                                               1.3
Other             Tomato                                                1.5b)
                  Cauliflower                                           1.1b)
                  Apple                                                 0.8b)

                  Grapevine (Merlot)                                    0.7c)

According to Sinclair and Muchow (1999), a) maximum RUE in gram dry matter MJ-1m-2 of
intercepted solar radiation; b) Environmental Protection Agency (2002); c) Castelan-Estrada
(2001).




                                          26
                                                 Table 2
                           French ranking of Mosel vineyards in 1804
                             10 grades by village and repurchase price
Grade    Name of the village                                                            Repurchase price
                                                                                       in Francs/1000 liter
1       Dusemond (Brauneberg)                                                               172
2       Piesport, Wehlen, Machern, Graach, Zeltingen, Erden, Lösenich                       150
3       Niederremmel, Müstert, Reinsport, Berncastel, Grünhaus, Kesten,                     140
        Oberremmel, Minheim
4       Kous (Cues), Lieser, Winterich, Ürzig, Kröf, Köwerich, Mülheim, Thron,              129
        Kinheim, Kindel, Wolf, Kasel, St. Matthias, Okfen, Kastel, Staadt, Neumagen
5       Trittenheim, Mehring, Monzel, Waltrach, Isselbach, Konz                             118
6       Rachtig, Awelsbach, Mertesdorf, Veldenz, Thörnich, Reul, Maring, Burgen,            107
        Olewig, Krutweiler, Ayl, Bibelhausen, Irsch/Saar
7       Pfalzel, Pichter, Merzlich, Niederleuken, Klüsserath, Wawern, Pölich,               96
        Köwerich, Platten, Filzen/Mosel, Neudorf, Trier, Hamm, Komlingen, Nennig,
        Mies, Helfand, Detzem, Schweich, Longen, Lörsch, Ensch, Longuich, Osan
8       Niedermennig, Leiwen, Schleich, Fell, Löwenbrück, Kreutz, Kürenz, Feyen,            86
        Palzem, Rölingen, Fasterau, Beurig, Perl, Sendorf
9       Wittlich, Andel, Pallien, Erang, Metzdorf, Euren, Zewen, Oberkirch, Monaise,        75
        Niederkirch, Ruwer, Pellingen, Irsch-Olewig, Kenn, Feilz, Plein, Luxem,
        Kernscheid, Issel, Bekond, Hetzrath, Rivenich, Riol
10      Bengel, Springirsbach, Korlingen, Drees, Bergweiler, Hupperat, Flusbach,            64
        Bausendorf, Olkenbach
According to Heger (1905).




                                                 27
                                 Table 3
                   Distribution of Vineyard Site Ranking
           Rank                        Number              Percent

             1                           1                  0.29
             2                           11                 3.20
             3                           23                 6.69
             4                           59                17.15
             5                           63                18.31
             6                           85                24.71
             7                           69                20.06
             8                           33                 9.59
           total                        344                100.00

Own calculations.




                                  28
                                 Table 4
                        Descriptive Statistics of Variables

Variable                      Mean        Std. Deviation Minimum      Maximum

Rank                             5.52               1.56          1         8
Slope (degree)                  38.28               7.97          0        45
Orientation1                    46.71              28.68          0       135
Latitude degree)                49.95               0.20      49.61     50.34
Altitude (in meters)           120.02              43.83         22       226
Hectare                         26.31              37.99        0.2       420
Energy (GJm-2 per year)         11.27               1.47       5.57      12.8
               -2
Energy (MJm in Sept/Oct) 1872.3                    318.0      694.6    2237.4
1
  deviation from southern orientation in degrees




                                  29
                                          Table 5
                        Determinants of the Vineyard Site Ranking
                           Results of the Ordered Probit Model

     Variable            (1)                (2)                   (3)
                                      (Annual Energy)       (Fall Energy)
Slope              -3.13*** (-6.44)
Orientation        0.04*** (12.71)
Latitude             0.29 (0.57)
Energy (KJm-2)                        -0.86*** (-11.50)    -4.10*** (-11.53)
Clay Slate         -2.35*** (-7.21)    -2.09*** (-6.79)     -2.13*** (-6.89)
Weathered Slate    -1.59*** (-5.92)    -1.32*** (-5.10)     -1.35*** (-5.20)
Slate Quartzite     -0.72* (-2.23)       -0.53+ (-1.71)       -0.57+ (-1.86)
Sandstone            -0.38 (-0.97)        -0.17 (0.32)        -0.20 (-0.41)
Finesoil             -0.11 (-0.41)       -0.27 (-1.19)        -0.26 (-1.15)
Sand                1.05*** (3.48)      1.12*** (4.38)       1.08*** (4.21)
Clay, Loam          0.86*** (3.88)      0.91*** (4.10)       0.89*** (4.04)
Quartzite             0.65+ (1.70)        0.81* (2.15)         0.80* (2.14)
Gravel               -0.04 (-0.08)         0.17 (0.37)          0.12 (0.25)
Graywacke            -0.03 (-0.12)         0.13 (0.88)          0.10 (0.68)
Limestone            -0.20 (-0.31)         0.17 (0.25)          0.06 (0.09)
Alluvial Soil        -0.08 (-0.20)         0.02 (0.07)        -0.04 (-0.13)
Depth of Soil       1.70*** (6.06)      1.94*** (6.97)       1.91*** (6.87)
Altitude
                   0.01*** (3.57)       0.01*** (2.83)      0.01*** (2.88)
Difference1
Vineyard Size      0.01*** (5.39)       0.01*** (6.71)      0.01*** (6.61)
Remote Vineyard    1.36*** (3.98)       1.41*** (4.31)      1.29*** (3.80)

 1                   8.48 (0.35)      -13.63*** (-11.65)   -11.84*** (-11.60)
 2                   9.98 (0.41)      -12.19*** (-11.06)   -10.38*** (-11.00)
 3                   10.80 (0.45)     -11.38*** (-10.81)    -9.56*** (-10.73)
 4                   11.97 (0.50)     -10.31*** (-10.06)     -8.46*** (-9.83)
 5                   13.05 (0.54)       -9.34*** (-9.34)     -7.47*** (-8.96)
 6                   14.65 (0.61)      -7.846*** (-8.28)    -5.926*** (-7.59)
 7                   16.81 (0.70)      -5.782*** (-6.56)    -3.826*** (-5.31)

Log Likelihood         -376.0              -397.3               -393.5

Pseudo R2 (in %)        39.7                36.3                 36.9




                                            30
                                    Table 6
                     Prediction and Deviation by Rank
                           Deviation by number of ranks
Rank      0          1       2       3       4       5    6     7     Sum
1         0          0       1       0       0       0    0     0      1
2         5          0       4       1       1       0    0     __     11
3         0         19       3       1       0       0    __    __     23
4         33        20       6       0       0       __   __    __     59
5         24        35       4       0       0       __   __    __     63
6         54        28       3       0       0       0    __    __     85
7         41        28       0       0       0       0    0     __     69
8         18        15       0       0       0       0    0     0      33
Sum      175        145     21       2       1       0    0     0     344
In %     50.9       42.2    6.1     0.6     0.3     0.0   0.0   0.0   100.0
Own calculations.




                                    31
                                 Table 7
           Marginal Effects of Model Using Fall Solar Radiation


                                                    Probability (in %)
                       Rank 1   Rank 2    Rank 3    Rank 4 Rank 5 Rank 6               Rank 7     Rank 8

Baseline                0.27     3.32      6.52      16.79     18.95       24.61        19.65       9.74

                                               Change in Probability (in %)
Continuous
Variables1
       Fall Energy      1.19      5.96      5.17      3.35     -2.07       -5.06        -5.45      -3.09
     Depth of Soil     -0.02     -0.25     -0.44     -0.71     -0.21        0.24         0.60       0.78
           Altitudea   -0.02     -0.24     -0.34     -0.44     -0.04        0.32         0.42       0.36
     Vineyard Size     -0.01     -0.08     -0.12     -0.19     -0.04        0.23         0.05       0.15

Dummy Variables2
        Clay Slate      4.46     14.90      9.68      7.42     -0.38       -9.69        -15.92     -10.48
  Weathered Slate       1.85      6.02      5.98      8.31      2.46       -5.36        -10.60      -8.66
   Slate Quartzite      0.56      3.41      3.59      3.30     -0.65       -3.27         -3.91      -3.04
             Sand      -0.26     -2.87     -4.83     -9.13     -4.14        4.38          8.60       8.26
      Clay, Loam       -0.24     -2.67     -4.44     -7.78     -2.82        4.17          8.13       5.65
         Quartzite     -0.23     -2.44     -3.99     -7.01     -2.35        3.99          6.29       5.74
          Remote       -0.26     -3.13     -5.64    -11.66     -6.44        5.29         10.99      10.86
1
 effect of a 10% increase, 2 difference between the values zero and one,   a
                                                                               difference in altitude
between vineyard and Mosel River.




                                         32
                                         Table 8
                           Global Warming and Vineyard Ranking


                                                       Probability (in %)
                                 Rank   Rank   Rank    Rank      Rank     Rank   Rank    Rank
                                   1     2      3        4          5      6      7        8

Baseline                         0.27   3.32   6.52    16.79    18.95    24.61   19.65   9.74

                                                 Change in Probability (in %)
temperature    energy increase
   increase    (MJ/month)
   1oC               47.43       0.32   2.19   2.46     2.45    -0.29    -2.21   -2.79   -2.13
   2oC               94.87       0.95   5.21   4.95     3.88    -1.23    -4.50   -5.44   -3.82
   3oC              142.82       2.06   9.02   7.10     4.22    -2.54    -6.80   -7.93   -5.24

                                                      Number of Vineyards
             Baseline             0      6      4       79       64         94    69      28
           1oC increase           0      13     5       111      43         91    62      19
           2oC increase           0      30     11      121      37         83    47      15
           3oC increase           2      56     10      115      39         73    36      13




                                         33
                            Table 9
                    Global Warming and Land Values
                             in 2003 prices

                Baseline     Simulation 1oC Simulation 2oC Simulation 3oC

Hectares
    Rank 1             0.0            0.0             0.0            7.8
    Rank 2            19.3           71.1           375.5          851.6
    Rank 3            10.8           32.1           212.8          134.6
    Rank 4          1283.4         1958.2          2317.2         2338.0
    Rank 5          1365.5          995.8           965.2         1086.4
    Rank 6          2384.9         2640.6          2582.7         2366.2
    Rank 7          2851.1         2431.9          1843.7         1550.5
    Rank 8          1134.6          919.9           752.5          714.5
Total               9049.6         9049.6          9049.6         9049.6

Value in Mill        231.3          276.1            371.0         467.4




                             34
                                                      Figure 1
                                         Solar Radiation by Latitude
                                  on a horizontal surface in the northern hemisphere

                     45


                     40


                     35

                                                      equator: 13.2 GJ/a
                     30
MJ per sqm and day




                     25

                                                        30o: 11.6 GJ/a
                     20
                                                            o
                                                        40 : 10.4 GJ/a
                     15

                                                        50o: 9.0 GJ/a
                     10


                      5


                      0
                          1   2    3      4       5         6            7   8   9     10   11   12
                                                                months




                                                       35
                                                       Figure 2

                                        Solar Radiation by Inclination
                                                                                 o
                                  on a southwards oriented surface in Trier (49.8 north)



                     45


                     40


                     35


                     30
MJ per sqm and day




                     25


                     20


                                                        90o: 9.4 GJ/a                o
                                                                                 45 : 12.8 GJ/a
                     15

                                                                                     o
                     10
                                                                                 20 : 11.5 GJ/a

                                                                                 horizontal 9.1 GJ/a
                      5


                      0
                          1   2    3       4       5        6            7   8           9   10    11   12

                                                                months




                                                       36
                                                      Figure 3

                                      Solar Radiation by Orientation
                                              o                             o
                                       on a 45 tilted surface in Trier (49.8 north)


                     40

                                                                                                 south: 12.8 GJ/a
                     35



                     30
MJ per sqm and day




                     25

                                                                                            south-west: 11.8 GJ/a
                     20



                     15



                     10
                                                                                                 west: 8.9 GJ/a
                      5
                                                                            north-west: 4.7 GJ/a
                      0
                          1   2   3     4         5        6            7       8     9     10        11     12
                                                               months




                                                      37
                                                Figure 4
                                    Solar radiation and temperature




                               temperature


                                              incoming solar radiation


                                                                         outgoing terrestrial
                                     positive net                             radiation
                                      radiation




    negative net                                                                  negative net
     radiation                                                                      radiation



1   2   3   4      5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24




                                                    38
