                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       UNCERTAINTY AND INVESTMENT DYNAMICS

                                              Nick Bloom
                                             Stephen Bond
                                           John Van Reenen

                                         Working Paper 12383
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12383


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




The authors would like to thank in particular two anonymous referees, and also Jerome Adda, Manuel
Arellano, Orazio Attanasio, Richard Blundell, Russell Cooper, Jason Cummins, Janice Eberly, Domenico
Lombardi, Costas Meghir, Steve Nickell, Murtaza Syed and Frank Windmeijer. The financial support of the
ESRC is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Nick Bloom, Stephen Bond and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Uncertainty and Investment Dynamics
Nick Bloom, Stephen Bond and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 12383
July 2006, Revised September 2006
JEL No. D92, E22, D8, C23

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper shows that, with (partial) irreversibility, higher uncertainty reduces the impact effect of
demand shocks on investment. Uncertainty increases real option values making firms more cautious
when investing or disinvesting. This is confirmed both numerically for a model with a rich mix of
adjustment costs, time-varying uncertainty, and aggregation over investment decisions and time, and
also empirically for a panel of manufacturing firms. These cautionary effects of uncertainty are large
– going from the lower quartile to the upper quartile of the uncertainty distribution typically halves
the first year investment response to demand shocks. This implies the responsiveness of firms to any
given policy stimulus may be much lower in periods of high uncertainty, such as after major shocks
like OPEC I and 9/11.


Nick Bloom
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu

Stephen Bond
Institute for Fiscal Studies
7 Ridgmount Street
London, WC1E 7AE
UNITED KINGDOM
steve.bond@economics.oxford.ac.uk

John Van Reenen
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London, WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk
1. Introduction

Recent theoretical analyses of investment under uncertainty have highlighted the
e¤ects of irreversibility in generating ‘real options’(e.g. Dixit and Pindyck (1994)).
In these models uncertainty increases the separation between the marginal product of
capital which justi…es investment and the marginal product of capital which justi…es
disinvestment. This increases the range of inaction where investment is zero as the
…rm prefers to ‘wait and see’rather than undertaking a costly action with uncertain
consequences. In short, investment behaviour becomes more cautious.
       Firm-level data is attractive for investigating this e¤ect of uncertainty on the
degree of caution since empirical measures of uncertainty can be constructed based
on share price volatility (e.g. Leahy and Whited (1996)). One important di¢ culty
for direct testing of real options models of investment under uncertainty using …rm
data, however, is the extreme rarity of observations with zero investment in annual
consolidated accounts. If we believed that these …rms make a single investment de-
cision in each year this lack of zeros would reject the canonical real options model of
a single investment decision with its region of inaction. However, given the extensive
evidence of discrete and lumpy adjustments in more disaggregated plant-level data
(e.g. Doms and Dunne (1998)), this lack of zeros at the …rm level is suggestive of
aggregation over types of capital, production units and time.
       Previous research has shown that aggregation does not eliminate the impact
of lumpy micro investment decisions for more aggregated investment dynamics.1
This raises the question of whether the e¤ects of uncertainty and irreversibility on
short run investment dynamics can be detected in an econometric study of …rm-
level investment spending. To investigate this issue we develop a model of the
…rm’s investment decisions that allows for two types of capital, a rich speci…cation
of adjustment costs, time-varying uncertainty, alternative functional forms for the
   1
    See, for example, Bertola and Caballero (1994), Caballero and Engel (1999), Abel and Eberly
(2001), and Doyle and Whited (2001). Thomas (2002) and Veracierto (2002) …nd that in general
equilibrium models the impact of non-convex investment costs on the business cycle may be small.
These papers are necessarily based on relatively simple models of …rm investment - including a
constant level of uncertainty - to enable complex general equilibrium modelling. Our focus here is on
much richer (partial equilibrium) micro models that include ‡uctuations in the level of uncertainty.
These are appropriate for estimation on …rm-level data.



                                                 1
revenue function and extensive aggregation over time and over production units.
We solve this theoretical model numerically and simulate …rm-level panel data. We
use this simulated data in two ways. First we analyse it directly to con…rm two
properties of …rm-level investment dynamics in this framework. One property is the
e¤ect of higher uncertainty on the degree of caution in investment decisions as noted
above. We show that, with (partial) irreversibility, the impact e¤ect on investment
of a given …rm-level demand shock tends to be weaker for …rms that are subject
to a higher level of uncertainty. We also show that the response of investment to
demand shocks tends to be convex, as larger shocks induce …rms to invest in more
types of capital and at more production units (the extensive margin). This in turn
induces more adjustment at the intensive margin, with these aggregation e¤ects
being reinforced by supermodularity in the production technology.
   We also use our simulated data to show that both of these e¤ects can be de-
tected using a relatively simple dynamic econometric speci…cation to approximate
the complex …rm-level investment dynamics implied by this framework. Our start-
ing point is an error correction model (ECM) of investment that has been widely
used in …rm-level studies. We add two types of terms. First, an interaction between
real sales growth and measured uncertainty tests for the more cautious response of
investment to demand shocks at higher levels of uncertainty. Second, a non-linear
sales growth term to test for convexity in the response of investment to demand
shocks. Generalised Method of Moments (GMM) estimation on the simulated panel
data indicates that we can reject the null hypothesis of a common, linear response
of investment to demand shocks, provided the dynamic speci…cation used is su¢ -
ciently rich for standard tests of overidentifying restrictions not to indicate severe
misspeci…cation of the econometric model.
   We then apply the same econometric approach to study the investment behaviour
of a sample of 672 publicly traded UK manufacturing companies over the period
1972 to 1991. We …nd evidence both of more cautious investment behaviour for
…rms subject to greater uncertainty, and of a convex response of investment to real
sales growth. While there may be other explanations for these patterns in company
investment dynamics, we conclude that the investment behaviour of large …rms is



                                          2
consistent with a partial irreversibility model in which uncertainty dampens the
short run adjustment of investment to demand shocks.
       Finally, simple simulations using our estimated econometric model suggest that
observed ‡uctuations in uncertainty can play an economically important role in
shaping …rm-level investment decisions. For example, we …nd that a one standard
deviation increase in our measure of uncertainty, as occurred after 9/11 and the
…rst OPEC oil crisis, can halve the impact e¤ect of demand shocks on company
investment. While we do not model the behaviour of labour demand, the existence
of similar labour hiring and …ring costs would imply that higher uncertainty would
also make employment responses to demand shocks more cautious. This suggests
that …rms will generally be less responsive to monetary and …scal stimulus in peri-
ods of high uncertainty, which is important for policy-makers trying to respond to
major shocks during periods of high uncertainty.2 Several papers have also reported
evidence of an increase in …rm-speci…c uncertainty in the US and other OECD coun-
tries in recent years,3 which our analysis indicates could have signi…cant e¤ects on
investment dynamics.
       The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 considers two implications of uncer-
tainty and irreversibility for investment behaviour, and con…rms these numerically
using simulated data. Section 3 develops our econometric investment equation and
shows, using the simulated data, that tests based on this model can detect these
e¤ects on investment dynamics. Section 4 takes this econometric model to real
company investment data to test for the presence of these e¤ects, while section 5
examines their magnitude. Section 6 o¤ers some concluding remarks.


2. Simulating investment dynamics under uncertainty

The typical model in the literature considers investment in a single partially irre-
versible capital good, with a Cobb-Douglas revenue function and demand conditions
which follow a Brownian motion process with constant variance. Investment only
   2
    See Bloom (2006) on the evidence for steep rises in uncertainty after major macro shocks.
   3
    Campbell et al. (2001) study US …rms in the period 1962-1997 and …nd an increase in the
…rm-level (but not market-level) volatility of annualised daily stock returns in the 1980s and 1990s
compared to the 1960s and 1970s. See also Philippon (2003) for evidence of increased sales growth
volatility for US …rms, and Thesmar and Thoenig (2003) for similar evidence on French …rms.


                                                 3
occurs when the …rm’s marginal revenue product of capital hits an upper threshold,
given by the traditional user cost of capital plus an option value for investment.
Similarly disinvestment only occurs when the marginal revenue product hits a lower
threshold, given by the user cost for selling capital less an option value for disin-
vestment. The …rm chooses to wait and do nothing if its marginal revenue product
of capital lies between these two thresholds.
   As the marginal revenue product of capital evolves stochastically over time this
approach predicts that the …rm will undertake sporadic bursts of investment or
disinvestment, consistent with the typical evidence from plant-level data (see, for
example, Doms and Dunne (1998) or Nilson and Schiantarelli (2003)). Abel and
Eberly (1996) show by comparative statics that the option values are increasing in
the (time invariant) level of uncertainty. This suggests that …rms which face a higher
level of uncertainty are less likely to respond to a given demand shock.

2.1. Aggregation and …rm-level investment

Annual investment data for publicly traded UK and US …rms, however, do not dis-
play the discrete switches from zero to non-zero investment regimes indicated by this
basic model. In particular observations with zero investment spending are almost
completely absent from their company accounts. Table 1 reports evidence from our
sample of 672 UK manufacturing companies, and from a sample of UK manufactur-
ing establishments that contain one or more plants at the same location. There are
two distinct patterns of aggregation that can be observed: …rst aggregation across
types of capital (structures, equipment and vehicles); and second aggregation across
plants within the establishment or the …rm. In both cases we observe a higher pro-
portion of observations with zero investment when we consider more disaggregated
data. There is also likely to be a third type of aggregation - temporal aggregation -
as the frequency of shocks and investment decisions is likely to be much higher than
that of the (annual) data.

                               [Table 1 about here]

   In view of this we explicitly consider a framework in which …rms invest in multiple
types of capital goods, across multiple production units, and there is aggregation over

                                          4
time. These production units experience idiosyncratic unit-level productivity shocks
as well as a common …rm-level demand shock. In this more general framework, but in
a model with a constant level of uncertainty and partial irreversibilities only, Eberly
and Van Mieghem (1997) have shown that the optimal investment decisions for each
unit will follow a multi-dimensional threshold policy. Extending this to allow for
time-varying uncertainty and temporal aggregation provides two implications which
are the focus of our simulation and empirical investigation.
       The …rst implication is that the response of company investment to demand
shocks should be lower at higher levels of uncertainty due to the “cautionary”e¤ect
of uncertainty. For each production unit or type of capital the option to wait and
do nothing is more valuable for …rms that face a higher level of demand uncertainty.
Following a given positive demand shock investment by such …rms is expected to be
lower, as both less units (or types of capital) will invest (the extensive margin) and
each unit (type) that does invest will invest less (the intensive margin), with any
supermodularity in the production technology reinforcing these e¤ects.4 Similarly
the impact of a given negative demand shock on …rm-level disinvestment is also
expected to be smaller for …rms that face a higher level of uncertainty.
       Second, the investment response will be convex in response to positive demand
shocks and concave in response to negative demand shocks. When the …rm expe-
riences a positive demand shock it may invest in a greater number of production
units or types of capital (the extensive margin) and it may invest more in each unit
or type of capital (the intensive margin). Larger demand shocks will a¤ect both
margins, and any supermodularity in the production technology would make these
two e¤ects reinforcing. Thus, the more types of capital the …rm is induced to invest
in, the more it wants to invest in those types of capital which are already adjusting,
generating a convex response. The same reasoning also suggests that the response
of …rm-level disinvestment to negative demand shocks will be concave.
   4
    Supermodularity is a general concept for complementarity. A function f :Rn ! R is de…ned
as supermodular if 8 x; x0 2 Rn , f (x) + f (x0 )         f (min(x; x0 )) + f (max(x; x0 )). If f is twice
                           @ 2 f (x1; x2 ;::xn )
di¤erentiable this implies        @xi @xj        0 8 i 6= j. The Cobb-Douglas and CES production
functions are both supermodular.




                                                    5
       As these investment models do not have closed form solutions we cannot prove
these properties analytically. In the next section we con…rm them using numerical
simulations.

2.2. The simulation model

We start by parameterising one model from the general class of supermodular ho-
mogeneous models that we are considering. Firms are assumed to operate a large
collection of individual production units, with the number chosen to ensure that full
aggregation has occurred. In the simulation this is set at 250 units per …rm, chosen
by increasing the number of units until the results were no longer sensitive to this
number.5
       Each unit faces an iso-elastic demand curve for its output, which is produced
using labour and two types of capital. Demand conditions evolve as a geometric ran-
dom walk with time-varying uncertainty, and have a unit-speci…c idiosyncratic com-
ponent and a common …rm-level component. Demand shocks, uncertainty shocks
and optimisation occur in monthly discrete time. Labour is costless to adjust while
both types of capital are costly to adjust.

2.2.1. The production unit model

In the basic model each production unit has a reduced form supermodular revenue
function R(X; K1 ; K2 )
                                 R(X; K1 ; K2 ) = X K1 K2                                  (2.1)

based on an underlying Cobb-Douglas production function after labour, a ‡exible
factor of production, has been optimised out. Demand and productivity conditions
have been combined into one index, X, henceforth called demand conditions. For
computational tractability we normalize this demand conditions parameter through
                      1
the substitution, P         = X, so that the revenue function is homogeneous of degree
   5
    In the UK Census of Production microdata the average size of a manufacturing production
unit is about 20 employees. The mean size of …rms in our sample is 4,440 employees, suggesting a
mean of around 220 units per …rm. Tests on speci…cations with di¤erent degrees of cross-sectional
aggregation (5, 10 and 50 units per …rm) and temporal aggregation (2, 4 and 6 periods per year)
con…rm the robustness of our results to these assumptions.




                                               6
one in (P; K1 ; K2 ), where

                                               e K1 ; K2 )
                              R(X; K1 ; K2 ) = R(P;                                               (2.2)
                                                   = P1       K1 K2 :                             (2.3)

In the simulation we set          = 0:4 and     = 0:4; corresponding to a 25% mark-up and
constant returns to scale in the physical production function, with equal coe¢ cients
on each type of capital.
   Demand conditions are a composite of a unit-level (P U ) and a …rm-level (P F )
component, P = P U            P F . The unit-level demand (or productivity) conditions
evolve over time as an augmented geometric random walk with stochastic volatility:

            PtU = PtU 1 (1 + ( t ) +              U
                                              t Vt )                    VtU     N (0; 1)          (2.4)

              t   =     t 1   +    (        t 1)   +     Wt           Wt      N (0; 1):           (2.5)

                                                                                    2
Here   ( t ) is the mean drift in unit-level demand conditions,                     t   is the variance
of unit-level demand conditions,              is the long run mean of          t,        is the rate of
                                        2
convergence to this mean, and               is the variance of the shocks to this variance
process. The terms VtU and Wt are the i.i.d. shocks to unit-level demand and
variance conditions respectively.
   The …rm-level demand process is also an augmented geometric random walk
with stochastic volatility, which for tractability we assume has the same mean and
variance:
                  PtF = PtF 1 (1 + ( t ) +          F
                                                t Vt )          VtF        N (0; 1):              (2.6)

Hence, the overall demand process log P has drift 2 ( t ) and variance 2 2t . While
this demand structure may seem complex, it is formulated to ensure that units
within the same …rm have linked investment behaviour due to the common …rm-
level demand shocks and level of uncertainty, but also display some independent
behaviour due to idiosyncratic shocks. The baseline value of 2 ( t ) is set to 4%
(average real sales growth), invariant to the level of uncertainty, although we also
report below some experiments that allow for more general drifts.
   The two types of capital are costly to adjust. We start by modelling only partial
irreversibility adjustment costs whereby the resale price of a unit of capital is less

                                                   7
than the purchase price. Capital type 1 is assumed more costly to adjust (for
example, specialised equipment), while capital type 2 is less costly to adjust (for
example, vehicles). For the simulation we set the resale loss for capital of type 1 to
50% and the resale loss for capital of type 2 to 20%.6
       These adjustment costs are de…ned by the …rm’s adjustment cost function,
C(P; K1 ; K2 ; I1 ; I2 ). We assume, for numerical tractability, that newly invested
capital enters production immediately, that both types of capital depreciate at an
annualized rate of 10%, and that the …rm has an annualized discount rate of 10%.

2.2.2. Solving the production unit model

The complexity of the model necessitates numerical simulation, but analytical results
can be used to show that the problem has a unique-valued continuous solution,7 and
an (almost everywhere) unique policy function. This means our numerical results
will be convergent with the unique analytical solution.
       In principle we have a model with too many state variables to be solved using
numerical methods given current computing power. The unit’s optimization prob-
lem, however, can be simpli…ed by noting that the revenue function, adjustment cost
function, depreciation schedules and expectations operators are all jointly homoge-
neous of degree one in (P; K1 ; K2 ). This allows us to normalize by one state variable
- capital type 1 - simplifying the model and dramatically increasing the speed of
the numerical solution routine. This e¤ectively gives us one state “for free”, in that
                                                           K2
we estimate on two major state spaces ( KP1 and            K1
                                                              )   but for three underlying state
variables.
   6
     Our choice of adjustment cost parameters is based on the literature where available, in par-
ticular Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006). The qualitative results from our analysis of the simulated
data are not sensitive to moderate changes to the adjustment cost parameter values, although as
discussed in section 3.2, they are sensitive to the type of adjustment costs considered.
   7
     An application of Stokey and Lucas (1989) for the continuous, concave and almost surely
bounded normalized returns and cost function for models with partial irreversibilities (this section)
and quadratic adjustment costs; and Caballero and Leahy (1996) for the extension to models with
…xed costs in section (3.2.2).




                                                 8
       The optimization problem (before normalization) can be stated as:

V (Pt ; K1t ; K2t ;    t)
                                       e t ; K1t; + I1t ; K2t + I2t )
                                 = max R(P                                 C(Pt ; K1t ; K2t ; I1t ; I2t )
                                     I1t ;I2t
                          1
                                     +
                             E[V (Pt+1 ; (K1t + I1t )(1 ); (K2t + I2t )(1 ); t+1 )]
                        1+r
where r is the discount rate, is the depreciation rate, E[:] is the expectations
operator, Ijt is investment in type j (j = 1; 2) capital at time t and Kjt is the stock
of type j capital. Using the homogeneity in (P; K1 ; K2 ) this can be re-written as:

K1t V (Pt ; 1; K2t ;        t)
                                            e t ; 1 + I1t ; K2t (1 + I2t ))
                                  = max K1t R(P                                    K1t C(Pt ; 1; K2t ; I1t ; I2t K2t )
                                         I1t ;I2t
                            1
                                         +
                               K1t+1 E[V (Pt+1 ; 1; K2t+1 ; t+1 )]
                          1+r
where starred variables are K2 = KK1
                                    2
                                      ; P = KP1 ; I1 = KI11 and I2 =                           I2
                                                                                               K2
                                                                                                  .   Upon
normalization by K1t this simpli…es to:

  V (Pt ; 1; K2t ;    t)
                                       e
                                 = max R(P t ; 1 + I1t ; K2t (1 + I2t ))   C(Pt ; 1; K2t ; I1t ; I2t K2t )
                                     I1t ;I2t

                         (1 + I1t )(1   )
                                     +    E[V (Pt+1 ; 1; K2t+1 ; t+1 )]
                              1+r
which is a function of only the state variables ( KP1 ; K
                                                        K1
                                                          2
                                                            ; ). We let uncertainty,                         t,

take …ve equally-spaced values from 0.05 to 0.5, with a symmetric monthly transition
matrix that is approximately calibrated against (the variance and autocorrelation
of) our stock-returns measure of uncertainty for UK listed …rms, described in section
4.1 below. The simulation is run on a state space of ( KP1 ; K2
                                                             K1
                                                                ; ) of (100,100,5).8

2.2.3. Aggregation to …rm-level data

Simulated data is generated by taking the numerical solutions for the optimal in-
vestment functions and feeding in demand and uncertainty shocks at a monthly
frequency. The simulation is run for 60 months to generate an initial ergodic distri-
bution. Annual …rm-level investment data is then generated by aggregating across
the two types of capital, across the 250 units and across 12 months within each year.
Capital stocks and the level of the demand conditions are summed across all units
at the end of each year, while uncertainty is measured as the average yearly value.
   8
    We also need the optimal control space of (I1 ; I2 ) of dimension (100,100), so that the full
returns function in the Bellman equation has dimensionality (100,100,100,100,5). The program and
a manual explaining the underlying techniques are available at http://cep.lse.ac.uk/matlabcode or
from nbloom@stanford.edu.

                                                        9
2.3. Investigating the theoretical implications

Using the model and solution method outlined above we generate simulated invest-
ment and demand data for a panel of 50,000 …rms and 25 years. We con…rm the two
implications for short run investment dynamics highlighted in section 2 by consider-
ing the relationship between …rm-level annual investment rates and demand growth
in this simulated data. As the drift in the demand process is common to all …rms,
and the idiosyncratic shocks are averaged across 250 production units, there is a
simple correspondence between demand growth and the …rm-level demand shock in
this simulation.
       Figure 1 presents Lowess smoothed non-parametric plots9 of investment against
demand growth for observations around the 10th , 25th , 50th , 75th and 90th percentiles
of the distribution of uncertainty ( t ).10 Investment rates are measured as annual
investment divided by the capital stock at the beginning of the year, and annual
demand growth is measured as the percentage change comparing the beginning
and the end of the year. The …rst implication - that the short run response of
investment to demand shocks will be lower at higher uncertainty - indicates that the
slope of these response functions is lower at higher levels of uncertainty. It is evident
that these non-parametric regression estimates do indeed become ‡atter as the level
of uncertainty rises, consistent with the …rst implication. In quantitative terms,
comparing investment responses to -10% and +25% demand growth, the gradient
of the investment response to demand growth approximately doubles when moving
from the third quartile to the …rst quartile of the distribution of uncertainty, and
approximately triples when moving from the 90th percentile to the 10th percentile.
Hence, di¤erences in the level of uncertainty generate substantial variation in the
short run response of investment to demand shocks, and this is clearly seen in our
   9
      Lowess smoothing estimates a linear regression at each data point, using Cleveland’s (1979)
tricube weighting over a moving window of 5% of the data, to generate a non-parametrically
smoothed data series. Lowess is similar to Kernel smoothing but uses information on both the
mean and the slope of the data, and so is more e¢ cient in estimating functions with continuous …rst
derivatives, which our aggregated data has asymptotically (in the number of production units).
   10
      As this variance parameter has a …ve point process in the underlying monthly model, we obtain
considerable clustering of observations around these values, even in the average annual …rm data.
Although we use 1.25 million generated observations, there are no observations in the sample at
the 10th and 25th percentiles of uncertainty with annual demand growth above 27% and 64%
respectively, so the lines are not estimated beyond these points.


                                                10
simulated …rm-level data despite extensive aggregation across two types of capital,
250 production units and 12 monthly decision periods.
   The second implication - that the short run response of investment to demand
shocks is non-linear - indicates that these response functions are convex for pos-
itive investment and concave for negative investment. Focusing …rst on positive
investment, it is evident that all …ve curves are indeed convex, with a proportion-
ally larger response to larger positive shocks. Looking at negative investment the
picture is unclear because, even for large negative demand growth of -25%, most
…rms are still undertaking positive gross investment. This re‡ects the combination
of longer run dynamics with pent-up investment demand, 4% demand drift and 10%
depreciation, which even in the presence of relatively low degrees of irreversibility
generates very few …rm-level disinvestment observations (2% in our simulated data
sample and 3% in the real UK data). Thus, we cannot identify the concavity in the
disinvestment responses in either the simulation or in actual UK data, and therefore
we concentrate on the convex response for positive investment in the remainder of
the paper.


3. Evaluating our empirical speci…cation

The next step is to investigate the empirical importance of these properties of short
run investment dynamics in actual …rm-level data, which requires an appropriate
econometric speci…cation. If we observed the true underlying demand shocks and
demand variance this would be relatively straightforward as we could, for example,
use the same the non-parametric approach used in the previous section to analyse
short run investment responses to exogenous demand shocks. However, in real …rm-
level datasets we only observe proxies for demand growth such as sales growth and
proxies for uncertainty such as share price volatility. Among other issues, this re-
quires us to deal with the problem that outcomes like sales and share prices are
jointly determined with the …rm’s investment decisions. To do this we consider
GMM estimates of dynamic econometric investment equations.
   Our starting point is a reduced form error correction model that provides a
‡exible distinction between short run in‡uences on investment rates and longer term


                                         11
in‡uences on capital stocks. This has been widely used in recent empirical studies of
company investment behaviour.11 Bloom (2000) shows that the actual capital stock
series chosen by a …rm under partial irreversibility has a long run growth rate equal
to that of the hypothetical capital stock series that the same …rm would choose
under costless reversibility, essentially because the gap between these two series is
bounded. This implies that the logarithms of the two series should be cointegrated,
and thus provides one motivation for considering an error correction model of capital
stock adjustment.12
       This cointegration result indicates that

                                     log Kit = log Kit + eit                                  (3.1)

where Kit is the actual capital stock for …rm i in period t, Kit is the capital stock this
…rm would have chosen in the absence of adjustment costs, and eit is a stationary
error term. We specify this hypothetical frictionless level of the capital stock as

                                 log Kit = log Yit + Ai + Bt                                  (3.2)

where Yit is the (real) sales of …rm i in period t, and Ai and Bt are unobserved
…rm-speci…c and time-speci…c e¤ects re‡ecting possible variation across …rms in
the components of and response to the user cost of capital (Chetty, 2006). This
formulation is consistent, for example, with the frictionless demand for capital for
a …rm with a constant returns to scale CES production function and iso-elastic
demand, and implies that the logs of the actual capital stock and real sales are
cointegrated, provided the user cost of capital is stationary.13 Note that this does
not impose that the actual capital stock and its hypothetical frictionless level are
equal on average, since the error term eit need not be mean zero. However, the
partial irreversibility framework indicates that eit will be serially correlated in a
  11
     See, for example, Hall, Mairesse and Mulkay (1999) and Bond, Harho¤ and Van Reenen (2003).
  12
     The representation theorem of Engle and Granger (1987) shows that the dynamic relationship
between two I(1) series that are cointegrated can be formulated as an error correction relationship.
  13
     Both this speci…cation and the results in Bloom (2000) are based on a single production unit
with one type of capital. To check that this provides an accurate approximation for our aggregated
…rm-level data, we con…rmed that log capital was cointegrated with log sales in our simulated
data, with a coe¢ cient of 1.008 on log sales. In sections 3.2 and 4.4 we also consider relaxing the
restriction in (3.2) that this coe¢ cient is unity.


                                                12
highly complex way. Any parsimonious speci…cation of these dynamics should be
viewed as an approximation, the quality of which we will investigate using simulated
investment data in the next section.
   A basic error correction representation of the dynamic relationship between
log Kit and log Kit , using equation (3.2), would have the form

                 log Kit =       log Yit + (log Yi;t      s      log Ki;t s ) + Ai + Bt + vit            (3.3)

where Ai and Bt are again unobserved …rm-speci…c and time-speci…c e¤ects and vit
is, at least approximately, a serially uncorrelated error term. A key property is that
the coe¢ cient          on the error correction term should be positive, so that …rms with a
capital stock level below their target will eventually adjust upwards, and vice versa.
   We use the approximation                log Kit     (Iit =Ki;t 1 )        i,   where Iit is gross invest-
ment and     i   is the (possibly …rm-speci…c) depreciation rate. To test for the e¤ect of
uncertainty on the impact e¤ect of demand shocks (the …rst implication), we add an
interaction term between a measure of uncertainty (SDit ) and current sales growth
( log Yit ). A negative coe¢ cient on this interaction term would indicate that the
short run response of investment to demand shocks is indeed lower at higher levels
of uncertainty. To allow for other possible e¤ects of uncertainty on the level of the
capital stock in either the short run or the long run, we also consider further terms
in both the change ( SDit ) and the level (SDit ) of our measure of uncertainty. To
test for non-linearity in the short run response of investment to demand shocks (the
second implication), we add a higher order term in current sales growth ( log Yit )2 .
A positive coe¢ cient on this squared term would be consistent with this implication,
indicating a convex relationship between investment and demand shocks, recalling
that our samples are dominated by observations on …rms with positive gross invest-
ment.
   These additional terms then give us an empirical speci…cation of the form
   Iit
             =      1     log Yit +   2(   log Yit )2 +       3 (SDit       log Yit )                    (3.4)
  Ki;t   1
                  + (log Yi;t    1    log Ki;t 1 ) +      1 SDit   +    2   SDit + Ai +      i   + Bt + vit :




                                                     13
3.1. Testing our empirical speci…cation on simulated data

To investigate whether this econometric approach can detect the properties of short
run investment dynamics highlighted in section 2, we use our simulation model
to generate data for a panel of 1,000 …rms and 15 years. This allows us to con-
sider whether this relatively simple dynamic econometric speci…cation provides an
adequate approximation to the complex investment dynamics suggested by mod-
els with partial irreversibility, and to compare speci…cations that use sales and a
stock-returns measure of uncertainty with speci…cations that use the true underly-
ing demand and uncertainty variables. Sales (Yit ) are generated from the revenue
function and aggregated across production units and months. Monthly stock re-
turns are generated by aggregating the value function across units and adding in
monthly net cash ‡ows (revenue less investment costs). The within-year standard
deviation of these monthly returns (SDit ) provides our …rm-level measure of uncer-
tainty, which mimics the kind of measure used in our empirical analysis in section
4. Table 2 reports the sample correlation matrix for key variables in our simulated
dataset. This demonstrates that the standard deviation of monthly stock returns is
positively correlated with the underlying standard deviation of demand shocks (    it ),

supporting the use of this as an empirical measure of uncertainty. In what follows
we use lower cases to denote natural logarithms, so for example, yit = log Yit .

                          [Tables 2 and 3 about here]

   In Table 3 we present the results of estimating the augmented error correction
model of investment using this simulated …rm-level panel. In column (1) we …rst
report OLS estimates using as explanatory variables the annual measures of the ‘true’
demand (P ) and uncertainty ( ) variables that were used to generate this simulated
investment data. Our tests detect signi…cant heterogeneity in the impact e¤ect of
demand shocks on …rm-level investment, depending on the level of uncertainty, and
signi…cant convexity in the response of investment to demand shocks. We also …nd
evidence of ‘error correcting’behaviour, with the actual capital stock adjusting in
the long run towards a target that is cointegrated with its frictionless level. We …nd
no evidence here that a permanent increase in the level of uncertainty would a¤ect

                                         14
the level of the capital stock in the long run, but there is an indication that increases
in uncertainty reduce investment in the short run in ways that are not fully captured
by our multiplicative interaction term.
   Column (2) of Table 3 uses instead the empirical counterparts to the demand
and uncertainty variables, based on annual levels of simulated sales (Yit ) and the
within-year standard deviation of simulated monthly stock returns (SDit ). As these
variables are jointly determined with investment decisions we treat them as endoge-
nous and report GMM estimates. To mimic our empirical analysis of real company
data more closely, we also allow for the possibility of unobserved …rm-speci…c ef-
fects here, and estimate this speci…cation in …rst-di¤erences. The instruments used
are the second and third lags of our simulated investment, capital, sales and un-
certainty measures, following Arellano and Bond (1991). A Sargan-Hansen test of
overidentifying restrictions does not reject this speci…cation, and there is no sig-
ni…cant evidence of second-order serial correlation in the …rst-di¤erenced residuals.
While the parameter estimates are less precise in this case, we again detect signif-
icant evidence that uncertainty in‡uences the short run response of investment to
demand shocks, and that this response is convex. It should be noted, however, that
this was not always the case if we imposed simpler dynamic speci…cations that were
rejected by the test of overidentifying restrictions (for example, if we omit the error
correction term). This illustrates the potential importance of controlling for longer
run investment dynamics when testing the properties of the short run responses to
demand shocks. For other calibrations of the simulation model we found that al-
ternative dynamic speci…cations or instrument sets may be required. The negative
coe¢ cient on the interaction term and the positive coe¢ cient on the squared term,
however, were found consistently across speci…cations that were not rejected by the
test of overidentifying restrictions.
   Considering the magnitude of this e¤ect of uncertainty, we …nd that the predicted
impact e¤ect of sales growth on investment rates increases by 79% when moving from
the third quartile to the …rst quartile in the distribution of measured uncertainty,
and by 168% when moving from the 90th percentile to the 10th percentile. These
di¤erences are quantitatively similar to those that we estimated directly for the



                                           15
underlying model in section 2.3.
       This suggests that our econometric tests have power to detect these properties of
short run investment dynamics, at least using this simulated dataset. Interestingly
we also …nd that the longer run capital stock adjustment process is approximated
quite well by our error correction speci…cation, and that our GMM estimates using
measured sales and uncertainty variables even provide quantitative estimates of the
e¤ect of uncertainty on short run responses to demand shocks that are in the right
ballpark.
       In columns (3) and (4) of Table 3 we con…rm that these properties of short
run investment dynamics are also found using two alternative speci…cations of our
simulation model, which approximate Hartman (1972) and Abel (1983) type e¤ects
of uncertainty on the expected marginal revenue product of capital (MRPC).14 In
                                                                                                 2
column (3) we set the drift in the demand process 2 ( t ) = 0:04 +                               t
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                     , so that the
expected MRPC is increasing in uncertainty. As expected, this generates a positive
long run e¤ect of the level of uncertainty on the level of the capital stock. Neverthe-
less we can still detect the negative e¤ect of uncertainty on the short run response
of investment to demand shocks, and the convex shape of these short run responses.
                                                           2
In column (4) we set the drift 2 ( t ) = 0:04              t
                                                           2
                                                               , so that the expected MRPC is
decreasing in uncertainty. This generates a negative long run e¤ect of uncertainty
on the level of the capital stock, but has little impact on either the interaction term
between demand growth and uncertainty or on our higher order demand growth
term. This suggests, …rst, that our econometric tests of the properties of short run
  14
    In a competitive model with shocks to output prices and a ‡exible factor (such as labour) the
marginal revenue product of capital (MRPC) is convex in demand conditions, so uncertainty has a
positive impact on the expected MRPC. For example, with a revenue function R = ZK a Lb (where
Z is a demand process, K is capital and L is labour), after optimizing out labour net revenue
            1    a                                                          1    a+b 1
equals CZ 1 b K 1 b (where C is a constant) and the MRPC equals 1aCb Z 1 b K 1 b . If Z is a
                                                                        1              1                     2
                                                                                                         b      dt
geometric Brownian process with drift     and variance    then E[dZ 1       b   =Z 1       b   ]=( +    1 b 2 )1 b,
                                                     2
so the expected growth of MRPC equals ( + 1 b b 2 ) 1 1 b ; which is increasing in uncertainty. How-
ever, as Caballero (1991) notes, the sign of this e¤ect is sensitive to assumptions such as the
degree of imperfect competition, and whether the underlying shocks are to prices or quantities.
Under alternative assumptions the marginal revenue product of capital can become concave in
demand conditions, with a negative impact of uncertainty. To qualitatively simulate these pos-
itive and negative Hartman-Abel e¤ects in our linear homogeneous speci…cation, we adjust our
                          2
demand drift term by     2 , noting that the quantitative e¤ects would also depend on the exact
convexity/concavity of the underlying MRPC in demand conditions.



                                                16
investment dynamics appear to be robust (at least to these modi…cations), and sec-
ondly, that the longer run e¤ects of uncertainty are theoretically ambiguous and
need to be determined empirically. This echoes the discussions both in Leahy and
Whited (1996), who outline a range of potentially positive and negative e¤ects of
uncertainty, and in Abel and Eberly (1999), who note the ambiguous long run e¤ects
of uncertainty on capital stock levels in a partial irreversibility framework.

3.2. Simulation robustness tests

To assess the generality of our predictions on the uncertainty-demand growth inter-
action term and on the demand growth squared term, we now investigate whether
these e¤ects are found for an alternative revenue function, and for alternative types
of adjustment costs.

                                   [Table 4 about here]

3.2.1. A CES speci…cation

The simulation model and assumptions require only a supermodular homogeneous
unit revenue function, so we can replace the Cobb-Douglas revenue function (2.1)
with a function of a CES aggregator over the two types of capital

                              R(X; K1 ; K2 ) = X (K1 + K2 )                                 (3.5)

                                                                     e K1 ; K2 ) =
The associated linear homogeneous revenue function is then de…ned by R(P;
P 1 (K1 + K2 ) , where P = X 1 . We set                = 0:5 and      = 0:8.
       Column (1) of Table 4 presents OLS results for simulated …rm-level data with
this alternative CES speci…cation, using the true demand and uncertainty variables.
We again …nd that the short run response of investment to demand shocks is convex,
and that higher uncertainty reduces this impact e¤ect of demand shocks on invest-
ment. First-di¤erenced GMM estimates, using sales as a measure of demand and
stock-return volatility as a measure of uncertainty, also yielded a signi…cant positive
coe¢ cient on the sales growth squared term and a signi…cant negative coe¢ cient on
the uncertainty interaction term.15 This suggests that our empirical tests can detect
  15
    Coe¢ cients (standard deviations) of 0.627 (0.132) on the sales growth term and -1.452 (0.467)
on the uncertainty interaction term.

                                               17
these e¤ects on short run investment dynamics with this alternative speci…cation of
the revenue function.

3.2.2. General adjustment costs

A number of previous papers, including Abel and Eberly (1994), Cooper and Halti-
wanger (2006) and Bloom (2006) have noted that di¤erent forms of adjustment costs
can have signi…cantly di¤erent implications for investment behaviour. Our core pre-
dictions are based on a model with partial irreversibilities, but in this section we
investigate whether they are also found using two additional types of adjustment
costs: …xed disruption costs and quadratic adjustment costs.
       Fixed disruption costs
       When new capital is added into the production process some downtime may
result in a …xed loss of output however large the investment. For example, the factory
may need to close for a …xed period while a re…t is occurring. For the simulation we
assume the …xed cost of adjustment for either type of capital is 5% of annual sales,
which is approximately calibrated on a monthly basis from the annual estimates in
Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006).
       Quadratic adjustment costs
       The costs of investment may also be related to the rate of adjustment with
                                                                                           Im 2
higher costs for more rapid changes, which we specify as Cquad;j =                  m Km ( Km )   for
j = 1; 2. For the simulation we assume that                j   = 0.3 for both types of capital,
again calibrated roughly on a monthly basis from Cooper and Haltiwanger’s (2006)
annual estimates.16
       Since both of these adjustment costs are jointly homogeneous of degree one in
(P; K1 ; K2 ) the cost function C(P; K1 ; K2 ; I1 ; I2 ) is also homogeneous, permitting
the same normalization by capital type 1 and the resulting accelerated numerical
solution as outlined in section 2.2.
       Column (2) of Table 4 presents OLS results for simulated …rm-level data with
  16
    For simplicity we have assumed that both the …xed and the quadratic adjustment costs are
identical for the two types of capital, with no cross e¤ects. In experiments allowing for di¤erent
levels of these adjustment costs for the two types of capital, we found qualitatively similar results.
Our approach could allow for more general speci…cations of these adjustment costs, with cross
e¤ects, but we leave this for future research.



                                                 18
…xed adjustment costs only, again using the true demand and uncertainty variables.
Interestingly, in this case we …nd that higher uncertainty has the opposite e¤ect on
the impact e¤ect of demand shocks on investment. This suggests that the ‘caution-
ary e¤ect’of uncertainty on short run investment dynamics is sensitive to the form of
adjustment costs, even within the class of non-convex adjustment costs. The reason
for this positive e¤ect is that, under …xed costs, investment is undertaken as a jump
                                                                                P          P
process with the level of investment determined so as to return                 K1
                                                                                     and   K2
                                                                                                to target
levels between their thresholds, rather than to hold them continuously at their in-
vestment thresholds as under partial irreversibility. When uncertainty rises and the
thresholds move further apart, this target level moves by less, so that the gap be-
tween the target and the investment threshold grows and the amount of investment
required to reach the target also grows. This positive impact of uncertainty on the
level of investment undertaken at each investing unit o¤sets the negative e¤ect of
uncertainty on the number of investing units, leading to a positive e¤ect of uncer-
tainty on the response of investment to demand shocks in our simulation with …xed
costs only. Since the magnitude of these opposing e¤ects is likely to be sensitive to
the exact parameterization of the model, the sign of this short run e¤ect is probably
ambiguous under (pure) …xed costs. We also …nd no signi…cant non-linearity in the
response of investment to demand shocks in this experiment.
       Column (3) of Table 4 reports the OLS results for a simulation with quadratic
adjustment costs only. In this case we …nd a smaller response of investment to
demand shocks at higher levels of uncertainty, but again no signi…cant indication
of non-linearity in the short run responses. Again these results suggest that these
properties of short run investment dynamics are sensitive to the type of adjustment
costs. In this experiment we also …nd a strong long run e¤ect of uncertainty in
reducing the level of the capital stock,17 although we note that this e¤ect could be
o¤set by a positive Hartman-Abel type e¤ect of the kind considered in Table 3.
       Finally in columns (4) and (5) we report the results for a simulation that com-
bines all three types of adjustment costs, with the same parameter values used
  17
     With …xed costs or partial irreversibilities, the value function is linear outside the central region
of inaction, with slope equal to the purchase/resale price of capital, so that the value function is
concave only in the region of inaction. With quadratic adjustment costs, the value function is
globally curved, thereby generating greater global concavity.


                                                   19
previously. For both the OLS results using the ‘true’explanatory variables in col-
umn (4), and for the …rst-di¤erenced GMM results using the observable proxies in
column (5), we …nd evidence that higher uncertainty makes the response of invest-
ment to demand shocks more cautious, and that this response is convex, with a
proportionately larger response to larger shocks. At least for this combination of
adjustment cost parameters, based on the evidence presented in Cooper and Halti-
wanger (2006), we …nd that the properties of the short run investment dynamics
seem to be dominated by the e¤ects of partial irreversibility that we highlighted in
section 2.
       In other robustness tests we also experimented with, …rst, changing the discount
rate from 10% to 5%, and second, relaxing the restriction in our econometric speci-
…cation that the long run coe¢ cient on log sales is unity, as in equation (3.2). The
signs and statistical signi…cance of the coe¢ cients on the additional uncertainty
interaction and squared demand growth terms in our augmented error correction
models were robust in both cases, both in the OLS and …rst-di¤erenced GMM re-
sults.18


4. Empirical results for company data

We use …rm-level data for an unbalanced panel of 672 publicly traded UK man-
ufacturing …rms between 1972 and 1991. We use pre-1991 UK data because the
accounting regulations required …rms to report investment expenditure consistently
throughout this period, together with the net book value of capital from acquisition
of subsidiaries, and revenue from sales of …xed assets. We use data on publicly
traded companies because this allows us to construct measures of uncertainty from
high frequency stock market returns data.
  18
    For the simulated data with a 5% discount rate, a consistent …nding was that the e¤ect of
uncertainty on the short run response of investment to demand shocks was larger than we found
with a 10% discount rate. This is consistent with the higher value of real options at a lower discount
rate. These results are available on request from the authors.




                                                 20
4.1. Uncertainty measures

Although our formal model focuses on uncertainty about demand and productivity
conditions, our measure of uncertainty is much broader in scope. In reality …rms
will be uncertain about a wide range of factors, including taxes, regulations, interest
rates, wages, exchange rates and technological change. In an attempt to capture all
relevant factors in one scalar measure, we follow the approach suggested by Leahy
and Whited (1996) and use the standard deviation of daily stock returns for …rm i in
accounting year t, denoted SDit . This provides a forward-looking indicator which is
implicitly weighted in accordance with the impact of di¤erent sources of uncertainty
on the …rm’s value.
   A stock returns-based measure of uncertainty is also attractive because the data
is reported at a su¢ ciently high frequency to use on an annual basis. For ho-
moskedastic di¤usion processes, the variance of the sample variance is inversely
related to the sampling frequency (see Merton (1980)). Our sampling frequency of
about 265 observations per year should yield low sample variance, so that move-
ments in the measured variance should re‡ect changes in the underlying process
rather than extreme draws.
   One possible concern about this measure of uncertainty is that the variability
in stock market returns may partly re‡ect noise unrelated to fundamentals (for
example, share price bubbles). We address this by considering a second measure
which normalizes the …rm’s daily share return by the return on the FTSE All-
Share index, to eliminate the e¤ect of any aggregate stock market bubbles. We
also consider using the within-year standard deviation of the …rm’s monthly stock
returns. Although estimates based on 12 monthly observations are subject to more
sampling variation, this will reduce the impact of high frequency noise that may be
present in daily observations.
   A di¤erent concern is whether the volatility in stock returns would re‡ect the
variance of demand or productivity shocks in our underlying theoretical framework.
We have addressed this using our simulated data in the previous section where
we …nd that econometric speci…cations using this observable proxy can detect the
impact of underlying uncertainty on investment dynamics.


                                          21
   We have also compared our stock returns measure to other possible proxies for
uncertainty. Using I/B/E/S data for UK …rms, Bond et al. (2005) report that
stock returns volatility is positively correlated with both the within-year variability
of analysts’earnings forecasts, and with the cross-section dispersion across forecasts
made by di¤erent analysts for the same …rm.
   Finally we note that our empirical …nding on the relationship between uncer-
tainty and the impact e¤ect of demand growth is qualitatively similar to that ob-
tained by Guiso and Parigi (1999), who used cross-sectional survey data on man-
agers’ subjective distributions of future demand growth to estimate the variance
of …rm-level demand shocks for a sample of Italian …rms. This suggests that this
property of short run investment dynamics can be detected using di¤erent empirical
measures of uncertainty.

4.2. Investment and other accounting data

We obtained company accounts data, as well as data on stock returns, from Datas-
tream. Investment in …xed capital assets is measured net of revenue from asset
sales. Our capital stock measure is benchmarked using the book value of the …rm’s
stock of net …xed assets, and subsequently updated using the investment data in a
standard perpetual inventory formula. Real sales are obtained from data on nominal
sales using the aggregate GDP de‡ator. Cash ‡ow is measured as reported post-
tax earnings plus depreciation deductions. Further details are provided in the Data
Appendix.

4.3. Estimation results

Our main econometric results are estimated using the system GMM procedure devel-
oped by Arellano and Bover (1995) and Blundell and Bond (1998). This combines
a system of equations in …rst-di¤erences using suitably lagged levels of endoge-
nous variables as instruments, as in the basic …rst-di¤erenced GMM estimator (see
Arellano and Bond (1991)), with equations in levels for which lagged di¤erences
of endogenous variables are used as instruments. Unobserved …rm-speci…c e¤ects
are eliminated from the …rst-di¤erenced equations by the transformation. The key
requirement is that the additional instruments used in the levels equations should

                                          22
be uncorrelated with the unobserved …rm-speci…c e¤ects in the investment equa-
tion, which is tested using the Sargan-Hansen test of overidentifying restrictions.
The advantage is that, if these additional instruments are valid, the system GMM
estimator should have greater e¢ ciency and smaller …nite sample bias than the cor-
responding …rst-di¤erenced GMM estimator. The reported results treat both sales
and stock-returns volatility as endogenous variables, with the precise instruments
used noted in the Tables. Similar results were found using a range of alternative in-
strument sets, and our main …ndings concerning the short run e¤ects of sales growth
and uncertainty on company investment were also found using the …rst-di¤erenced
GMM estimator.
   Our main speci…cation is based on equation (3.4), with current and lagged cash
‡ow variables (Cit =Ki;t 1 ) as additional controls. Such terms are often found to
be informative in microeconometric investment equations, and may re‡ect either
…nancing constraints (see Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988)), expectations of
future demand growth or pro…tability (see Bond et al. (2004)), or more generally
measurement errors or mis-speci…cations (see, for example, Erickson and Whited
(2000) and Cooper and Ejarque (2003)). In our case these cash ‡ow terms are
statistically signi…cant, and are required to obtain empirical speci…cations that are
not rejected by the test of overidentifying restrictions. However, as reported below,
our main results on investment dynamics are robust to their exclusion.

                              [Table 5 about here]

   Column (1) of Table 5 reports results for a basic linear error correction speci-
…cation with these additional cash ‡ow terms. We …nd that the key coe¢ cient on
the error correction term is correctly signed and statistically signi…cant, suggesting
that in the long run companies adjust their capital stocks towards a target that
is proportional to real sales. We also …nd an impact e¤ect of real sales growth
that is positive and statistically signi…cant, although considerably smaller than the
long run elasticity of unity, and signi…cant e¤ects from the additional cash ‡ow
terms. There is marginally signi…cant evidence of second-order serial correlation in
the …rst-di¤erenced residuals in this basic speci…cation, although the Sargan-Hansen


                                         23
test does not reject the validity of the overidentifying restrictions. A simple good-
ness of …t statistic also suggests that this model has reasonable explanatory power
for …rm-level data of this kind.19
       Column (2) of Table 5 adds a squared term in current real sales growth to this
basic speci…cation. In line with our results for the simulated data under partial
irreversibility in section 3, we …nd signi…cant positive coe¢ cients on both the level
and the square of real sales growth. Column (3) adds a range of uncertainty terms
to this extended error correction speci…cation. The main result of interest here is
the signi…cant negative coe¢ cient on the interaction term. The linear uncertainty
terms (the change in uncertainty and the lagged level of uncertainty), in contrast,
are found to be only weakly signi…cant, with a joint test of their exclusion from the
speci…cation in column (3) not rejected (p-value = 0.17). We include these terms
here partly to ensure that the signi…cant coe¢ cient on the interaction term is not
the result of omitting relevant linear uncertainty terms, and partly to investigate
whether there is signi…cant evidence of a long run e¤ect of uncertainty on capital
accumulation. The insigni…cance of the lagged level of uncertainty in column (3)
formally rejects the presence of such a long run e¤ect, although the imprecision
with which we estimate this coe¢ cient suggests that this test may not be very
powerful.20 Omitting this term in column (4) results in an insigni…cant coe¢ cient
on the short run change in uncertainty term, which we also omit from our preferred
parsimonious speci…cation in column (5). Thus the only e¤ect of uncertainty on
company investment behaviour that we can detect with a high degree of statistical
con…dence is the interaction with the impact e¤ect of current real sales growth.
       Table 6 investigates this interaction e¤ect further. Here we decompose our stock
returns measure of uncertainty (SDit ) into three components - a macroeconomic
component, common to all …rms in a particular year (SDt ); a time-invariant …rm-
speci…c component (SDi ); and an idiosyncratic time-varying component (SDgit =
  19
     We report the squared correlation coe¢ cient between actual and predicted levels of the in-
vestment rate. This squared correlation measure is equivalent to the standard R2 in an OLS
regression, and is recommended as a goodness of …t measure for instrumental variable regressions
by, for example, Windmeijer (1995).
  20
     That is, our results do not rule out the possibility of an economically signi…cant negative long
run e¤ect of uncertainty on capital accumulation, although we cannot con…rm the presence of such
an e¤ect with any con…dence.


                                                 24
SDit SDt SDi ). Columns (1) to (3) include interactions between real sales growth
and each of these uncertainty variables individually, while column (4) includes all
three interaction terms jointly.

                             [Tables 6 and 7 about here]

       The interaction between …rm-level real sales growth and a purely macroeconomic
measure of uncertainty, included in column (1) of Table 6, is the least informative
of our three variables.21 The interaction with a time invariant …rm-speci…c measure
of uncertainty, reported in column (2), is only weakly signi…cant, while columns (3)
and (4) show that it is the interaction between sales growth and the idiosyncratic
time-varying component (SDgit ) of our uncertainty measure that is most informative.
However, because the coe¢ cients on the remaining interaction terms in column (4)
are estimated imprecisely, we can easily accept the restriction of common coe¢ cients
on these three interactions, as imposed in our preferred empirical speci…cation.

4.4. Robustness tests

We conducted a number of robustness tests, some of which are reported in Table 7.
In column (1) we omit the cash ‡ow variables, which causes the test of overiden-
tifying restrictions to reject, but does not a¤ect the sign or the signi…cance of the
coe¢ cients on the interaction term between uncertainty and sales growth and on the
squared sales growth term. In column (2) we add a further interaction with …rm size,
de…ning a ‘big …rm’dummy variable Bit which takes the value one for observations
with real sales above the sample median, and zero otherwise. Our result indicates
that the e¤ect of uncertainty on the impact e¤ect of sales growth on investment is
not signi…cantly di¤erent between the smaller and larger …rms within our sample.
The point estimate suggests that this e¤ect may be smaller for the relatively large
…rms. One possible explanation is that our stock-returns measure may be a noisier
proxy for the underlying uncertainty in the case of larger …rms, due to the e¤ect of
conglomeration.
  21
    The limited information that we …nd in macroeconomic as opposed to microeconomic variation
in our uncertainty measure may help to explain why time-series studies of aggregate investment
data have often not found signi…cant e¤ects of uncertainty variables.


                                             25
       In column (3) of Table 7 we use an alternative measure of uncertainty constructed
after normalising each …rm’s stock returns by the return on the FTSE All-Share
index for the same day. This measure gives a slightly larger and more precisely
estimated coe¢ cient on the interaction term than our basic results, possibly because
some of the general stock market noise has been removed from this measure of
uncertainty. In column (4) we use the within-year standard deviation of monthly
stock returns (not normalised), rather than daily stock returns, to generate the
uncertainty measure. Our results here are qualitatively similar, but in this case the
coe¢ cient on the interaction term is slightly smaller and less signi…cant. This may
be partly due to the greater sampling variance that results from the lower monthly
sampling frequency,22 suggesting that higher frequency stock returns data is valuable
for obtaining a more powerful test.
       In column (5) of Table 7 we implement an adjustment for …nancial leverage,
following Leahy and Whited (1996), to eliminate the e¤ect of gearing on the vari-
ability of stock returns.23 Again we …nd that our key results on the properties of
short run investment dynamics are robust. In this case we …nd that the coe¢ cient
on the interaction with sales growth is larger and more signi…cant, possibly because
controlling for leverage reduces some of the measurement error in our proxy for
uncertainty.
       We also considered speci…cations with the lagged level of log sales as an additional
explanatory variable; together with the included error correction term, this relaxes
the restriction that the long run elasticity of capital with respect to sales is unity.
This additional term was insigni…cant in all cases, and our results on short run
investment dynamics were completely robust to its inclusion. We also experimented
with a range of additional non-linear and interaction terms, none of which were found
to be statistically signi…cant in our sample. For example, we included interactions
  22
     Switching from daily to monthly returns data is expected to increase the sampling variance of
SDit …ve-fold. The monthly (weekly) measure of uncertainty has a correlation coe¢ cient with the
daily measure of 0.784 (0.900). Using the weekly uncertainty measure, the coe¢ cient (standard
error) on the uncertainty-sales growth interaction term was estimated to be -0.146 (0.082), about
mid-way between the estimates using the daily and monthly measures.
  23
     This is done by mutliplying SDit by the ratio of equity to (equity+debt), with equity measured
using the market value of shares (ordinary and preference) and debt measured using the book value
of all long-term debt.



                                                26
of our measure of uncertainty with squared sales growth, cash ‡ow and the error
correction term. The joint Wald test for the exclusion of these three terms gave a
 2
     (3) statistic of 4.42, with a p-value of 0.219. Finally, we also investigated whether
the coe¢ cient on our interaction term was larger or more signi…cant for …rms in
industries where market power is likely to be greater (as proxied by concentration
ratios, trade barriers, etc.). An implication of real options theory is that this e¤ect
of uncertainty should be stronger for …rms with more market power. We found no
evidence that this was the case, although it could be that our industry-level proxies
are inadequate measures of the …rm’s market power.


5. Quantifying the impact of uncertainty

The results presented in the preceding section detect a statistically signi…cant e¤ect
of higher uncertainty in dampening the response of company investment to demand
shocks. To evaluate the size of this e¤ect we conducted a simple simulation using
the model in column (5) of Table 5, in which we track the predicted response of
investment and the capital stock to an unanticipated, permanent 2.5% increase in
real sales.24 Figure 2 plots the predicted response of investment rates for observations
at di¤erent levels of uncertainty, highlighting the large ‘cautionary’e¤ect of higher
uncertainty on the short-run investment response. Here we …nd that moving from the
third quartile to the …rst quartile in the distribution of our measure of uncertainty
doubles the impact, while moving from the 90th percentile to the 10th percentile
increases it by four-fold. This substantial impact of uncertainty is similar to the
…ndings from our calibrated simulation model reported in section 2.3, suggesting
that an e¤ect of this size is consistent with a real options explanation.
       This indicates that increases in uncertainty around major shocks, like 9/11 and
the OPEC oil shocks, could seriously reduce the responsiveness of investment to
monetary or …scal policy.25 Over the longer term these short run e¤ects are slowly
cancelled out due to the cointegration between capital and sales, as illustrated in
  24
      See Bloom, Bond and Van Reenen (2003) for more details of these and further simulations.
The exact size of the sales shock makes relatively little di¤erence to the results.
   25
      For comparison, the increase in average uncertainty for our sample …rms after the …rst OPEC
oil crisis is similar in magnitude to the increase from the …rst quartile to the third quartile of our
sample distribution.


                                                 27
Figure 3, but our estimates suggest that the ‘short run’ e¤ects persist for a sig-
ni…cant period. Even after ten years there is still a noticeable di¤erence between
the predicted increases in capital stocks, in response to the same demand shock, at
di¤erent levels of uncertainty.


6. Conclusions

This paper develops two implications of partial irreversibility for the short run dy-
namics of investment. First, investment will respond more cautiously to a given
demand shock at higher levels of uncertainty (due to wider thresholds for the zone
of inaction), and second investment will have a convex response to positive demand
shocks (due to aggregation and supermodularity). We con…rm these implications
using numerical methods to solve a model with two types of capital, a rich mix of
adjustment costs (partial irreversibility, quadratic and …xed), time-varying uncer-
tainty, alternative functional forms for the revenue function and aggregation over
time and over production units. We propose and evaluate an econometric speci…ca-
tion that is designed to test for these properties of short run investment dynamics
using …rm-level data. We report evidence that both e¤ects are found using a measure
of uncertainty based on stock-returns volatility for a large panel of manufacturing
…rms. Through both numerical and econometric simulations we show that these
e¤ects are economically important - the investment response to a demand shock is
doubled by moving from the third quartile to the …rst quartile in the distribution of
our measure of uncertainty, and quadrupled by moving from the 90th to the 10th
percentile.
   This indicates that the one standard deviation increase in measures of uncer-
tainty observed around major shocks, like 9/11 and the OPEC oil shocks, could
seriously reduce the responsiveness of investment to subsequent monetary or …scal
policy. While we do not model the behaviour of labour demand, the existence of
similar labour hiring and …ring costs would imply that higher uncertainty would
also make …rms more cautious in their employment responses. This is important
as policy-makers typically want to respond to major shocks, but the behavioural
responses to any given policy stimulus may be much lower than normal in these


                                         28
periods of high uncertainty.
   The empirical results indicate that the short run investment dynamics for large
manufacturing …rms are consistent with the predictions of a partial irreversibility
model in which higher uncertainty reduces the impact e¤ect of demand shocks on
investment. Of course, there may be other explanations that could account for the
same patterns in company investment dynamics. One possibility is that …rms subject
to greater uncertainty may place less weight on recent information in updating their
expectations of future growth prospects. Discriminating between these and other
explanations for our empirical …ndings presents an interesting challenge for future
research.
   In future work we plan to build on this research in at least three further direc-
tions. First, by looking at the implications of uncertainty for adjusting other factors
of production, such as labour, R&D and information communication technologies.
Second, by moving beyond our calibration of the micro-model to undertake a full
simulated method of moments estimation of the adjustment cost parameters under
time-varying uncertainty, multiple factors of production and extensive aggregation.
Finally, by using this approach to investigate the impacts of uncertainty on both
the level and the distribution of micro and macro activity.




                                          29
   References
    ABEL, A. (1983), “Optimal Investment under Uncertainty”, American Economic
Review, 73, 228-233.
    ABEL, A. and EBERLY, J. (1994), “A Uni…ed Model of Investment under Un-
certainty”, American Economic Review, 84, 1369-1384.
    ABEL, A. and EBERLY, J. (1996), “Optimal Investment with Costly Reversibil-
ity”, Review of Economic Studies, 63, 581-593.
    ABEL, A. and EBERLY, J. (1999), “The E¤ects of Irreversibility and Uncer-
tainty on Capital Accumulation”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 44, 339-377.
    ABEL, A. and EBERLY, J. (2001), “Investment and q with Fixed Costs: An
Empirical Analysis”, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, mimeo.
    ARELLANO, M. and BOND, S. (1991), “Some Tests of Speci…cation for Panel
Data: Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations”, Review
of Economic Studies, 58, 277-297.
    ARELLANO, M. and BOVER. O. (1995), “Another Look at the Instrumental-
Variable Estimation of Error Components Models”, Journal of Econometrics, 68,
29-52.
    BERTOLA, G. and CABALLERO, R. (1994), “Irreversibility and Aggregate
Investment”, Review of Economic Studies, 61, 223-246.
    BLOOM, N. (2000), “The Dynamic E¤ects of Real Options and Irreversibility
on Investment and Labour Demand”, Institute for Fiscal Studies Working Paper no.
W00/15.
    BLOOM, N. (2006), “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks: A Firm-Level Estima-
tion and a 9/11 Simulation”, Stanford mimeo.
    BLOOM, N., BOND, S. and VAN REENEN, J., (2003), “Uncertainty and Com-
pany Investment Dynamics: Empirical Evidence for UK Firms”, CEPR discussion
paper 4025.
    BLUNDELL, R. and BOND, S. (1998), “Initial Conditions and Moment Restric-
tions in Dynamic Panel Data Models”, Journal of Econometrics, 87, 115-143.
    BOND, S., HARHOFF, D. and VAN REENEN, J. (2003) “Investment, R&D and
Financial Constraints in Britain and Germany” Centre for Economic Performance
Discussion Paper No. 0595.
    BOND, S., KLEMM, A., NEWTON-SMITH, R., SYED, M. and VLIEGHE, G.
(2004), “The roles of expected pro…tability, Tobin’s q and cash ‡ow in econometric
models of company investment”, Bank of England Working Paper no. 222.
    BOND, S., MOESSNER, R., MUMTAZ, H. and SYED, M. (2005), “Microecono-
metric evidence on uncertainty and investment”, Bank of England working paper,
forthcoming.
    CABALLERO, R. (1991), “On the Sign of the Investment-Uncertainty Relation-
ship”, American Economic Review, 81, 279-288.
    CABALLERO, R. and LEAHY, J. (1996), “Fixed costs: the demise of marginal
Q”, NBER working paper 5508.
    CABALLERO, R. and ENGEL, E. (1999), “Explaining Investment Dynamics in
U.S. Manufacturing: a Generalized (S,s) Approach”, Econometrica, 67, 783-826.

                                       30
    CAMPBELL, J., LETTAU, M., BURTON, G.M., AND XU, Y. (2001) “Have
individual stocks become more volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic
risk”, Journal of Finance, LVI, 1, 1-43
   CHETTY, R. (2006), “Interest rates and backward-bending investment”, forth-
coming Review of Economic Studies.
   CLEVELAND, W. (1979), “Robust locally weighted regression and smoothing
scatterplots"”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74, 829-836.
   COMIN, D. and PHILIPPON, T. (2005), “The Rise in Firm-Level Volatility:
Causes and Consequences”, NBER Working Paper No. 11388, forthcoming NBER
Macro-Economics Annual.
   COOPER, R., and EJARQUE, J, (2003) “Financial frictions and Investment: A
Requiem in Q", Review of Economic Dynamics, 6, 710-728.
    COOPER, R., and HALTIWANGER, J, (2006) “On the Nature of Capital Ad-
justment Costs”, forthcoming Review of Economic Studies.
   DIXIT, A., and PINDYCK, R. (1994), Investment Under Uncertainty, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
    DOMS, M., and DUNNE, T. (1998), “Capital Adjustment Patterns in Manufac-
turing Plants”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 67, 117-145.
    DOYLE, J., and WHITED, T. (2001), “Fixed Costs of Adjustment, Coordina-
tion, and Industry Investment”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 83, 628-637.
  EBERLY, J. and VAN MIEGHEM, J. (1997), “Multi-Factor Dynamic Invest-
ment under Uncertainty”, Journal of Economic Theory, 75, 345-387.
   ENGLE, R. and GRANGER, C. (1987), “Cointegration and Error-Correction:
Representation, Estimation and Testing”, Econometrica, 55, 251-276.
    ERICKSON, T. and WHITED, T. (2000), “Measurement Error and the Rela-
tionship between Investment and q", Journal of Political Economy, 108, 1027-1057.
    FAZZARI, S., HUBBARD, R. and PETERSEN, B. (1988), “Financing con-
straints and corporate investment”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988(1),
141-195.
  GUISO, L. and PARIGI, G. (1999), “Investment and Demand Uncertainty”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 185-227.
   HALL, B. , MAIRESSE, J. AND MULKAY, B. (1999), “Firm-Level Investment
in France and the United States: an Exploration of What We Have Learned in
Twenty Years”, Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, 55-56, 27-69.
   HARTMAN,R. (1972), “The e¤ect of price and cost uncertainty on Investment”,
Journal of Economic Theory, 5, 258-266.
   LEAHY, J. and WHITED, T. (1996), “The E¤ects of Uncertainty on Investment:
Some Stylized Facts”, Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 28, 64-83.
   MERTON, R. (1980), “On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market”,
Journal of Financial Economics, 8, 323-361.
   NILSON, O, and SCHIANTARELLI, F. (2003), “Zeroes and lumps in invest-
ment: empirical evidence on irreversibilities and nonconvexities”, Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics, 85, 1021-1037.


                                        31
   PHILIPPON, T. (2003) “An Explanation for the Joint Evolution of Firm and
Aggregate Volatility”, MIT, mimeo.
   REDUTO DOS REIS, I. (1999), “Irreversible Investment and Fixed Costs. Ev-
idence from ARD Establishment Level Data”, University College London mimeo.
   STOKEY, N. and LUCAS, R. (1989), Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics,
with PRESCOTT, E, Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass.
  THESMAR, D. and THOENIG, M. (2003) “Flexibility and Insecurity: How
Outsourcing ampli…es uncertainty”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 3629
   THOMAS, J. (2002), “Is Lumpy Investment Relevant for the Business Cycle?”,
Journal of Political Economy, 110, 508-534.
   VERACIERTO, M. (2002), “Plant-Level Irreversible Investment and Equilib-
rium Business Cycles”, American Economic Review, 92, 181-197.
   WINDMEIJER, F. (1995) “A Note on R2 in the Instrumental Variables Model”,
Journal of Quantitative Economics, 11, 257-261.




                                     32
   Data Appendix
    The company data is taken from the consolidated accounts of manufacturing
…rms listed on the UK stock market. We deleted …rms with less than three consec-
utive observations, broke the series for …rms where accounting periods fell outside
the range 300 to 400 days (due to changes in year ends), and excluded observations
for …rms where there are jumps of greater than 150% in any of the basic variables.
This data is obtained from the Datastream on-line service.
Investment (I). Total new …xed assets (DS435) less sales of …xed assets (DS423).

Capital Stock (K): Constructed by applying a perpetual inventory procedure with
a depreciation rate of 8%. The starting value was based on the net book value
of tangible …xed capital assets (DS339) in the …rst observation within our sample
period, adjusted for previous in‡ation. Subsequent values were obtained using ac-
counts data on investment and asset sales, and an aggregate series for investment
goods prices.

Sales (Y ): Total sales (DS104), de‡ated by the aggregate GDP de‡ator.

Cash Flow (C): Net pro…ts (earned for ordinary, DS182) plus depreciation (DS136).

Uncertainty ( ). The computation of this variable is described in the text. For
each company we take the daily stock market return (Datastream Returns Index,
RI). This measure includes on a daily returns basis the capital gain on the stock,
dividend payments, the value of rights issues, special dividends, and stock dilutions.
We then compute the standard deviation of these daily returns on a year by year
basis, matched precisely to the accounting period. We trim the variable so that
values above …ve are set equal to …ve. The results are robust to dropping these ten
observations.




                                         33
TABLE 1: Episodes of Zero Investment in Di¤erent Types of Data

                     % of observations with zero investment
                    Buildings Equipment Vehicles Total
Firms               5.9         0.1           n.a.      0.1
Establishments      46.8        3.2           21.2      1.8
Single Plants       53.0        4.3           23.6      2.4
Small Single Plants 57.6        5.6           24.4      3.2

N ote : Firm-level data (6,019 annual observations) from Extel and Datastream. Establishment-level
data (46,089 annual observations) from UK Census of Production (see Reduto dos Reis, 1999).




TABLE 2: Sample Correlations in the Simulated Data

                                            Iit =Ki;t 1     yit      pit SDit           it
investment rate Iit =Ki;t 1                 1.000         0.823 0.618 0.081 -0.067
sales growth yit                                          1.000 0.395 0.018 -0.224
demand growth pit                                                 1.000 -0.018 -0.006
standard deviation of returns SDit                                          1.000 0.645
uncertainty it                                                                        1.000
N ote : These are Pearson correlation coe¢ cients of the relevant variables (e.g. the correlation of   yit and
  pit is 0.395) taken over the simulated data for 1,000 …rms and 15 years




                                               34
 TABLE 3: Econometric Estimation on the Simulated Data

 Dependent Variable: Iit =Ki;t              1                 (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)
 Estimation Method                                            OLS       GMM       OLS      OLS
 Type of data for P and                                       True     Empirical  True     True
 Hartman-Abel e¤ects                                           No        No      Positive Negative

 Demand Growth,          pit                                   0.395      0.539     0.387      0.416
                                                             (0.041)    (0.083)   (0.040)     (0.040)
 Demand Growth Squared,                    p2it                0.028      0.864     0.028      0.028
                                                             (0.005)    (0.212)   (0.004)     (0.005)
 Change in Uncertainty,               it                      -0.095     -0.042    -0.020      -0.755
                                                             (0.046)    (0.019)   (0.160)     (0.161)
 Uncertainty,     it                                           0.005     -0.080     0.373      -0.402
                                                             (0.021)    (0.097)   (0.080)     (0.066)
 Uncertainty       Demand Growth,                 it   pit    -0.441     -0.440    -1.500      -1.733
                                                             (0.108)    (0.166)   (0.368)     (0.373)
 Demand ECM, (p           k)i;t   1                            0.190      0.439     0.189      0.187
                                                             (0.008)    (0.105)   (0.008)     (0.008)

 2nd order serial correlation (p-value)                                 0.185
 Sargan-Hansen test (p-value)                                           0.856

    N ote : Standard errors are robust to arbitrary autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity. GMM
coe¢ cients are one-step estimates. Columns (1), (3) and (4) estimate using the underlying ‘true’
demand and variance data, while column (2) estimates using the ‘empirical’proxies: sales (instead
of demand) and the standard deviation of stock returns (instead of demand variance). The instru-
ments used in column (2) are lags 2 and 3 of the variables K Iit ; yit , SDit , and (y         k)it .
                                                              i;t 1
Instrument validity is tested using a Sargan-Hansen test of the overidentifying restrictions. Serial
correlation is tested using an LM test on the …rst-di¤erenced residuals (Arellano and Bond, 1991).
To maintain a constant sample across speci…cations we use years 4 to 15 in all columns, providing
12,000 observations on a balanced panel of 1,000 …rms. Implementation of Hartman-Abel e¤ects
is described in the text.




                                                       35
 TABLE 4: Robustness Tests on the Simulated Data

 Dependent Variable: (Iit =Ki;t 1 )               (1)         (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)
 Estimation Method                                OLS        OLS     OLS     OLS     GMM
 Type of data for P and                           True       True    True    True   Empirical
 Adjustment Costs                                Partial     Fixed   Quad     All     All
 Revenue Function                                 CES        Cobb-   Cobb-   Cobb-   Cobb-
                                                            Douglas Douglas Douglas Douglas

 Demand Growth,          pit                      0.400       0.586        0.486        0.378        0.630
                                                (0.041)     (0.093)      (0.051)      (0.039)      (0.065)
 Demand Growth Squared,                p2it       0.029      -0.012       -0.004        0.011        0.403
                                                (0.004)     (0.031)      (0.015)      (0.004)      (0.114)
 Change in Uncertainty,           it             -0.389      -1.031       -0.048       -0.666       -0.064
                                                (0.158)     (0.283)      (0.220)      (0.141)      (0.042)
 Uncertainty,     it                             -0.006      -0.505       -1.216        0.033        0.101
                                                (0.071)     (0.131)      (0.090)      (0.066)      (0.294)
 Uncertainty Demand Growth,                      -1.566      1.766        -0.844       -1.791       -0.701
   it    pit                                    (0.373)     (0.854)      (0.427)      (0.346)      (0.294)
 Demand ECM Term, (p k)i;t 1                      0.186       0.205        0.323        0.180        0.204
                                                (0.008)     (0.024)      (0.020)      (0.006)      (0.098)

 2nd order serial correlation (p-value)                                                             0.267
 Sargan-Hansen test (p-value)                                                                       0.875

    N ote Standard errors are robust to arbitrary autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity. GMM
coe¢ cients are one-step estimates. Columns (1) to (4) estimate using the underlying ‘true’ de-
mand and variance data, while column (5) estimates using the ‘empirical’proxies: sales (instead
of demand) and the standard deviation of stock returns (instead of demand variance). The instru-
ments used in column (5) are lags 2 and 3 of the variables K Iit ; yit , SDit , and (y         k)it .
                                                              i;t 1
Instrument validity is tested using a Sargan-Hansen test of the overidentifying restrictions. Serial
correlation is tested using an LM test on the …rst-di¤erenced residuals (Arellano and Bond, 1991).
To maintain a constant sample across speci…cations we use years 4 to 15 in all columns, providing
12,000 observations on a balanced panel of 1,000 …rms.




                                                 36
 TABLE 5: Econometric Estimates using UK Company Data

 Dependent Variable: (Iit =Ki;t 1 )                                          (1)           (2)        (3)              (4)           (5)

 Sales Growth ( yit )                   0.259                                           0.151         0.382         0.400         0.413
                                       (0.072)                                         (0.059)       (0.136)      (0.139)        (0.139)
 Change in Cash Flow ( (Cit =Ki;t 1 )) 0.206                                            0.263          0.260        0.255         0.272
                                       (0.135)                                         (0.132)       (0.124)      (0.126)        (0.125)
 Lagged Cash Flow (Ci;t 1 =Ki;t 2 )     0.303                                           0.269         0.272         0.288         0.273
                                       (0.086)                                         (0.082)       (0.083)      (0.081)        (0.076)
 Error Correction Term (y k)i;t 1       0.062                                           0.056         0.054         0.054         0.053
                                       (0.030)                                         (0.029)       (0.026)      (0.026)        (0.026)
 Sales Growth Squared ( yit )2                                                          0.481         0.512        0.494          0.500
                                                                                       (0.175)       (0.152)      (0.150)        (0.151)
 Change in Uncertainty ( SDit )                                                                       -0.023       -0.012
                                                                                                     (0.012)      (0.008)
 Lagged Uncertainty (SDi;t 1 )                                                                        -0.015
                                                                                                     (0.011)
 Uncertainty Sales Growth                                                                             -0.162       -0.165 -0.167
 (SDit    yit )                                                                                      (0.067)      (0.068) (0.068)

                              d 2
 Goodness of Fit - Corr(I=K; I=K)                                       0.259          0.287         0.285        0285           0.307
 Serial correlation (p-value)                                            0.048          0.102         0.069        0.078          0.091
 Sargan-Hansen (p-value)                                                 0.510          0.709         0.699        0.629          0.560

     N ote One-step coe¢ cients and standard errors robust to autocorrelation and heteroskedas-
ticity are reported. The number of observations in all columns is 5,347, using an unbalanced
panel of 672 …rms over 1973 to 1991. A full set of year dummies is included in all speci…ca-
tions. Estimation uses a system GMM estimator (see Blundell and Bond, 1998) computed in
DPD98 for Gauss. The instruments used in columns (3) to (5) are, in the …rst-di¤erenced equa-
           Ii;t   2              Ii;t   3                                           Ci;t   2         Ci;t   3
tions:     Ki;t   3
                      and        Ki;t   4
                                            ,    yi;t       2   and    yi;t 3 ,     Ki;t   3
                                                                                               and   Ki;t   4
                                                                                                                , (y     k)i;t   2   and
                                                                                                                             Ii;t    1
(y       k)i;t 3 , and SDi;t 2 , SDi;t                  3   and SDi;t         4;   and in the levels equations:              Ki;t    2
                                                                                                                                         ,
                      Ci;t   1
     yi;t 1 ,         Ki;t   2
                                   ;        (y      k)i;t        1    and     SDi;t 1 . Columns (1) and (2) use this in-
strument set but with the uncertainty variables excluded. Instrument validity is tested using a
Sargan-Hansen test of the overidentifying restrictions. Second-order serial correlation in the …rst-
di¤erenced residuals is tested using an LM test (Arellano and Bond, 1991). The goodness of …t
measure is the squared correlation coe¢ cient between actual and predicted levels of the dependent
variable.




                                                                        37
     TABLE 6: Separating Time, Firm and Residual Variation in
     Uncertainty

     Dependent Variable: (Iit =Ki;t 1 )                                             (1)          (2)             (3)         (4)

     Sales Growth ( yit )                                                       0.127            0.141       0.4740.499
                                                                               (0.052)          (0.053)     (0.182)
                                                                                                                (0.184)
     Change in Cash Flow ( Cit =Ki;t 1 )                                        0.270            0.263       0.287
                                                                                                                 0.280
                                                                               (0.124)          (0.127)     (0.122)
                                                                                                                (0.124)
     Lagged Cash Flow (Ci;t 1 =Ki;t 2 )                                         0.271            0.274       0.269
                                                                                                                 0.273
                                                                               (0.078)          (0.083)     (0.079)
                                                                                                                (0.081)
     Error Correction Term (y                           k)i;t        1          0.054            0.056       0.0470.049
                                                                               (0.027)          (0.027)     (0.026)
                                                                                                                (0.026)
     Sales Growth Squared ( yit )2                                              0.497            0.507       0.5340.537
                                                                               (0.170)          (0.157)     (0.148)
                                                                                                                (0.162)
     Time Uncertainty Sales Growth                                              0.016                            -0.051
       (SDt ) ( yit )                                                          (0.150)                          (0.135)
     Firm Uncertainty Sales Growth                                                               -0.130          -0.136
       (SDi ) ( yit )                                                                           (0.105)         (0.107)
     Residual Uncertainty Sales Growth                                                                   -0.225 -0.230
        git ) ( yit )
       (SD                                                                                              (0.102) (0.103)

                                    d 2
     Goodness of Fit - Corr(I=K; I=K)                                           0.307           0.298            0.311       0.288
     2nd order serial correlation (p-value)                                     0.096           0.094            0.132       0.106
     Sargan-Hansen (p-value)                                                    0.399           0.490            0.383       0.452

     N ote : One-step coe¢ cients and standard errors robust to autocorrelation and heteroskedas-
ticity are reported. The number of observations in all columns is 5,347, using an unbalanced
panel of 672 …rms over 1973 to 1991. A full set of year dummies is included in all speci…-
cations. Estimation uses a system GMM estimator (see Blundell and Bond, 1998) computed
in DPD98 for Gauss. The instruments used in all columns are, in the …rst-di¤erenced equa-
           Ii;t   2              Ii;t   3                                            Ci;t   2             Ci;t   3
tions:     Ki;t   3
                      and        Ki;t   4
                                            ,    yi;t       2   and      yi;t 3 ,    Ki;t   3
                                                                                                 and      Ki;t    4
                                                                                                                      , (y   k)i;t   2   and
                                                                                                                                Ii;t     1
(y       k)i;t 3 , and SDi;t 2 , SDi;t                  3   and SDi;t          4;   and in the levels equations:                Ki;t     2
                                                                                                                                             ,
                      Ci;t   1
     yi;t 1 ,         Ki;t   2
                                  ;         (y     k)i;t         1   and      SDi;t 1 . Instrument validity is tested using a
Sargan-Hansen test of the overidentifying restrictions. Second-order serial correlation in the …rst-
di¤erenced residuals is tested using an LM test (Arellano and Bond, 1991). The goodness of …t
measure is the squared correlation coe¢ cient between actual and predicted levels of the dependent
variable.




                                                                         38
 TABLE 7: Robustness Tests on UK Company Data

 Dependent Variable: (Iit =Ki;t 1 )                          (1)            (2)           (3)    (4)     (5)
 Experiment                                                 No cash         Size         FTSE Monthly Leverage
                                                             ‡ow           splits       normed returns adjusted

 Sales Growth ( yit )                                         0.509          0.379        0.464           0.374           0.443
                                                             (0.121)       (0.137)      (0.153)          (0.166)         (0.119)
 Change in Cash Flow ( Cit =Ki;t 1 )                                         0.283        0.282           0.279           0.306
                                                                           (0.123)      (0.124)          (0.126)         (0.119)
 Lagged Cash Flow (Ci;t 1 =Ki;t 2 )                                          0.272        0.272           0.268           0.257
                                                                           (0.076)      (0.075)          (0.077)         (0.073)
 Error Correction Term (y                k)i;t   1             0.163         0.052        0.052           0.050           0.060
                                                             (0.025)       (0.026)      (0.026)          (0.026)         (0.028)
 Sales Growth Squared ( yit )2                                 0.500         0.479        0.462           0.482           0.557
                                                             (0.172)       (0.151)      (0.146)          (0.154)         (0.155)
 Uncertainty Sales Growth                                     -0.142        -0.185       -0.196           -0.122          -0.278
  (SDit     yit )                                            (0.065)       (0.069)      (0.075)          (0.069)         (0.087)
 Big Uncertainty Sales Growth                                               0.082
   (Bit SDit      yit )                                                    (0.060)

 Serial correlation (p-value)                               0.049          0.056        0.080        0.083                0.064
 Sargan-Hansen (p-value)                                    0.010          0.531        0.504        0.668                0.662

     N otes: One-step coe¢ cients and standard errors robust to autocorrelation and heteroskedas-
ticity are reported. The number of observations in all columns is 5,347, using an unbalanced
panel of 672 …rms over 1973 to 1991. A full set of year dummies is included in all speci…cations.
The dummy variable Bit indicates real sales above the sample median. The uncertainty measure
in column (5) has been multiplied by the ratio equity/(equity+debt). Estimation uses a system
GMM estimator (see Blundell and Bond, 1998) computed in DPD98 for Gauss. The instruments
                                                                             Ii;t   2         Ii;t   3
used in all columns are, in the …rst-di¤erenced equations:                   Ki;t   3
                                                                                        and   Ki;t   4
                                                                                                          ,   yi;t   2   and
             Ci;t   2         Ci;t   3
  yi;t 3 ,   Ki;t   3
                        and   Ki;t   4
                                         , (y        k)i;t    2   and (y     k)i;t 3 , and SDi;t 2 , SDi;t           3   and
                                           i;t 1        I          i;t 1                 C
SDi;t 4 ; and in the levels equations:    Ki;t 2
                                                 ,     yi;t 1 ,  Ki;t 2
                                                                          ;    (y k)i;t 1
and SDi;t 1 . Instrument validity is tested using a Sargan-Hansen test of the overidentifying
restrictions. Second-order serial correlation in the …rst-di¤erenced residuals is tested using an LM
test (Arellano and Bond, 1991). The goodness of …t measure is the squared correlation coe¢ cient
between actual and predicted levels of the dependent variable.




                                                             39
Figure 1: Average investment response to demand shocks at different levels of
uncertainty, simulated data.
                                          80
                                                                          50th Percentile of
Average annual firm investment rate (%)




                                                                          uncertainty
                                                              25th Percentile of
                                          60                  uncertainty
                                                         10th Percentile of
                                          40             uncertainty
                                                                                                       75th Percentile of
                                                                                                       uncertainty
                                          20                                            90th Percentile of
                                                                                        uncertainty
                                          0
                                               -25   0               25                50             75             100
                                                              Annual firm demand growth (%)
Figure 2: Investment response to a sales shock at different levels of uncertainty,
UK firm-level data
                                                10th Percentile of uncertainty
                                  6.0
Annual firm investment rate (%)




                                                25th Percentile of uncertainty
                                  4.0
                                                50th Percentile of uncertainty
                                                75th Percentile of uncertainty
                                  2.0
                                                90th Percentile of uncertainty
                                  0.0
                                        0   2        4               6           8   10
                                                        f the
                                                 Years after S salesSshock
Figure 3: Capital stock response to a sales shock at different levels of
uncertainty , UK firm-level data
                                      10th Percentile of uncertainty
                                 25th Percentile of uncertainty
                      1.01
Capital stock level




                      1.00                                        50th Percentile of uncertainty
                                                         75th Percentile of uncertainty
                                                      90th Percentile of uncertainty
                      1.00
                             0             2             4                6               8        10
                                                      Years after the sales shock
