                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE EFFECT OF INHERITANCE RECEIPT ON RETIREMENT

                                           Jeffrey R. Brown
                                           Courtney C. Coile
                                          Scott J. Weisbenner

                                         Working Paper 12386
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12386


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




We thank Michael Hurd, Erzo Luttmer, John Karl Scholz, Jim Poterba, and seminar participants at the NBER
Summer Institute Workshop on Aging, University of Virginia, RAND, and the University of Wisconsin for
very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Courtney C. Coile and Scott J. Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Inheritance Receipt on Retirement
Jeffrey R. Brown, Courtney C. Coile and Scott J. Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 12386
July 2006
JEL No. J14, J26

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper uses the receipt of an inheritance to measure the effect of wealth shocks on retirement.
Using the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), we first document that inheritance receipt is common
among older workers – one in five households receives an inheritance over an eight-year period, with
a median value of about $30,000. We find that inheritance receipt is associated with a significant
increase in the probability of retirement. In particular, we find that receiving an inheritance increases
the probability of retiring earlier than expected by 4.4 percentage points, or 12 percent relative to the
baseline retirement rate, over an eight-year period. Importantly, this effect is stronger when the
inheritance is unexpected and thus more likely to represent an exogenous shock to wealth.


Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820-6980
and NBER
brownjr@uiuc.edu

Courtney C. Coile
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
ccoile@wellesley.edu

Scott J. Weisbenner
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
304C David Kinley Hall
1407 West Gregory Drive
Urbana, IL 61801
and NBER
wesibenn@uiuc.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

           A widely accepted principle of economic theory is that leisure is a normal good, and thus

that positive wealth shocks can be expected to lead to reductions in lifetime labor supply. Yet it

is difficult to obtain reliable empirical estimates of the wealth effect because wealth is often

correlated with unobservable characteristics that affect labor supply, such as taste for leisure or

risk aversion.1 In this paper, we leverage the fact that an inheritance, particularly if it is

unexpected, may generate a shock to wealth that allows one to identify the effect of wealth on

retirement behavior.

           Inheritances are also interesting in their own right because of their importance for many

households. Brown and Weisbenner (2004) find that more than one in five households has

received a substantial transfer. Strong returns in housing and equity markets over the past

several decades have led some analysts to suggest that inherited wealth may become increasingly

important in the coming decades. For example, Schervish and Havens (2003) predict that from

1998 to 2052, over $45 trillion of wealth (in 2002 dollars) will be transferred from final estates.2

           In considering the effect of inheritance receipt on labor supply, it is particularly

interesting to focus on retirement for several reasons. First, given the life expectancies of

today’s elderly, many households will receive inheritances when they are of near-retirement age.

For example, among older households in the 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances who report ever

having received an inheritance, more than half received one at ages 50-65.3 Second, if workers

have little flexibility along the hours dimension and most inheritances are too small to allow

1
 For surveys of the large literature estimating the effect of unearned income on labor supply, see Pencavel (1986),
Blundell and MaCurdy (2000), and Killingsworth and Heckman (1986).
2
  Not all analysts agree with the idea that inheritances are likely to grow in importance as a source of wealth for
future retirees. Gokhale and Kotlikoff (2000), for example, point out that for most households, inheritances are
small relative to lifetime labor earnings.
3
    Authors’ calculations.


                                                           1
young workers to retire immediately, the greatest labor supply response to inheritance receipt

may lie in the retirement response of older workers. Third, there is strong general policy interest

in understanding how wealth affects retirement behavior. For example, one of the pathways

through which Social Security or private pension reform might influence retirement behavior is

through wealth effects, and thus it is important for policy analysis to develop an empirical

foundation for understanding wealth effects, as distinct from other pathways.

       To our knowledge, there are only two previous studies (Holtz-Eakin et. al., 1993;

Joulfaian and Wilhelm, 1994) that have tried to examine the effect of inheritance receipt on labor

supply. Unfortunately, these two papers shed little light on the effect of inheritance receipt on

the retirement decisions of older workers; the former uses a sample of younger workers only,

while the latter obtains inconsistent results for older workers, with some specifications even

suggesting that inheritance receipt reduces the likelihood of retirement. In addition, these studies

are unable to distinguish between expected and unexpected inheritances. This distinction is

potentially important in estimating wealth effects because if households who expect an

inheritance adjust their behavior prior to actually receiving it, then an estimate that is based on

total inheritances may underestimate of the true effect of wealth shocks on behavior.

       In this paper, we explore the effect of inheritance receipt on retirement using data from

the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) for the 1994 to 2002 period. We begin by providing

descriptive statistics documenting the empirical importance of inheritances for this population

and the accuracy of inheritance expectations. Turning to our main empirical analysis, we first

simply estimate whether inheritance receipt increases the probability of labor force exit.

However, because this initial approach is subject to a number of concerns about household

expectations, we then turn to our preferred specification, which examines whether the receipt of




                                                  2
an inheritance – particularly an unexpected one – causes the individual to retire earlier than

expected. By comparing actual inheritance receipt and retirement behavior to what the same

individual expected at the beginning of the sample period, we are able to directly and indirectly

control for most factors that might otherwise lead to a spurious correlation between inheritance

receipt and retirement behavior.

       We have several findings. First, we find that inheritances are empirically important for

the young elderly. Over an eight-year period, approximately one in five households receives an

inheritance; the median value of those inheritances is about $30,000. Many inheritances are

unexpected, as indicated by respondent’s self-reported probability of inheritance receipt at the

beginning of the sample period, but for those who do expect to receive an inheritance, the

received value is correlated with the conditional value of the expected inheritance. Second, we

find that inheritance receipt is associated with a significant increase in the probability of

retirement and that the magnitude of the response is increasing in the size of the inheritance.

Third, we find that the effect of an inheritance is greater when the inheritance is unexpected,

suggesting that previous estimates may underestimate the true effect of a wealth shock by

combining expected and unexpected inheritances. Overall, our findings confirm the existence of

non-trivial wealth effects on retirement behavior.



2. PREVIOUS LITERATURE

       While there is a vast literature on how various financial considerations influence labor

supply decisions, only a small number of studies have attempted to isolate the effect of a wealth

shock on labor supply. Interestingly, the evidence from this literature is not uniformly

supportive of wealth having a large effect. For example, while Imbens et. al. (2001) find that




                                                  3
lottery winners consume some of their winnings in the form of reduced labor earnings and that

the effect is larger for older winners, Krueger and Pischke (1992) find little evidence of an

increase in labor supply for workers in the Social Security “notch” cohort, who experienced a

dramatic reduction in Social Security wealth due to a law change. Similarly, while Coronado

and Perozek (2003) and Sevak (2001) find that unanticipated stock market gains led workers to

retire earlier, Coile and Levine (2006) find no effect of stock market fluctuations on retirement.

       Two earlier studies have examined the effect of inheritance receipt on labor supply.

Holtz-Eakin et. al. (1993) use a sample of estate tax returns from the early 1980s matched to the

income tax returns of recipients before and after inheritance receipt. They find that recipients are

more likely to exit the labor force when they receive a larger inheritance. However, their sample

is limited to recipients age 19 to 58, and because excluding most of the retirement age

population, they are unable to observe how the inheritance influences subsequent retirement

behavior. Using the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics, Joulfaian and Wilhelm (1994) find

small effects of inheritance receipt on hours worked for prime-age workers. They find

inconsistent effects on labor force exit by older workers, possibly due to a small sample size.

       Our analysis is the first to use the HRS to estimate the effect of inheritance receipt on

retirement. The HRS offers many advantages for the study of this question. First, there are a

large number of inheritance recipients among older workers in the HRS, giving us the

opportunity to improve upon the inconclusive results of the past literature. Second, we are able

to include a richer set of covariates than was used in prior studies. Third, the HRS provides data

on ex ante inheritance expectations, which we use to test whether the effect of inheritance receipt

depends on whether the inheritance is anticipated. As authors of previous studies have noted, the

inability to distinguish between inheritances that are expected and unexpected introduces a




                                                 4
potential downwards bias in estimates of wealth effects, as the adjustment to an expected

inheritance may have already occurred prior to receipt. Finally, the HRS has data on retirement

expectations, which we use to help control for unobserved characteristics that may be correlated

with both inheritance receipt and retirement.

         In addition to offering an appealing way to estimate wealth effects, studying the effect of

inheritances on retirement is of more general interest due to the very small but growing literature

on the effect of inheritance receipt on household behavior more generally. In addition to the two

labor supply papers already discussed, Blanchflower and Oswald (1998) and Holtz-Eakin et. al.

(1994a, 1994b) find that inheritance receipt is associated with an increased probability of

becoming an entrepreneur. Joulfaian and Wilhelm (1994) also look at the effect of receipt on

consumption. While there are numerous other papers focusing on inheritances, most of it has

focused on implications for aggregate wealth accumulation4 or on the reasons that households

make bequests.5 Studying the behavioral responses to inheritance receipt can help us to better

understand the implications of these substantial intergenerational transfers for aggregate labor

supply and savings behavior.




4
 Kotlikoff & Summers (1981) initiated this debate by arguing that most wealth is inherited, counter to implication
of the life-cycle models of Modigliani & Brumberg (1954) and Ando & Modigliani (1963) that most wealth is
saved. Subsequent articles have offered wide-ranging estimates of the share of net worth due to transfers and have
clarified the reasons for the differences; see Modigliani (1988), Kotlikoff (1988), Kessler and Masson (1989), Gale
& Scholz (1994), Gale & Slemrod (2000), and Brown and Weisbenner (2004).
5
  Some of the leading theories include that households derive utility from making a bequest (Yaari, 1964) or directly
from their children’s consumption (Barro, 1974), that parents use bequests to influence their children’s behavior
(Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers, 1985), or that many bequests are unintentional (Davies, 1981). See Bernheim
(1991), Wilhelm (1996), Perozek (1998), McGarry (1999) McGranahan (2000), Page (2003), and Light and
McGarry (2004) for tests of these theories in the context of bequests and Cox (1987), Cox and Rank (1992), and
McGarry and Schoeni (1995, 1997) for tests in the context of inter vivos gifts.



                                                         5
3. DATA AND DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON INHERITANCES

         The data set for the analysis is the Health and Retirement Study. The HRS began in 1992

as a survey of people who were ages 51-61 and their spouses, with re-interviews of these

individuals every two years.6 We use data from waves 2 through 6 (1994-2002) in the analysis

because data on inheritance expectations is not available until wave 2.

         The HRS provides richly detailed data on respondents’ labor supply, health, and finances.

For our purposes, a critical feature of the HRS is that it provides information on inheritances at

each wave, including whether any inheritances were received since the last wave, the value of

any inheritances received, the respondent’s self-reported probability of receiving an inheritance

over the next ten years, and the conditional value of the expected inheritance. Individuals who

give a positive probability of inheritance receipt but are unable to provide a conditional value are

asked a series of questions that allow for the value of the expected inheritance to be put into one

of the following brackets: $0 to $10,000; $10,000 to $50,000; $50,000 to $250,000; $250,000 to

$1,000,000; or over $1,000,000. The second important feature of the HRS is that we can follow

the same individuals over time, which allows us to look at how behavior changes following

inheritance receipt.

         We begin our analysis with an overview of the empirical importance of inheritances for

HRS workers nearing retirement age, the characteristics of inheritance recipients, and the

accuracy of inheritance expectations.7 We find that inheritance receipt is quite common in the

HRS population: 5.4 percent of workers are in households that receive an inheritance over a two-

6
 Starting in 1998, additional birth cohorts were added to the HRS; however, this analysis focuses on the original
HRS cohort. For some labor force and demographic variables, we make use of the RAND version of the HRS, a
user-friendly subset of the data that offers cleaned and consistent variables.
7
 We defer detailed discussion of the samples used for these calculations until the next section of the paper.
Calculations that refer to inheritance receipt over a two-year period are based on our “person-wave” sample, while
calculations that refer to receipt over the full eight-year sample period are based on our “long-difference” sample.



                                                          6
year period as are 19.3 percent of workers over an eight-year period. When weighted by dollars

received, the majority of inheritances come from parents (72 percent) or aunts and uncles (7

percent); source missing (15 percent) is the other significant category.

         Many of these inheritances are quite substantial, as reported in Table 1. The mean and

median values for inheritance received by workers over a two-year period are about $67,000 and

$28,000, respectively, indicating that the distribution of inheritance values is highly skewed;

indeed, one-quarter of inheritance recipients receive less than $10,000 while the top 5 percent

receive inheritances in excess of $280,000.8 Table 1 also shows the value of inheritances relative

to net worth and household income. The median inheritance is equivalent to nearly 11 percent of

net worth and four months of household income; the top 5 percent of inheritances are more than

1.5 times net worth or three years of household income.

         Table 2 shows the characteristics of inheritance recipients and non-recipients in the HRS.

Recipients are slightly younger, as might be expected, because younger people are more likely to

have parents that are still alive. Recipients and non-recipients are equally likely to be female but

recipients are more likely to be white and married. In general, recipients have higher

socioeconomic status – they are in better health, have more education, and have higher

household income and net worth prior to inheritance receipt.

         Next, we turn to inheritance expectations. Figure 1 is a histogram showing the

respondent’s self-reported probability of receiving an inheritance over the next 10 years, as

reported at in 1994. Nearly 60% of respondents report zero probability of receiving an

inheritance. The focal responses of 50% chance and 100% change are the next most common



8
  The median value of inheritances shown on Table 3 is slightly higher, at $30,474. The reason for the difference is
that the latter measure includes all inheritances received over an eight-year period rather than the two-year period
shown here and thus captures instances where households receive multiple inheritances over the longer period.


                                                         7
answers, with about 10% of the sample selecting each of these responses, and the rest of the

distribution is spread out fairly evenly.

         Table 3 begins to assess the accuracy of inheritance expectations. We compare 1994

expectations of inheritance receipt during the next 10 years with actual inheritance receipt

between 1994 and 2002, grouping respondents by expected probability of inheritance receipt.

The third and fourth columns on the table show that the median conditional value of the expected

inheritance and median value relative to household income rise with the expected probability of

receipt.9 The next column shows the fraction of each group who actually received an inheritance

over an eight-year period. Among the 60 percent of the sample who said there was no chance of

getting an inheritance, more than 10 percent of them did receive one and the median value was

$17,554 or 35 percent of household income. The probability of receiving an inheritance rises

with the probability of expecting one, but perhaps not as quickly as expected – fewer than 40

percent of those who said they were certain to get an inheritance in the next ten years actually

received one over our eight-year sample period. The median value and value as a share of

household income also generally rise with probability of receipt. It is interesting to note that by

probability group, the median received inheritance is fairly similar to the median expected

inheritance.

         While the medians are similar, it may still be the case that many individuals under-

estimate or over-estimate their inheritance. Tables 4a and 4b explore this point by generating a

cross-tab of conditional expected and received inheritance values. Table 4a includes everyone

in the sample (inheritance recipients and non-recipients), while Table 4b includes recipients only.

9
 For this table only, in cases where respondents reported a positive probability of inheritance receipt and could not
provide a conditional value of the expected inheritance but did answer the bracket questions, we assign them a
conditional value equal to the midpoint of the bracket (or $2,000,000 for the very few observations in the over
$1,000,000 bracket). As discussed more below, we do not use these values in our empirical analysis.



                                                          8
The values on the diagonal, shown in bold, represent the fraction of the sample that accurately

predicted their inheritance; we define the categories according to the values in the inheritance

expectation bracket questions, allowing us to include people who could not provide a conditional

value for the expected inheritance but did answer these questions.

       Table 4a shows that for any conditional value of the expected inheritance, the vast

majority of workers are in the first column, meaning that they received no inheritance. For

example, among those who expected an inheritance of $10,000 to $50,000 within the next ten

years, nearly two-thirds had not received an inheritance eight years later. This might make it

seem that expectations and receipt are only loosely related, but Table 4b tells a somewhat

different story. Among those who expected and received an inheritance, workers with a given

conditional value are more likely to be in the diagonal cell (the conditional value matches the

received value) than any of the other cells in their row. For example, of those who expected an

inheritance of $10,000 to $50,000 and received an inheritance, 40 percent got an inheritance

value in this range. Nonetheless, there are many workers in the off-diagonal cells as well, with

inheritances both larger and smaller than expected. We make use of the fact that received

inheritances are unexpectedly larger for some and smaller for others in the analysis below.



4. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY

       There are numerous possible approaches to estimating the effect of inheritances on

retirement, each with its own advantages and disadvantages. In particular, there are at least three

dimensions along which the researcher must choose to specify the problem. First, one must

needs to define the dependent variable of interest. Second, one must determine an appropriate




                                                 9
measure of inheritance receipt. Third, one must determine the time horizon over which to

examine behavior.

        In order to fully explore the robustness of our results, we adopt multiple approaches

along each of these dimensions. To initially establish whether there is a correlation between

inheritance receipt and retirement, we first define retirement as “exit the labor force” and run the

following regression:

         retireit = β 0 + β1inheritance it + β 2 X it + γ t + ε it                               (1)

        In our initial specification, retireit is a dummy equal to 1 if the individual has exited the

labor force since the previous wave, inheritanceit is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the household

received an inheritance since the previous wave, and time horizon is a two-year wave of the

HRS. Because retirement is the behavior of interest, the sample is limited to individuals who

were working at the previous wave. If both spouses are in the labor force at the previous wave,

both will be included in our regression. Because our measure of inheritance receipt is at the

household level, we will cluster the standard errors on the household identifier to reflect any

within household correlation in the response to the inheritance receipt. When using person-wave

observations, we have 17,801 observations.10

        Xit is a vector of demographic characteristics including age dummies, race/ethnicity,

gender, marital status, a dummy for poor health status at the previous wave and the change in

this dummy, a cubic in own earnings from the previous wave, a cubic in household income from


10
   As detailed below, in some specifications we make use of data on expectations of inheritance receipt, which are
first asked at wave 2. To use a consistent sample throughout the analysis, we start our person-wave sample with
persons working at wave 2 and observe whether they retire by wave 3. As our data extends through wave 6, each of
the HRS’ 12,652 respondents may provide up to 4 observations to the person-wave sample. Starting with a potential
sample of 50,608 person-wave observations, the sample is selected as follows: we lose 12,426 observations because
the individual died, left the sample, or was divorced or separated before wave 6; 4,603 observations because the
individual did not report a probability of inheritance receipt; 1,018 observations because the individual failed to
report a conditional value for the expected inheritance or answer the bracket questions, and 14,760 observations
because the individual was not working at the previous wave.


                                                         10
the previous wave, and a cubic in lifetime wages11, net worth at previous wave, education level

dummies, pension type dummies, industry and occupation dummies, and region dummies.                               t   is a

wave fixed effect.

         As a second specification, we replace the inherit dummy with the dollar value of the

inheritance to test whether the magnitude of the response is increasing with the size of the

inheritance. A third specification scales the value of the inheritance by the household’s income

at the wave prior to receipt.

         We will then alter our time horizon, and analyze the effect of inheritance receipt (using

each of our three measures) during the entire sample period (1994-2002) on the labor force exit

over this period. We refer to this as the “long-difference” estimation. In this approach, each

individual contributes one observation to the sample, conditional on being in the labor force at

wave 2.12 The long-difference approach can potentially include longer-term responses to

inheritance receipt, while the original approach will focus on more immediate responses. In

addition, the long-difference approach matches up somewhat better with the questions about

inheritance expectations, which ask about receipt over the next ten years. In our long-difference

sample, we have 4,508 observations.

         After discussing the above results in Table 5, we will then turn to our preferred

specification in Table 6 that makes use of the expectations data in the HRS. In particular, we

will introduce two innovations. First, we use as our new dependent variable whether or not the

individual retired earlier than expected, where expectations about retirement are measured as of



11
  Lifetime wages are defined as the sum both spouses’ real earnings from ages 25 – 50 based on Social Security
administrative records. For those observations missing earnings records, we use the median earnings for that
individual’s gender and education group.
12
  The same sample selection criteria discussed for the person-wave sample apply here as well. For example, if the
respondent dies before wave 6 or does not report a probability of inheritance receipt, he or she is not in the sample.


                                                          11
wave 1.13 This approach allows us to control for a wide range of unobservable factors that might

be correlated with both retirement behavior and inheritance receipt. For example, if individuals

who receive inheritances also happen to have a stronger taste for leisure, then this information

would already be incorporated into their expectations about retirement. By comparing actual to

expected retirement dates, we can determine whether the receipt of an inheritance influenced this

individual’s behavior, while controlling for these other factors.

         Second, we can regress this difference in actual and expected retirement date on measures

of inheritance receipt that differentiate between expected and unexpected inheritances. This

combination essentially allows us to examine the change in retirement (actual minus expected)

on the change in inheritance. By comparing changes in retirement and inheritance expectations,

we are controlling for numerous unobservable characteristics of the individual in much the same

way that individual fixed effects would do.



5. REGRESSION RESULTS

5.1 Effects of Inheritance Receipt on Retirement

         Our first regression results are shown in Table 5, with results for the person-wave sample

in the first three columns and those for the long-difference sample in the last three columns.14




13
   We would have preferred to use retirement expectations as of wave 2, since our data on inheritance expectations
comes from wave 2, but were unable to do so due to data limitations. To be specific, we use the variable r1rplnya
from the RAND version of the HRS as our measure of the expected year of retirement. As explained in St. Clair et.
al. (2004), this variable incorporates the answers to several questions about expected date of retirement in different
parts of the survey in order to provide non-missing data for as many observations as possible. However, the HRS
did not ask some of these questions in the wave 2 survey and thus the RAND data does not include a variable
equivalent to r1rplnya for wave 2. For reference, we use the variable r6retyr from the RAND data as our measure of
the actual date of retirement.
14
  In all regressions, standard errors are clustered at the household level to correct for arbitrary forms of serial
correlation in the error term for members of the same household across survey waves.



                                                           12
The model is estimated as a linear probability model for ease of interpretation.15 We first

discuss the person-wave results. In specification 1, we find that receiving an inheritance is

associated with a 2.4 percentage point increase in the probability of retirement over a two-year

period, or 13 percent of the baseline retirement rate over a two-year period; the effect is

statistically significant at the 10 percent level. In the next column, we test whether the response

is increasing in the size of the inheritance by instead using the continuous value of the

inheritance received.16 This coefficient is positive and also significant at the 10 percent level.

Increasing the value of the inheritance by $100,000 is found to increase the probability of

retirement by 2.1 percentage points, or about 11 percent of the baseline retirement rate. In the

final column, we use the inheritance value scaled by household income at the previous wave, as

it may be that it is the size of the inheritance relative to household finances that matters. This

variable also has a positive effect on retirement. The effect is not statistically significant, but the

magnitude is quite similar to the other coefficients on the table: an increase in the inheritance

value equal to household income (about $55,000 for the median household) raises the probability

of retirement by 1.1 percentage points.

           The second half of the table shows results for the long-difference sample, where the

dependent variable is labor force exit over the full eight-year sample period. The results are

quite similar to those already discussed, except that the inheritance dummy and inheritance value

coefficients are now significant at the 5 percent level rather than the 10 percent level. The

magnitudes of the coefficients are generally similar to those in the two-year change sample,

though they are smaller relative to the baseline retirement rate in the long-difference sample. For


15
     We have also run all of our specifications using a probit model, and found the marginal effects to be very similar.
16
   To allow for the possibility of a non-linear effect of inheritances on retirement, we try including squared and cubic
terms as well; however, these are never statistically different from zero and so the results are not shown here.


                                                            13
example, receiving an inheritance raises the probability of retirement over the eight-year period

by 3.6 percentage points, or 7 percent relative to baseline retirement over an eight-year period,

and increasing the value of the inheritance by $100,000 raises the probability of retirement by 3

percentage points, or about 5 percent relative to baseline retirement.

       In results not shown, we have also assessed the robustness of the estimates in Table 5 to

several alternative measures of labor supply. These include retirement defined based on the

respondent’s self-report of transitioning from being not retired to being partly or completely

retired, the change in the self-reported probability of working past 62 (which may pick up

changes in expected retirement behavior that have not yet been realized), the change in hours

worked (which may pick up responses on the intensive as well as extensive margin), and labor

force re-entry. In all cases the coefficients are of the expected sign, with inheritance receipt

consistently reducing labor supply, and the effects are frequently statistically significant. We

conclude that the estimated effects of inheritance receipt on labor supply are quite robust.



5.2 Results Using Expectations Data

       Our results indicate that the wealth shock a household experiences when it receives an

inheritance leads to a significant reduction in the labor supply of household members. There are,

however, two limitations to these initial results. First, inheritance receipt is not random in the

population. If, for example, individuals with wealthy parents are more likely to receive an

inheritance and are also more likely to retire early even in the absence of an inheritance due to

differences in both observable (e.g., education, income) and unobservable (e.g., financial

knowledge, risk aversion) characteristics, then this would cause a spurious correlation between

inheritance receipt and retirement. Second, the receipt of an inheritance may not actually




                                                 14
constitute a wealth shock for many households, because inheritances are often expected. Some

of the households that expect an inheritance may have adjusted their labor supply prior to

inheritance receipt (for example, by having one spouse retire early) and thus there may be no

change in their behavior when the inheritance actually arrives. In this case, treating all

inheritances as unexpected will tend to understate the true effect of wealth shocks on behavior.

         To address both of these concerns, we make use of the rich data on expectations in the

HRS. Specifically, we now define our dependent variable to be equal to one if the household

retires earlier than expected, and zero otherwise. To create this variable, we make use of the

individual’s planned retirement year as reported in wave 1. Because some respondents did not

answer these questions in the survey, the sample size is reduced from 4,508 to 2,502

observations.17

         We also make use of expectations questions about inheritances in order to distinguish

expected from unexpected inheritances. Even with the rich information in the HRS, it is not

necessarily clear how to delineate between expected and unexpected inheritances. For example,

an inheritance may be unexpected because the recipient did not expect to receive one at all, or it

may be partially unexpected because the amount received was greater than expected.

         Therefore, we first divide inheritance recipients by whether they expected any inheritance

(expected probability greater than zero) or not, a simple but appealing way to identify a group of

individuals for whom the inheritance was truly unexpected. Our calculations indicate that more




17
  Our retired earlier than expected dummy is 1 for people who are retired by wave 6 and did so earlier than their
expected retirement date, 0 for those who are retired by wave 6 and retired on time or later than their expected
retirement date, and 0 for those who are still working at wave 6 and have passed their planned retirement date. This
variable is missing for those who do not report a planned retirement year (1,321 obs) or who have neither yet retired
nor reached their planned retirement date (677 obs). There is no significant difference in the probability of
inheritance receipt among those observations with missing values of the retired earlier than expected dummy and
those with non-missing values.


                                                         15
than one-third of inheritance recipients had said there was no chance they would receive an

inheritance over the next ten years.

          Next, to incorporate the idea that an inheritance may constitute a surprise by its size

rather than its arrival, we classify recipients by whether they received more than they expected,

less than expected, or about what they expected. Since many of those who reported a positive

probability of inheritance receipt could not give a conditional value of the inheritance but could

answer questions that allow us to determine whether their expected inheritance falls in a

particular range (e.g., $10,000 to $50,000), we define the more than expected dummy as

receiving an inheritance that fell in a higher bracket than expected, and similarly for inheritances

that were less than expected and about expected.18

          The results of this analysis are shown on Table 6. For ease of comparison with earlier

results, we first estimate models with our new dependent variable and the same inheritance

variables used in Table 5. The coefficients on the prior inheritance variables are all significant at

the 10 percent level or better, even the inheritance value scaled by household income, and are

somewhat larger relative to the mean of the dependent variable than those for the long-difference

sample on Table 5. For example, receiving an inheritance increases the probability of retiring

earlier than expected by 4.4 percentage points, or 12 percent relative to the baseline. Increasing

the value of the inheritance by $100,000 increases the probability of retirement by 4.5 percentage

points.




18
  While it is tempting to try to decompose the value of the inheritance into its expected and unexpected components
using the difference between the received value and the conditional value or expected value, such attempts are
stymied by the large number of people who expect an inheritance but do not report its conditional value (about 40%
of those who give a positive probability of inheritance receipt). Thus, it is not clear how much of their inheritance
should be considered expected vs. unexpected. The approach we have adopted is, in our opinion, the cleanest way
to test for differences between expected and unexpected inheritances given the available data.



                                                         16
        The final three columns on the table display the results including our new right-hand side

variables. When we include the two dummy variables for having received an expected or an

unexpected inheritance in column 4, we fail to find a stronger effect of unexpected inheritances;

its coefficient is somewhat larger than the coefficient on expected inheritances, but they are not

statistically different from each other or individually different from zero.

        One possible explanation for these findings, however, is that unexpected inheritances

may be smaller than expected inheritances, so that the results in column 4 are confounding the

size of the inheritance with whether it was a surprise. Indeed, the median expected inheritance is

$40,135 while the median unexpected inheritance is $17,554. Thus, in column 5, we instead use

as our key independent variables the value of the inheritance for those with expected inheritances

and the value for those with unexpected inheritances. Now the expected result emerges. The

effect of a given dollar amount of inheritance on the probability of retiring early is more than

twice as large if the inheritance is unexpected, so that the effect of raising the inheritance value

by $100,000 is to increase the probability of retiring early by 3.8 percentage points if the

inheritance is expected or by 8.4 percentage points if it is unexpected. Each coefficient is

individually significantly different from zero, but more importantly, the difference between the

two coefficients is statistically significant at the 10 percent level.

        In the final column of Table 6, we allow for the possibility that even an expected

inheritance may be unexpected in its size by including dummy variables for whether the

inheritance was more than expected, less than expected, or about what was expected (where

expected means within the same “bracket,” e.g. $10,000-$50,000). Here too the results suggest a

stronger effect of unexpected inheritances. Receiving an inheritance that is larger than expected

raises the probability of retiring early by 5.5 percentage points, and this effect is significant at the




                                                   17
10 percent level. The coefficient on receiving an inheritance that is less than expected is

negative (but not different from zero) and the two coefficients are statistically different from

each other at the 10 percent level. Overall, our results indicate that inheritances that are either

entirely unexpected or unexpectedly large have larger effects on retirement than expected

inheritances.



6. FURTHER DISCUSSION

       While we have found support for our hypothesis that inheritances have larger effects

when they are unanticipated, we pause to consider factors that might make it difficult to find a

stronger effect of unexpected inheritances in the data.

       One possible issue is that that there may be measurement error in respondents’ self-

reported probability of inheritance receipt and conditional value of the expected inheritance, so

that our measures of expected and unexpected inheritances are both quite noisy. While it is

undoubtedly the case that our delineation between expected and unexpected bequests is noisy,

Tables 3 and 4 show that the subjective probability questions on inheritances contain useful

information, as the self-reported probability of inheritance receipt is correlated with actual

receipt and the received value is correlated with the conditional value. Furthermore, our

measures are constructed so as to not rely very heavily on the specific probability of inheritance

receipt or exact value of the expected inheritance. However, given our need to classify

inheritances based on the bracket values, it is possible that inheritances are labeled “about as

expected” when they are either far more or less than expected (e.g., if a respondent expects

$100,000 and receives $225,000), or conversely classified as “more than expected” when in fact

the unexpected component is not very large (e.g., if a respondent expects $45,000 and receives




                                                 18
$55,000). Thus, it is possible that the difference between the effect of expected and unexpected

inheritances on retirement is larger than what we have found here.

       Another potential factor that may affect the interpretation of our results is the role played

by liquidity constraints. Workers who expect inheritances might wish to consume some of their

inheritance prior to receipt and retire earlier, but be unable to do so because they cannot borrow

against the inheritance and hold few assets or mostly illiquid assets. If so, this will tend to make

the effect of expected and unexpected inheritances more similar.

       To explore this, we experimented with three measures of liquidity constraints, including

“has financial assets < $5,000,” “has financial assets < $10,000,” and “has financial assets < 20%

of income.” By interacting these with our measures of inheritance receipt, we can test whether

there is a differential response to the inheritance based on liquidity. These results did not

produce a consistent pattern of there being a stronger response to inheritance receipt by liquidity-

constrained households.

       These results, however, should not be interpreted as evidence that liquidity constraints are

not important, for at least two reasons. First, our three measures are, admittedly, poor proxies for

liquidity constraints. Indeed, the literature in this area suggests that good proxies for liquidity

constraints are extremely difficult to find. In this context, the problem is made even more

intractable by the fact that most proxies of liquidity constraints (such as measures of financial

assets, levels of debt, etc.) may be endogenously determined with inheritance expectations. In

other words, a household that is expecting an inheritance might save less and/or borrow more in

an attempt to smooth out the consumption effects of the future bequest.

        A final theory is that recipients may be reluctant to act upon as-yet-unrealized

inheritances because inheritance receipt is uncertain. To use a common expression, “a bird in the




                                                  19
hand is worth more than a bird in the bush.” Conceptually, it would be more appropriate to use

the certainty equivalent of the expected inheritance as the portion that is expected. Unfortunately,

calculating the certainty equivalent is not possible with the data available to us, as we would

need to know the individual’s full probability distribution of inheritance receipt, as well as

parameters of the individual’s utility function.19 In sum, measurement error, liquidity

constraints, and risk aversion over the size of the inheritance suggest that the difference between

the effect of unexpected and expected inheritance receipt on behavior may well be even greater

than what we find.



7. CONCLUSIONS

         Inheritances represent a shock to wealth that may provide a useful way to estimate the

effect of wealth on labor supply. Our paper provides new evidence on the effect of inheritance

receipt on retirement using the HRS, which has a large number of inheritance recipients among

its sample of older workers and includes data on ex-ante inheritance and retirement expectations.

         We find that inheritance receipt is associated with a significant increase in the probability

of retirement and that the effect is increasing in the size of the inheritance. These findings

contrast with those of the previous literature, which failed to find large and consistent effects of

inheritance receipt on retirement. We find that the effect is more than twice as large when the

inheritance is unexpected, suggesting that earlier studies may have underestimated the wealth

effect due to an inability to distinguish between expected and unexpected inheritances. Our



19
  We have conducted weaker tests of whether uncertainty matters based on the measure of risk aversion available in
the data (based on answers to questions about income gambles), on the theory that those who are relatively less risk
averse will be more willing to spend expected inheritances prior to receipt, so they will respond less to inheritance
receipt than will the most risk averse individuals. However, we do not find any evidence that response to
inheritance receipt depends on risk aversion.


                                                         20
findings may be of use to economists and policy makers seeking to project the effect of other

wealth changes on retirement, such as those that might result from changes to Social Security.

       A second contribution of our work is that we document that inheritance receipt is an

important phenomenon for households nearing retirement age. About 20 percent of HRS

respondents receive an inheritance over an eight-year period and these inheritances can be quite

substantial, with a median value of about $30,000. When a household receives an inheritance, it

can spend it in a variety of ways – by reducing labor supply and increasing the consumption of

leisure, by increasing its consumption of goods and services, or by increasing transfers to family

and friends via bequests or inter vivos gifts. Studying some of these other behavioral responses

to inheritance receipt may be a fruitful area for future research.




                                                 21
                                       REFERENCES


Abel, Andrew B., 1985. “Precautionary Savings and Accidental Bequests,” American Economic
Review 75, 777-791.

Ando, A. and F. Modigliani, 1963. “The `Life-Cycle’ Hypothesis of Saving: Aggregate
Implications and Test,” American Economic Review 53, 55-84.

Barro, Robert J., 1974. “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political Economy 82,
1095-1117.

Blanchflower, David and Andrew J. Oswald, 1998. “What Makes an Entrepreneur? Evidence on
Inheritance and Capital Constrains,” Journal of Labor Economics 16: 26-60.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Shleifer, and Lawrence H. Summers, 1985. “The Strategic
Bequest Motive,” Journal of Political Economy 93, 1045-1076.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1991. “How Strong Are Bequest Motives? Evidence Based on Estimates
of the Demand for Life Insurance and Annuities,” Journal of Political Economy 99, 899-927.

Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy (2000). “Labor Supply,” in Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Brown, Jeffrey R. and Scott J. Weisbenner, 2004. “Intergenerational Transfers and Savings
Behavior,” in Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, David A. Wise, ed. (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press).

Coile, Courtney C. and Phillip B. Levine. “Bulls, Bears, and Retirement Behavior.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 59(3):408-429, April 2006.

Coronado, Julia and Maria Perozek (2003). “Wealth Effects and the Consumption of Leisure:
Retirement Decisions During the Stock Market Boom of the 1990s,” Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series #2003-20.

Cox, Donald, 1987. “Motives for Private Income Transfers,” Journal of Political Economy 95,
508-546.

Cox, Donald and Mark R. Rank, 1992. “Inter-Vivos Transfers and Intergenerational Exchange,”
The Review of Economics and Statistics 74, 305-314.

Gale, W., and J. Scholz, 1994. “Intergenerational Transfers and the Accumulation of Wealth,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 8, 145-160.

Gale and Slemrod, 2000. “Rethinking the Estate and Gift Tax: Overview,” in W. Gale and J.
Slemrod, eds., Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution).



                                              22
Gokhale, Jagadeesh and Lawrence Kotlikoff, 2002. “The Impact of Social Security and Other
Factors on the Distribution of Wealth,” in Martin Feldstein (ed.), The Distributions Aspects of
Social Security and Social Security Reform. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, 1993. “The Carnegie Conjecture:
Some Empirical Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 413-435.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, 1994a. “Sticking It Out:
Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Constraints,” Journal of Political Economy, 53-75.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, 1994b. “Entrepreneurial
Decisions and Liquidity Constraints,” RAND Journal of Economics 25, 334-347.

Imbens, Guido W., Donald B. Rubin, and Bruce I. Sacerdote, 2001. "Estimating the
Effect of Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence
from a Survey of Lottery Players." American Economic Review, Vol. 91, No. 4
(September), pp. 778–94.

Joulfaian, David and Mark O. Wilhelm, 1994. “Inheritance and Labor Supply,” Journal of
Human Resources 29, 1205-1234.

Kessler , D., and A. Masson, 1989. “Bequest and Wealth Accumulation: Are Some Pieces of
the Puzzle Missing?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 3, 141-152.

Killingsworth, Mark and James Heckman (1986). “Female Labor Supply: A Survey,” in Orley
Ashenfelter and Richard Layard (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics. Amsterdam: North-
Holland.

Kotlikoff, L., and L. Summers, 1981. “The Role of Intergenerational Transfers in Aggregate
Capital Accumulation,” Journal of Political Economy 89, 706-732.

Kotlikoff, L., 1988. “Intergenerational Transfers and Savings,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 2, 41-58.

Light, Audrey and Kathleen McGarry, (2004, forthcoming). “Why Parents Play Favorites:
Explanations for Unequal Bequests,” American Economic Review.

McGarry, Kathleen M. and Robert F. Schoeni, 1995. “Transfer Behavior: Measurement and the
Redistribution of Resources within the Family,” Journal of Human Resources 30: s184-226.

McGarry, Kathleen M. and Robert F. Schoeni, 1997. “Transfer Behavior within the Family:
Results from the Asset and Health Dynamics Survey,” The Journals of Gerontology 52B: 82-92.

McGarry, Kathleen M., 1999. “Inter Vivos Transfers and Intended Bequests,” Journal of Public
Economics 73: 321-351.




                                               23
McGranaham, Leslie, 2000. “Charity and the Bequest Motive: Evidence from Seventeenth-
Century Wills,” Journal of Political Economy 108, 1270-1291.

Modigliani, F. and R. Brumberg, 1954. “Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An
Interpretation of Cross-Section Data,” in K. Kurihara, ed., Post-Keynesian Economics (New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press).

Modigliani, F., 1988. “The Role of Intergenerational Transfers and Life Cycle Saving in the
Accumulation of Wealth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 2, 15-40.

Pencavel, John, 1986. “Labor Supply of Men: A Survey,” in Orley Ashenfelter and Richard
Layard (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Perozek, Maria G., 1998. “A Reexamination of the Strategic Bequest Motive,” Journal of
Political Economy 106, 423-445.

Schervish, Paul G. and John J. Havens, 2003. “Gifts and Bequests: Family or Philanthropic
Organizations?” in Alicia H. Munnell and Annika Sunden (eds.), Death and Dollars: The Role of
Gifts and Bequests in America. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Sevak, Purvi. 2001. "Wealth Shocks and Retirement Timing: Evidence from the
Nineties." Michigan Retirement Research Center, Working Paper WP00D1.

St. Clair, Patricia, et. al. 2004. “RAND HRS Data Documentation, Version D,” mimeo, RAND
Corporation.

Wilhelm, Mark O., 1996. “Bequest Behavior and the Effect of Heirs’ Earnings: Testing the
Altruistic Model of Bequests,” American Economic Review 86, 874-892.

Yaari, Menahem E, 1965. “Uncertain Lifetimes, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the
Consumer,” Review of Economic Studies 32, 137-150.




                                              24
                          Table 1: Value of Inheritances Received
                                HRS Person-Wave Sample

                                     Value          Value/           Value/
                                                   Net Worth       Household
                                                                    Income

                  Mean                  67,068        0.520          0.932

                  5th %ile              1,620         0.005          0.025
                  10th %ile             3,311         0.010          0.050
                  25th %ile             9,444         0.039          0.144
                  50th %ile            28,343         0.108          0.370
                  75th %ile            72,857         0.331          1.020
                  90th %ile           166,256         0.885          2.178
                  95th %ile           280,218         1.660          3.458

                 Number of Obs        958              956            956


                 Note: Values are reported in $2002.




                         Table 2: Characteristics of Inheritance Recipients,
                                    HRS Person-Wave Sample

Characteristic                                        Recipients    Non-Recipients       Significant
                                                                                         Difference?

Age                                                      59.3             59.6             Yes (*)
Female                                                  0.539            0.545              No
Non-white                                               0.079            0.174              Yes
Hispanic                                                0.023            0.072              Yes
Married                                                 0.867            0.811              Yes
Poor Health                                             0.075            0.130              Yes
Education: HS Dropout                                   0.089            0.183              Yes
Education: HS Graduate                                  0.338            0.381              Yes
Education: Some College                                 0.238            0.217              No
Education: College Graduate                             0.335            0.218              Yes
Pension Dummy                                           0.559            0.538              No
Net Worth at Previous Wave (median)                    243,165          153,930             Yes
Household Income at Prev Wave (median)                  54,973           71,834             Yes

Number of Observations                                   955             16,843


Note: * indicates that the difference is statistical significance at the 10% level. All other
differences are statistically significant at the 5% level.




                                                 25
                               Table 3: Expected vs. Received Inheritances
                                      HRS Long-Difference Sample

    Prob of         % of            Median        Median of        % Who           Median         Median of
  Inheritance      Sample        Cond. Value     Cond. Value      Received        Value of       Inheritance/
    Receipt                      of Expected     of Expected     Inheritance     Inheritance        1994
    in 1994                      Inheritance     Inheritance/      by 2002        Received       HH Income
                                                 HH Income

       0            0.598             0             0.000           0.109          17,554           0.350
    .01-.25         0.113           12,139          0.226           0.181          18,021           0.339
    .26-.49         0.020           24,278          0.420           0.190          17,199           0.486
      0.50          0.083           36,417          0.617           0.245          39,231           0.597
    .51-.75         0.042           36,417          0.667           0.329          35,728           0.618
    .76-.99         0.054           60,695          0.872           0.367          63,219           0.741
       1            0.088           60,695          0.893           0.388          48,592           0.708

      All           1.000             0             0.000           0.178          30,474           0.500


Note: Values are reported in $2002. The two final columns are conditional on receipt of an inheritance.




                                                       26
                    Table 4a: Cross-Tabulation of Conditional Expected vs. Received Inheritances
                                     HRS Long-Difference Sample: Full Sample

Cond. Exp.                                               Actual Inheritance Value
Inh. Value            0          >0 to 10K      >10K to 50K >50K to 250K >250K to 1M               >1M          Total Obs

0                   86.8             5.2            5.3             2.4             0.4            0.0              4,204

>0 to 10K           73.6            11.2            9.9             4.6             0.9            0.0              924

>10K to 50K         64.6             7.1            14.6           11.8             1.8            0.0              1,154

>50K to 250K        57.2             4.3            11.7           21.1             5.5            0.2              622

>250K to 1M         59.3             4.4            8.0             8.0            15.0            5.3              113

>1M                 80.0            10.0            0.0            10.0             0.0            0.0               10

Total                                                                                                               7,207


Note: Row percentages are shown in each cell; the total number of people in each row is shown in the last column.


                    Table 4b: Cross-Tabulation of Conditional Expected vs. Received Inheritances
                                HRS Long-Difference Sample: Inheritance Recipients

Cond. Exp.                                               Actual Inheritance Value
Inh. Value                       >0 to 10K      >10K to 50K >50K to 250K >250K to 1M               >1M          Total Obs

0                                   39.7            38.4           18.6             3.3            0.0              456

>0 to 10K                           43.6            35.2           17.3             4.0            0.0              202

>10K to 50K                         20.4            39.8           34.1             5.7            0.0              334

>50K to 250K                         8.7            26.2           51.4            13.3            0.5              218

>250K to 1M                         13.5            16.2           24.3            29.7            16.2              37

>1M                                 50.0            0.0            50.0             0.0            0.0               2

Total                                                                                                               1,249


Note: Row percentages are shown in each cell; the total number of people in each row is shown in the last column.




                                                             27
                                  Table 5: Effect of Inheritance Receipt on Retirement

Variable                                                  Depend Var: Labor Force Exit
                            (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)                (5)             (6)

                                     Person-Wave Sample                                  Long-Difference Sample

Inheritance Flag           0.0241 *                                            0.0360 **
                           (.0132)                                             (.0187)
Inheritance Value                          0.0210 *                                             0.0295 **
                                           (.0108)                                              (.0074)
Inh Value / HH Income                                      0.0111                                              0.0107
                                                           (.0078)                                             (.0076)

# of Obs                   17,801          17,801          17,733                4,508           4,508            4,485

Mean of Depend Var           0.192           0.192           0.192               0.541           0.541            0.541


Note:
1) The sample is limited to individuals who were working at the previous wave. The two-year change and long-
difference samples are described in more detail in the text.
2) Inheritance value is measured in 100,000s of $2002.
3) All regressions include controls for age, gender, marital status, race, education, current and lifetime income,
net worth, health status, pension type, industry, occupation, region, and wave; see text for details.
4) * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level.




                                                            28
                Table 6: Effect of Expected vs. Unexpected Inheritance Receipt on Retirement
                                           Long-Difference Sample

Variable                                            Depend Var: Retire Earlier Than Expected
                             (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)             (6)

Inh Flag                   0.0442     *
                           (.0250)
Inh Value                                 0.0448     **
                                          (.0121)
Inh Value / HH Income                                      0.0359       **
                                                           (.0078)
Inh Flag - Expected                                                          0.0379
                                                                             (.0310)
Inh Flag - Unexpected                                                        0.0536
                                                                             (.0364)
Inh Value - Expected                                                                      0.0383 **
                                                                                          (.0126)
Inh Value - Unexpected                                                                    0.0836 **
                                                                                          (.0229)
Inh Flag - Amt Expected                                                                                   0.0678
                                                                                                          (.0453)
Inh Flag - Amt More                                                                                       0.0547 *
                                                                                                          (.0303)
Inh Flag - Amt Less                                                                                      -0.0622
                                                                                                          (.0623)

# of obs                      2,502          2,502              2,488         2,502         2,502          2,502

Mean of Depend Var            0.382          0.382              0.382         0.382         0.382          0.382

F-test: Exp=Unexp                                                             0.726         0.079          0.083
(or Amt More=Amt Less)


Note:
1) The sample is limited to individuals who were working at the wave 2 and provided an expected retirement date
at wave 1. The long-difference sample is described in more detail in the text.
2) Inheritance value is measured in 100,000s of $2002.
3) All regressions include controls for age, gender, marital status, race, education, current and lifetime income,
net worth, health status, pension type, industry, occupation, region, and wave; see text for details.
4) * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level.




                                                           29
                         Figure 1: Distribution of Expected Probability of
                                 Inheritance Receipt (1994 value)

            0.7

            0.6

            0.5
Frequency




            0.4

            0.3

            0.2

            0.1

            0.0
                  0.00    0.01-   0.11-   0.21-   0.31-   0.41-    0.50   0.51-   0.61-   0.71-   0.81-   0.91-   1.00
                          0.10    0.20    0.30    0.40    0.49            0.60    0.70    0.80    0.90    0.99

                                                            Probability



                                                              30
