                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        EXCHANGE RATE CHANGES AND INFLATION IN POST-CRISIS ASIAN
       ECONOMIES: VAR ANALYSIS OF THE EXCHANGE RATE PASS-THROUGH

                                              Takatoshi Ito
                                              Kiyotaka Sato

                                          Working Paper 12395
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12395


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




The authors are grateful to Professors Eiji Ogawa, Etsuro Shioji, Yuri N. Sasaki, Kentaro Kawasaki, Willem
Thorbecke, Drs. Masaru Yoshitomi, Junko Shimizu and Yelena F. Takhtamanova for their insightful
comments. Research support by JSPS Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research, (A-2), No. 15203008, to the first
author and by MEXT Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B), No. 16730145, to the second author are
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Takatoshi Ito and Kiyotaka Sato. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Exchange Rate Changes and Inflation in Post-Crisis Asian Economies: VAR Analysis of the
Exchange Rate Pass-Through
Takatoshi Ito and Kiyotaka Sato
NBER Working Paper No. 12395
July 2006
JEL No. F12, F31, F41

                                           ABSTRACT


Macroeconomic consequences of a large currency depreciation among the crisis-hit Asian economies
had varied from one country to another. Inflation did not soar in most Asian countries, including
Thailand and Korea, after the exchange rate depreciated during the crisis. Indonesia, however,
suffered very high inflation following a very large nominal depreciation of the rupiah. As a result,
price competitive advantage by the rupiah depreciation was lost in the real exchange rate terms. The
objective of this paper is to examine the pass-through effects of exchange rate changes on the
domestic prices in the East Asian economies using a VAR analysis. Main results are as follows: (1)
the degree of exchange rate pass-through to import prices was quite high in the crisis-hit economies;
(2) the pass-through to CPI was generally low, with a notable exception of Indonesia: and (3) in
Indonesia, both the impulse response of monetary policy variables to exchange rate shocks and that
of CPI to monetary policy shocks are positive, large, and statistically significant. Thus, Indonesia’s
accommodative monetary policy, coupled with the high degree of the CPI responsiveness to
exchange rate changes was an important factor in the spiraling effects of domestic price inflation and
sharp nominal exchange rate depreciation in the post-crisis period.


Takatoshi Ito
Graduate School of Economics
University of Tokyo
7-2-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo, 113-0033
JAPAN
and NBER
tito@e.u-tokyo@ac.jp

Kiyotaka Sato
Faculty of Economics
Yokohama National University
79-3 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya
Yokohama 240-8501
JAPAN
sato@ynu.ac.jp
1. Introduction
          The objective of this paper is to examine pass-through effects of the exchange

rate changes on the domestic prices among the East Asian countries.       In order to take

into account of bi-directional effects, as well as other macroeconomic factors, between

domestic inflation and exchange rate changes, a vector autoregression (VAR) analysis

with five or seven variables, is used.       The crisis-affected Asian countries have

experienced varying degree of exchange rate and inflation rate changes following an

initial shock of sharp depreciation of their currencies in the fall of 1997. In some

countries, such as Korea, a sharp nominal depreciation was followed by a sharp

reversal within several months, with little effects on domestic inflation. In some other

countries, such as Indonesia, a very large depreciation resulted in high inflation, so that

the real exchange rate did not change much to promote exports.

          Whether the exchange rate changes have significant impact on the domestic

prices has several important implications to thinking of the role of the exchange rate in

macroeconomic policy design.         It is commonly thought that if the degree of

pass-through is high, the exchange rate changes will change the relative prices of

tradables and non-tradables, so that the adjustment in trade balances will be relatively

prompt.    For example, imported goods become expensive, if pass-through is high, so

that expenditure switching from imports to domestic goods will occur and external

balances will be corrected in several months. On the other hand, if the degree of

pass-through is low, the exchange rate does not have much impact on the trade balance.

          Another important aspect is the interaction between the exchange rate and

domestic prices including both tradables and non-tradables. Suppose that a country is

experiencing trade deficits and the exchange rate depreciates, then export

competitiveness is strengthened, resulting in improvement in external balances.


                                             3
However, if domestic prices in general respond to the nominal exchange rate

depreciation one-to-one—that is, pass-through not only to import prices but to CPI in

general—then any export competitiveness from nominal depreciation would be

cancelled out.   A combination of nominal depreciation and high inflation leaves the

export competitiveness unchanged, while corporations and financial institutions that

had net foreign-currency liabilities become burdened by larger real debts and

nonperforming loans.

        Hence, from the viewpoint of using the exchange rate changes as an

instrument for correcting (reducing deficits and possibly making surpluses in) the trade

balance, the pass-through to import prices and possibly wholesale prices to force

expenditure switching is good, but the pass-through to CPI, raising all price levels, is

bad.   Monetary policy should be operated with knowledge of this distinction.

        Post-crisis Asian countries provide a rich “natural” experiment of large

exchange rate changes and different domestic responses. In order to examine what

exactly happened in the post-crisis Asian economies in terms of pass-through at

different levels, we need to build a framework that includes different kinds of price

indices as well as the nominal exchange rate.        The pass-through question is to

examine the direction from the exchange rate to domestic prices.       There is a large

literature of pass-through effects, with a single-equation regression explaining

responses of a domestic price index from the changes in the exchange rate.      See, for

example, Feenstra (1989), Olivei (2002), Campa and Goldberg (2005), Campa,

Goldberg and Gonzáles-Mínguez (2005), Otani, Shiratsuka and Shirota (2005).

However, a single-equation pass-through regression ignores the fact that domestic

inflation may affect the exchange rate.   In order to examine a reinforcing mechanism

between domestic prices and the exchange rate, a VAR analysis is necessary.      Recent


                                           4
studies, such as McCarthy (2000), Hahn (2003) and Faruqee (2004), use a VAR

approach for an analysis of pass-through of several types of shocks to domestic

inflation. However, these studies examine the pass-through in advanced countries

and the data covers the relatively peace (non-crisis) time which contrasts sharply with

the crisis period experienced by East Asian economies.

        The novelty of this paper is three-fold: First, by focusing on the interaction

between the exchange rate and inflation, new insights on the difficulty of Indonesia in

the post-crisis period will be examined. Most of existing studies examine the nominal

exchange rate to describe the recovery and non-recovery process; Second, a VAR

analysis, which allows the reverse causality from inflation to the exchange rate, is

applied to crisis-affected countries; and third, to use several domestic price indices so

that we may examine how pass-through effects may be watered down as weights of

domestic (nontradable) value added increase, from import prices to wholesale prices,

to consumer price indices.

        The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the brief

history of currency movements of the Asian currency crisis.      Section 3 discusses the

analytical framework of this paper. The results of a VAR analysis are presented in

Section 4. Section 5 checks the robustness of the empirical findings.         Section 6

concludes.



2. Experiences of the Asian Countries
        In the episode of the Asian currency crisis, the interaction of the exchange rate

and domestic prices varied from one country to another. After the floatation of the

Thai baht on July 2, 1997, some Asian currencies immediately depreciated (vis-à-vis

the US dollar), while others held on to a de facto dollar peg for several months before


                                            5
experiencing a large depreciation. Although the Asian currency crisis is commonly

considered to be a case of rapid contagion across Asia from Thailand to Indonesia, to

Korea, the process took more than several months before the full crisis developed in

December 1997.      In some interpretation, the Asian currency crisis was not due to a

single shock to Thailand but multiple shocks to Thailand, Indonesia, and Korea with

reinforcing spillover to each other. 3    Reasons for the downfall of the currencies

seemed to be different in different countries.

         Since reasons for a crisis were different in several countries, it is natural that

recovery processes were also different.    It is well recognized that the crisis was most

severe and the recovery took much longer in Indonesia than others.             By several

measures, Indonesia suffered most damages in the financial crisis of 1997-98.             The

Indonesian rupiah depreciated to one-sixth of the pre-crisis level in the mid-January

1998, about 16,000 rupiah/dollar. The rupiah recovered somewhat in the spring, but

again went to the 15,000 in May 1998, when the political crisis reached a climax, that

resulted in the resignation of President Suharto. Capital outflows continued, and the

recovery of nominal exchange rate from that trough was very much delayed.

         The value of Asian currencies other than the Indonesian rupiah recovered

from January to mid-1998, and then they were stabilized at around 60 to 70% of the

pre-crisis level by the mid-1998.    The recovery of the Indonesian rupiah was much

slower and never recovered to the level (relative to the pre-crisis level) of other Asian

currencies. Figure 1 shows the development of the Asian exchange rates.



                                 *** Insert Figure 1. ***

3
 See Ito and Hashimoto (2002) for high-frequency contagion of the exchange rate changes
among the Asian currencies during the Asian currency crisis.



                                             6
         It was not only the exchange rate but the inflation rate in Indonesia that was

different from other countries.      The inflation rate of Indonesia became very high for

any country in 1998 and 1999 and remained higher than most Asian countries in the

period from 2000 to 2003 (Figure 2).                 Although the Indonesian exchange rate

depreciated much more than other countries, inflation cancelled out some of price

competitiveness that came from depreciation. By 2004, the real exchange rate of

Indonesia became similar to that of Thailand, the Philippines, and Malaysia. The

export advantage of Indonesia was completely offset by 2004 (Figure 3).



                               *** Insert Figures 2 and 3. ***



         So far, the story is told in terms of the bilateral nominal and real exchange rate

vis-à-vis the US dollar.        However, export competitiveness of a county is most

accurately measured by the real effective exchange rate (the multilateral version of the

real exchange rate).     The trade weights can be used for defining multilateral effective

exchange rate. 4    The pass-through should be defined as the exchange rate changes of

trading partners and the impact should be measured as the weighted average of those

exchange rates.



3. Analytical Framework
         The exchange rate is determined by, among others, the interest rate, inflation

rate, and other macroeconomic variables that are subject to monetary and fiscal

4
 To be precise, price elasticities should be taken into account.   See Ito, Ogawa, and Sasaki
(1998).



                                                 7
policies.     It is theoretically well-known and empirically verifiable in the low

frequency data that high inflation rate (vis-à-vis the trading partner countries) will

surely cause depreciation of the currency and that the low interest rate tends to do the

same.   However, many relatively high-frequency empirical studies have found that

the exchange rate is unpredictable and statistically exogenous to (Granger-cause) many

macroeconomic variables. The changes in the exchange rate tend to affect pricing

behaviors of the firms and to influence macroeconomic policies.       Therefore, ideally,

any analysis of interaction between the exchange rate and domestic inflation should

allow a bi-directional causal relationship: from the exchange rate to domestic variables

and from domestic variables to the exchange rate.       The effect of the exchange rate

changes on domestic price variables is called pass-through, while the reverse effect is

the determination of the exchange rate in an open macroeconomics.

            In the fixed exchange rate regime, policies are assigned to keep the exchange

rate at the committed exchange rate.       Capital flows resulting from macroeconomic

shocks and investors’ assessment of the country as a destination of portfolio investment

have to be countered by policies, so that the interest rate and the inflation rate may

fluctuate, but the exchange rate.     In the floating exchange rate regime, the exchange

rate is one of the endogenous variables that respond to economic policies.     Since the

exchange rate and the inflation rate are expected to be influencing each other in many

theoretical models, it is most appropriate to estimate a system that would treat both of

them endogenous.       In particular, during the currency crisis period, a large swing of

exchange rate is likely to affect domestic macroeconomic variables. A VAR is a

useful approach to allow for such interaction between exchange rate and domestic

variables.

            A VAR analysis of the exchange rate pass-through has the following


                                              8
advantages over a single-equation version of pass-through analysis. First, a VAR

technique enables us to identify structural shocks through a Cholesky decomposition of

innovations.    Effects of structural shocks to other macroeconomic variables on

domestic inflation are also investigated under a VAR framework. Second, previous

studies typically analyze the exchange rate pass-through into a single price index by

employing a single-equation-based approach. 5        A VAR approach, in contrast, allows

us to investigate the exchange rate pass-through into a set of domestic prices along the

pricing chain from the import/producer level to the consumer level.

         This paper analyzes the pass-through effect of the exchange rate on domestic

inflation in the following way.      First, we employ a 5-variable VAR including the

exchange rate, the consumer price index (CPI) and other macroeconomic variables.

Structural shocks to the exchange rate and other variables are identified through a

Cholesky decomposition of innovations.                It is investigated how domestic

macroeconomic variables respond to exchange rate shocks through the impulse

response function analysis.     Second, in addition to CPI, we try other domestic price

variables, i.e., producer price index (PPI) and import price index (or import unit values,

to be abbreviated as IMP).      We include each price variable one by one and compare

estimated results between the three price variables.         We expect that the degree of

pass-through to IMP would be larger than that of PPI and CPI, because non-tradable

goods are included in CPI and distribution costs along the pricing chain may cause a



5
  The seminal work on the exchange rate pass-through is, inter alia, Knetter (1989, 1993) and
Feenstra (1989). Although there have been a large number of studies focusing on exchange
rate pass-through of Japanese trade such as Ohno (1989), Marston (1990) and Otani,
Shiratsuka and Shirota (2005), only a few attempts have been made at the exchange rate
pass-through of East Asian trade. See, for instance, Toh and Ho (2001), Sasaki (2005), and
Parsons and Sato (2006).



                                               9
decline in the degree of pass-through from upstream to downstream prices. 6           We also

include all three price variables together in a 7-variable VAR and examine the

pass-through effects of exchange rate shocks on a set of prices along the pricing chain.

Third, in addition to the analysis for the whole sample period, we conduct estimation

for the sub-sample period ranging from July 1997 to the present, as several countries

started to change their exchange rate regime from the de facto US dollar peg into more

flexible exchange rate system once hit by the crisis.      This additional analysis with the

sub-sample reveals how the pass-through effect has changed after shifting to a

post-crisis exchange rate regime.

         We set up the following VAR model (baseline model) with the vector of five

endogenous variables, xt = (Δoilt , gapt , Δmt , Δefexrt , Δpt )′ , where oilt denotes the

natural log of oil prices; gapt the output gap; mt the natural log of money supply

(base money or M1); efexrt that of nominal effective exchange rate; and pt that of

domestic prices.     Δ represents the first difference operator. As will be discussed

below, we take the first-difference of all variables except for gapt to ensure the

stationarity of variables.   Previous studies, such as McCarthy (2000) and Hahn (2003),

use a 7- or 8-variable VAR.     Our baseline model includes just five variables, primarily

in consideration of the relatively small sample size. In the later section, we also

attempt to extend the baseline model to a 7-variable VAR including all three price

variables to check the robustness and to investigate directly the pass-through effect

across the prices.

         Variables for our baseline model are selected with the following research

intent and empirical consideration. First, we include the oil price and the output gap

6
 Goldberg and Campa (2006) have empirically shown that distribution margins as well as the
higher share of imported inputs reduce the extent of transmission of exchange rate changes to
consumer prices.


                                              10
in a VAR model following McCarthy (2000) and Hahn (2003). Supply shocks are

identified by the oil price inflation. The US dollar denominated oil price is used for

our analysis so that we can investigate the effect of oil price changes themselves, and

not the effect of large changes in the bilateral exchange rate vis-à-vis the US dollar. 7

To capture the demand side effect, we include the output gap which is constructed by

applying the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter to industrial production index. 8

         Second, the base money is used to allow for the effects of monetary policy on

inflation. McLeod (2003) argues that Indonesia’s high inflation after the currency

crisis is primarily caused by the increase in base money that reflects the monetary

policy of the Bank Indonesia (the central bank of Indonesia).               The VAR approach

enables us to identify monetary policy shocks controlling for other factors. 9           If indeed

the monetary factor was dominant, then we will confidently determine the source of

inflation as a mistake of the monetary policy.

         Third, the nominal effective exchange rate is used in our VAR.                  Although

many studies have used the bilateral exchange rate vis-à-vis the US dollar, the effective

exchange rate is the right concept when the total effect of the exchange rate changes is

what we would like to measure. If a country has higher trade dependence on

neighboring countries that experience the same degree of currency depreciations, then

the country may not gain any price competitiveness of their exports or they will not

7
  The fluctuation of local currency oil prices for East Asian countries from the mid-1990s
largely reflect the changes in bilateral exchange rate vis-à-vis the US dollar rather than the oil
price fluctuations per se.
8
  We follow Hahn (2003) and the cyclical components generated by applying the HP filter to
industrial production index are used as the output gap.
9
 Recently, several studies such as Azis and Thorbecke (2004) and Caporale, Cipollini and
Demetriades (2005) use a VAR technique to examine the interaction between monetary policy
and exchange rate changes during and after the Asian currency crisis. However, such studies
do not allow for the exchange rate pass-through in the analysis.


                                                 11
experience much inflationary pressure from imports, since the effective exchange rate

would not change much.        In addition, although most East Asian countries had adopted

a de facto US dollar peg at least up to the currency crisis of 1997, the bilateral rate

vis-à-vis the US dollar is an inappropriate variable to use for this study.      We also

conduct estimation for a sub-sample starting from the crisis period, as several countries

started to change the de facto US dollar peg into more flexible exchange rate system

once hit by the crisis. The estimation for the sub-sample enables us to investigate

whether such changes in exchange rate policy affected the pass-through effect in the

countries concerned.

         Fourth, the consumer price index (CPI) is included in the baseline model as a

measure of domestic inflation.      The CPI includes both imported and, more generally,

tradable goods and non-tradable goods and services.      In order to extract the impact of

the currency depreciation on prices, it may be better to examine responsiveness of

tradable prices separately.      Therefore models with other types of prices, i.e., the

producer price index (PPI) or the import price index (IMP), will be examined.

Similar analyses were conducted by McCarthy (2000), Hahn (2003) and Faruqee

(2004). To investigate the difference in response to shocks among those different

price measures, 5-variable VAR models are estimated with different price measures;

i.e., each has one price variable in the VAR system, and then the price responses to the

currency shock will be prepared.        In addition, a 7-variable VAR including three

measures of price variables, CPI, PPI and IMP, in one system will be estimated to

directly analyze the effects of shocks on prices at different stages of the pricing chain

from imports to retails.

         The primary objective of this paper is to estimate impacts of exchange rate

changes and other types of shocks on domestic price inflation. To recover these


                                             12
structural shocks, a Choleski decomposition of the matrix Ω , a variance-covariance

matrix of the reduced-form VAR residuals ( u t ), is used to generate structural

disturbances ( ε t ).   The relationship between the reduced-form VAR residuals and the

structural disturbances can be written as follows: 10




          ⎛ u toil ⎞                                        ⎛ oil ⎞
          ⎜        ⎟ ⎛ S11      0      0      0      0 ⎞⎜ ε t ⎟
          ⎜ ut ⎟ ⎜ S
               gap                                        ⎟ gap
                                                     0 ⎟⎜⎜ ε t ⎟⎟
          ⎜        ⎟ ⎜ 21      S 22    0      0
          ⎜ u t ⎟ = ⎜ S 31
               m
                               S 32   S 33    0      0 ⎟⎜ ε tm ⎟ .                 (1)
          ⎜ efexr ⎟ ⎜                                     ⎟⎜       ⎟
          ⎜ u t ⎟ ⎜ S 41       S 42   S 43   S 44    0 ⎟⎜ ε tefexr ⎟
          ⎜⎜ p ⎟⎟ ⎜⎝ S 51      S 52   S 53   S 54   S 55 ⎟⎠⎜⎜ ε p ⎟⎟
           ⎝ ut ⎠                                           ⎝ t ⎠



The structural model is identified because the k (k − 1) / 2 restrictions are imposed on

the matrix S as zero restrictions where k denotes the number of endogenous variables.

The resulting lower-triangular matrix S implies that some structural shocks have no

contemporaneous effect on some endogenous variables given the ordering of

endogenous variables.

          Determining the most reasonable order of the endogenous variables is

particularly important to identify structural shocks.                  The change in oil prices is

ordered first because the reduced-form residuals of oil prices are unlikely affected

contemporaneously by any other shocks except oil price (supply) shocks per se, while

oil price shocks likely affect all variables in the system contemporaneously.

10
 A unique lower-triangular matrix S can be derived given the positive definite symmetric
matrix Ω . That is, the Choleski decomposition of Ω implies Ω = PP ′ where the
Choleski factor, P, is a lower-triangular matrix. Since Ω = E (u t u t′ ) = SE (ε t ε t′ ) S ′ = SS ′
where structural disturbances are assumed to be orthonormal, i.e., E (ε t ε t′ ) = I , the
lower-triangular matrix S is equal to the Choleski factor P.



                                                    13
Indonesia is not influential oil-producer in the global oil market.        The output gap is

placed second in the ordering as the output gap can be considered to be

contemporaneously affected by only oil price shocks while output gap (demand)

shocks have a contemporaneous impact on other variables except oil prices.           The base

money is ordered third because it is included as a representative of monetary policy

and, hence, it seems more reasonable to assume that monetary policy shocks have a

contemporaneous effect on the exchange rate than vice versa. Basically, the monetary

policy reaction function is assumed to responds to the current oil prices (supply shock)

and the GDP gap (both supply and demand shocks), and the effect of the monetary

policy shocks affect prices and the exchange rate immediately.         To put differently, the

reduced-form residuals of the base money is assumed not to react contemporaneously

to price shocks, while monetary policy shocks affect the domestic price inflation

contemporaneously. 11 The nominal effective exchange rate is placed in the ordering

ahead of the domestic prices.      This implies that the nominal effective exchange rate

responds contemporaneously to supply, demand and monetary policy shocks but not to

price shocks. The exchange rate shocks are assumed to have a contemporaneous

effect only on domestic inflation. Finally, the price variable is ordered last based on

the assumption that the price variable is contemporaneously affected by all four shocks

but price shocks have no contemporaneous impact on the other variables.



4. Empirical Analysis


11
  Hahn (2003) also orders the monetary policy variable (call rate) prior to exchange rate and
prices by assuming that monetary policy reacts not to realized inflation but to expected
inflation. In contrast, McCarthy (2000) orders the money supply last in a VAR model.
Hence, the different ordering is also attempted to check the robustness and the result is
reported in Section 5.2.



                                               14
4.1. Data

         The five East Asian countries—Indonesia, Korea, Thailand, Malaysia and

Singapore—are the sample countries of this study. 12            The data are monthly from

January 1993 to August 2005 except for Indonesia (March 1993 through August 2005)

and Thailand (January 1993 through October 2004).                  All price series and the

industrial production index (2000=100) are seasonally adjusted.                  The nominal

effective exchange rate index (2000=100) is defined such that an increase in the index

means depreciation. As a monetary policy variable, the seasonally adjusted base

money is used for Indonesia, Korea and Thailand.           Since the data of the base money

is not available for Malaysia and Singapore, the narrow money (M1) is alternatively

used for these countries. The output gap is defined by applying the HP filter to the

natural log of the industrial production index. 13     The data source for all the variables

is IMF, International Financial Statistics, CD-ROM; IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics,

CD-ROM; and the CEIC Asia Database. The details are described in Appendix 1.



                            *** Insert Table 1 around here. ***



         The time series properties of variables are tested by the Augmented

Dickey-Fuller Test (ADF) test and the Phillips-Perron (PP) test.        The result is reported

in Table 1 that shows that the oil price, three types of domestic prices, the monetary


12
  Taiwan, the Philippines and China are not studied because of the difficulty in obtaining the
data.
13
  The HP filter is applied with much longer sample: the sample of January 1980 through
August 2005 for Korea and Malaysia. Owing to the data availability for the industrial
production index, the sample starts from March 1993 for Indonesia, from January 1989 for
Singapore, and from January 1987 for Thailand.



                                               15
policy variables (base money and M1) and the nominal effective exchange rate appear

to be non-stationary in level but stationary in first-differences for all countries.          The

result of unit-root tests also suggest that the output gap is an I(0) process.        Thus, the

endogenous variables in the baseline model, xt = (Δoilt , gapt , Δmt , Δefexrt , Δpt )′ , are

assumed to be stationary and we proceed to the VAR estimation. 14             The lag order of

the VAR model is selected based on the likelihood Ratio (LR) test. 15



4.2. Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Domestic Prices

         This subsection discusses the degree of pass-through from the exchange rate

shocks to domestic variables, especially the domestic price level, in five East Asian

countries.   The baseline model including CPI is estimated and then the impulse

response function is analyzed. The accumulated impulse responses (solid line in

Figures) are presented over a twenty-four months time horizon.                 All shocks are

standardized to one-percent shocks and, hence, the vertical axis in Figures reports the

approximate percentage change in domestic prices in response to a one percent shock.

The dotted line in Figures denotes a two standard error confidence band around the

estimate.



                            *** Insert Figure 4 around here. ***



         Figure 4 shows the response of CPI, base money and output gap to a

14
  Previous studies suggest to including in a VAR the output gap in level together with other
variables in first-differences. Hence, we conduct the structural VAR analysis rather than
cointegration tests.
15
  The lag order of the baseline mode is as follows: Indonesia (4), Korea (2), Thailand (6),
Singapore (8) and Malaysia (3).



                                               16
one-percent exchange rate shock. First, in terms of impacts from the exchange rate to

inflation, the following differences among the countries are observed. As for a

response of CPI to the exchange rate shock, Indonesia exhibits a very large response to

a typical exchange rate shock.      The CPI response to exchange rate in Korea and

Thailand is also positive and statistically significant, but the degree of response is far

smaller than that in Indonesia. The CPI response to the exchange rate shock in

Malaysia is not statistically significant and much smaller than that in Korea and

Thailand. Singapore, which was relatively immune to the currency crisis, indicates

an insignificant response to the exchange rate shock.

         Second, in terms of monetary base responses to a one percent exchange rate

shock, the following cross-country difference is observed. The response of the base

money to the exchange rate shock is also significantly positive and quite large in

Indonesia, which indicates that the Bank Indonesia reacted to currency depreciation by

increasing the base money.      Among other crisis-hit countries, Korea and Thailand

show negative and insignificant responses to the exchange rate shock, though only the

initial response is positive and significant in Korea.         Malaysia also exhibits the

negative response but it is statistically significant. Third, the response of the output

gap to a one percent exchange rate shock is very large and negative in all countries

except Singapore, but the response is statistically significant only in Indonesia.

         Overall, the response of domestic variables to the exchange rate shock is far

larger and significant in Indonesia than in other countries.    The response of CPI to the

exchange rate shock is positive and significant in Korea and Thailand, but the degree

of exchange rate pass-through is much smaller in these countries than in Indonesia.

We have also found that the Bank Indonesia expanded base money in response to the

exchange rate shock, which also contrasts markedly with the other countries.


                                            17
         Although the Asian-currency crisis affected all these countries, Indonesia

stood out in how directly the exchange rate shock caused a disruption in domestic

economic management, monetary accommodation, higher inflation and output cut.

Other countries used monetary policy more prudently so that the domestic inflation

rate did not rise sharply.   This shows that the economic malaise in Indonesia was

partly caused not only by a contagion of crises from neighboring countries but by

economic policy mistakes in reaction to the initial shock of exchange rate depreciation.



4.3. Pass-Through Effects on Different Domestic Prices

         In considering the pass-through of exchange rate shocks into domestic prices,

the pass-through effects on several types of domestic prices and the interaction

between them are worth investigating. Previous studies, among others McCarthy

(2000), Hahn (2003) and Faruqee (2004), attempted to examine the pass-through of

exchange rate shocks on domestic prices at different stages of distribution.   The larger

the share of tradable goods in a certain price index, the more likely the effect of shocks

is to be passed through to the price index. By comparing the import price index (IMP),

the producers price index (PPI) and the consumer price index (CPI), it becomes

possible for us to determine whether and how much the domestic reactions to exchange

rate shocks mitigated or aggravated the external shocks.    It is expected that the import

price index exhibits the largest degree of pass-through while CPI shows the least. To

make a rigorous analysis of exchange rate pass-through into prices at different stages,

we first estimate the baseline model including not CPI but PPI or IMP and compare the

results of pass-through across three prices. Second, we extend the baseline model to a

7-variable VAR by including three price variables together to investigate the extent of

transmission in shocks across these prices.


                                              18
                           *** Insert Figure 5 around here. ***



          Figure 5 reports the response of IMP and PPI to a one-percent exchange rate

shock. 16 As expected, the response of IMP and PPI to the exchange rate shock is

significantly higher than that of CPI in both IMP and PPI for all countries except

Singapore. It is also confirmed that the degree of pass-through is higher in IMP than

in PPI for all countries. Interestingly, the Indonesia’s response is far higher than that

of other countries for both IMP and PPI.

          In sum, the degree of pass-through is highest in the import price index,

followed by PPI, and the lowest in CPI among the East Asian countries affected by the

crisis.   It is important to note that price responses in Indonesia are by far the largest,

and the part of the reasons is its monetary accommodation to the exchange rate shocks

that aggravated the inflation.

          Next, to investigate further the above findings, we use a 7-variable VAR with

the vector of xt = (Δoilt , gapt , Δmt , Δefexrt , Δimpt , Δppit , Δcpit )′ where impt , ppit

and cpit denote the import price index (or import unit value), PPI and CPI,

respectively. To identify the structural shocks under the 7-variable VAR, we employ

the following order in Choleski decomposition: 17




16
  The response of Malaysian import price index (IMP) to the exchange rate shock is not
presented owing to the difficulty in obtaining the data.
17
  The lag order of the 7-variable VAR is as follows: Indonesia (5), Korea (4), Thailand (3) and
Singapore (8). The zero restrictions imposed in (2) are similar to Hahn (2003) and McCarthy
(2000).



                                               19
         ⎛ u toil ⎞                                                   ⎛ ε oil ⎞
         ⎜        ⎟ ⎛ S11     0      0      0      0      0      0 ⎞⎜ t ⎟
         ⎜ u gap ⎟ ⎜                                                 ⎟⎜ gap ⎟
         ⎜ t ⎟ ⎜ S 21        S 22    0      0      0      0      0 ⎟⎜ ε t ⎟
         ⎜ u tm ⎟ ⎜ S        S 32   S 33    0      0      0      0 ⎟⎜ ε t ⎟
                                                                          m

         ⎜ efexr ⎟ ⎜ 31                                              ⎟⎜        ⎟
         ⎜ u t ⎟ = ⎜ S 41    S 42   S 43   S 44    0      0      0 ⎟⎜ ε tefexr ⎟ .      (2)
         ⎜ imp ⎟ ⎜ S         S 52   S 53   S 54   S 55    0
                                                                     ⎟
                                                                 0 ⎟⎜ ε timp ⎟
         ⎜ u t ⎟ ⎜ 51                                                 ⎜        ⎟
         ⎜ u ppi ⎟ ⎜ S 61    S 62   S 63   S 64   S 65   S 66    0 ⎟⎜ ε ppi ⎟
         ⎜ t ⎟ ⎜                                                     ⎟⎜ t ⎟
         ⎜ u tcpi ⎟ ⎝ S 71   S 72   S 73   S 74   S 75   S 76   S 77 ⎠⎜ cpi ⎟
         ⎝        ⎠                                                   ⎝ε t ⎠



                             *** Insert Figure 6 around here. ***



        The primary objective of this 7-variable VAR model is to investigate to what

degree shocks are transmitted from one domestic price index to another, in addition to

the exchange rate shock to each domestic price. The result will be compared to those

obtained in the baseline 5-variable models. Figure 6 shows that each response of IMP,

PPI and CPI is very similar to the result obtained in the baseline model.            Second, the

response of PPI to a one-percent import price shock is significantly positive in Korea

and Singapore at least for the first seven months.            The response of PPI to the import

price shock is positive in Indonesia and Thailand, but the response is not significant in

Indonesia and significant only for 2-3 months in Thailand.             The insignificant response

of PPI in Indonesia is perhaps due to the data problem. Specifically, the import price

index is not available in Indonesia and the import unit value is used as an alternative.

Therefore Indonesian results involving IMP are not directly comparable to others.

Third, the response of CPI to a one-percent PPI shock is significantly positive in

Indonesia for the first eight months.             In contrast, only the initial response is

significantly positive and the degree of response is far smaller in Korea, Thailand and

Singapore than that in Indonesia. The response of CPI to even domestic shocks is much


                                                  20
more persistent in Indonesia.

          In sum, the pass-through of exchange rate shocks to IMP and PPI is

significantly positive in all countries except Singapore.            The degree of the

pass-through to a one-percent exchange rate shock varies across the different stages of

distribution, i.e., the pass-through effect of the exchange rate shock is the largest on the

import price index (IMP), the second on PPI and the smallest on CPI, as predicted by

theory.   The degree of pass-through is found to be much larger in Indonesia than in

other countries in each stage of the distribution channel. Although the pass-through

into CPI is also significantly positive in Korea and Thailand, the degree of

pass-through is much smaller in these countries than in Indonesia.      Such difference in

the degree of pass-through between Indonesia and other countries might be attributable

partly to monetary policy accommodative reactions and partly to the shock

transmission from PPI to CPI, because only Indonesia exhibits a large and significant

response of CPI to PPI shocks.



4.4. Impulse Response Functions

          As mentioned earlier, the degree of responsiveness of domestic prices to the

exchange rate shock has important implications for the economic recovery process

among the crisis-hit countries.    An increase in domestic inflation immediately after a

sharp depreciation of the currency would prevent the improvement in the price

competitiveness of exports.     It causes a delay in economic recovery after the currency

crisis.   The speed of recovery seems to depend critically upon the inflation

performance after the currency depreciation.

          During the crisis period, the exchange rate of the crisis-hit countries

depreciated sharply. A question is whether such a large depreciation caused a high


                                             21
inflation in those countries.      As discussed above, however, crisis-hit East Asian

countries exhibited a relatively low level of CPI inflation except for Indonesia.          The

relatively milder inflation may be partly due to a severe downturn of domestic demand.

Figure 4 supports the above discussion, because the crisis-hit countries show the large

negative response of output gap to the exchange rate shock though it is statistically

significant only in Indonesia.

         The central bank’s reaction to the exchange rate shock appears to be very

different between Indonesia and the other crisis-affected countries.        Specifically, it is

only Indonesia that responded to the exchange rate shock by increasing the base money

significantly (Figure 4), which conforms to the fact that Indonesia’s base money

growth was far greater after the crisis than other crisis-hit countries. 18     In Indonesia,

the currency crisis induced the domestic financial crisis as well as internal political

instability, which deteriorated the supply side of the economy.        Under the framework

of the AD-AS model, the AS curve shifted leftward to a large extent in Indonesia.           As

the AD curve shifts rightward at the same time due to an increase in the domestic

money supply, not only a fall in GDP growth rates but also a far larger increase in

inflation rates occurred simultaneously.      The above arguments are supported by the

results of impulse response functions.

         Figure 7 shows the impulse response of CPI and the output gap to a

one-percent monetary policy shock. It is only in Indonesia that the response of CPI to

the monetary policy shock is significantly positive and the corresponding response of

output gap is significantly negative. 19    Furthermore, we plot in Figure 8 the series of

18
  McLeod (2003) compares the increase in base money between Indonesia, Korea, Thailand
and Malaysia, and reaches the same conclusion.
19
  As shown in Figure 4, the response of CPI to exchange rate shocks is significantly positive
and the corresponding response of output gap is significantly negative, which also supports our


                                              22
structural shocks to base money and exchange rate obtained from the VAR estimation

of the baseline model.       Only in Indonesia, we observe a high contemporaneous

correlation between the two shocks kinds of during the crisis period, reflecting the

Bank Indonesia’s monetary policy reaction to the exchange rate shock. 20



                           *** Insert Figure 7 around here. ***

                           *** Insert Figure 8 around here. ***



         To examine further the above discussion, a variance decomposition analysis is

employed.     Figure 9 reports the result of variance decomposition of CPI and output

gap over a forecast horizon of twenty-four months in order to check the relative

importance of each shock in explaining forecast errors of CPI and output gap. 21               As

for the variance of CPI, the exchange rate shock is an important determinant in

Indonesia and Korea, where about 40 percent of variation are accounted for by the

exchange rate shock in Indonesia and about 30 percent in Korea. Interestingly, the

monetary policy shock is the second important determinant for the first nine months in

Indonesia, implying that the initial response of CPI is largely affected by the monetary

policy shock as well as the exchange rate shock in Indonesia.                Prices are quite

sensitive to the monetary policy in Indonesia. In Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore,



argument.
20
  The correlation between monetary policy and exchange rate shocks over the sample period is
very high in Indonesia (0.77) while close to zero or negative in other countries: Korea (-0.12),
Thailand (-0.13), Singapore (-0.21) and Malaysia (0.11).
21
  The contributions of its own price shock (for variance decomposition of CPI) and own
output gap shock (for variance decomposition of output gap) are not reported in Figure 9 for
the sake of clearness.



                                               23
exchange rate and other three shocks account for only a small share in variance of CPI,

which indicates that its own price (CPI) shock is the most important in explaining its

variation. Regarding the variance of output gap, the oil price shock appears to be the

most important determinant in Korea, Thailand and Malaysia.       In contrast, monetary,

exchange rate and CPI shocks are more important in explaining the variation of output

gap in Indonesia. The last finding may be explained by the fact that Indonesia is

oil-producing nations and negative impact of oil price increases on aggregate demand

is partially mitigated by profits of oil-producing companies.    It is also revealed that

Indonesian output was largely affected by nominal variables, the exchange rate and

CPI. This empirical observation is consistent with a view that non-performing loans

resulting from the currency mismatch, credit crunch from the weak banking system

played a role in the recession of Indonesia.



                          *** Insert Figure 9 around here. ***



        Thus, our empirical results suggest that a remarkable difference in the

post-crisis inflation performance between Indonesia and other crisis-affected countries

is attributed to the Bank Indonesia’s monetary policy reaction.         The remaining

question is why the base money growth was extremely high in Indonesia.         Why did

the Bank Indonesia increase the base money so much, risking high inflation in the

wake of the currency crisis?    Although not quantitatively shown in the VAR analysis

of this paper, such an increase in the base money growth can be explained by the

impact of nonperforming loans problem and reactions of the central bank.          In the

early stage of the Asian currency crisis, some commercial banks and non-bank

financial institutions became insolvent as many corporations failed under difficult


                                               24
economic conditions.     Some banks tried to keep corporations alive by providing

liquidity, and the central bank, in turn, provided liquidity to commercial banks so that

banks would not fail. The liquidity support resulted in an expansion of bank loans

and M2.     The liquidity support happened in different Asian countries in the different

stage of currency crisis (the first in Thailand, and Indonesia and Korea much later), and

with different magnitude.    Indonesia had certainly the most severe case in liquidity

provision, as most banks had negative equity position before massive capital injection

by the government in 1998.       Efforts of keeping banks alive and maintaining the

financial stability, some necessary and some misguided, explain why M2 were

increasing in Indonesia and resulted in inflation.



5. Robustness
5.1. Sub-samples

          We have analyzed the degree of pass-through of exchange rate and other types

of shocks using the baseline model, xt = (Δoilt , gapt , Δmt , Δefexrt , Δpt )′ , with the

sample of 1993M1 through 2005M8.            However, one may suspect the economic

structure and policy regimes may have changed during the 12 years, especially after

the currency crisis of 1997-98, in many Asian countries.      The currency crisis drove

the countries to abandon the de facto US dollar peg policy and to adopt more flexible

exchange rate policy such as managed floating. So, we conduct the sub-sample

analysis using the 5-variable baseline model, focusing on the sample starting from

1997M7, the month of Thai baht large depreciation.          In addition, we may try the

different ordering of variables in a VAR model to check the robustness of the above

empirical results.




                                            25
                             *** Insert Figure 10 around here. ***



         The first two rows in Figure 10 report the results obtained from the baseline

model with the sub-sample from 1997M7 to 2005M8.                Owing to the space limitation,

only responses of CPI to the monetary policy shock and the exchange rate shock are

presented. The result is quite similar to that with the full sample from 1993M1 to

2005M8, although the degree of CPI response to exchange rate shocks becomes

smaller in Korea and Thailand. The response of CPI to monetary policy shocks

becomes even negative in Korea and Thailand when using the sub-sample.                     In

contrast, the CPI response to monetary policy shocks in Indonesia becomes larger and

statistically significant over the 24 months.         The excessive monetary expansion by the

Bank Indonesia and its impact on domestic inflation become more evident when using

the sub-sample for a VAR analysis.



5.2. Different Ordering

         The result of VAR analysis, such as variance decomposition and impulse

responses, is sensitive to the ordering of variables.        Two orderings different from the

benchmark are estimated in order to check the sensitivity of the above results to the

assumption of variable ordering. First, output gap is placed the fourth instead of the

second in the ordering. When the monetary policy is decided, it is assumed that

contemporaneous information of the exchange rate shock and output gap is either not

available or ignored.          The nominal exchange rate shocks affect output gap

contemporaneously, but not vice versa.           Accordingly, the “Alternative Model 1” is

xt = (Δoilt , Δmt , Δefexrt , gapt , Δpt )′ .   Second, the ordering of money and the

exchange rate may be switched from the baseline model.                  This amounts to an


                                                 26
assumption that exchange rate shocks at monthly frequency are not affected by

monetary policy shock contemporaneously.             Thus, this “Alternative Model 2” is

xt = (Δoilt , gapt , Δefexrt , Δmt , Δpt )′ .

          The results of CPI responses to both the exchange rate and monetary policy

shocks are reported in Figure 10. For the comparison purpose, the results using the

sub-sample are reported.          The third and fourth rows present the results of the

Alternative Model 1, which shows that the CPI response is quite similar between the

baseline model and the alternative model. The fifth and sixth rows exhibit the results

of CPI response obtained from the Alternative Model 2.        Again the results are similar

to those of the other models, although the Indonesia’s CPI response to monetary policy

shocks becomes insignificant after four months.

          Overall, we have confirmed that the difference in the degree of CPI response

to exchange rate and monetary policy shocks is more evident between Indonesia and

other crisis-affected countries if we use the shorter sub-sample period for estimation.

The result of impulse response is quite similar even if we use the different VAR

orderings.



6. Concluding Remarks
          In this paper, the pass-through effects of the exchange rate changes on

imported prices, producer (wholesale) prices, and consumer prices for East Asian

countries were analyzed.         The VAR analysis of the exchange rate pass-through has

revealed several new important facts.           First, the degree of pass-through to the

exchange rate shock varies across the different price indices: the pass-through effect is

the largest for the import price index, the second for PPI and the smallest on CPI.

Second, the degree of domestic price response to the exchange rate shock is by far the


                                                27
largest in Indonesia compared to other crisis-hit East Asian countries.         The CPI

response to the exchange rate shock is particularly larger in Indonesia than in other

countries. Moreover, only Indonesia exhibits a large and significant response of CPI

to the PPI shock, implying the smooth transmission of shocks from PPI to CPI.       Third,

a notable difference in the post-crisis inflation performance between Indonesia and

other crisis-affected countries is attributable to the Bank Indonesia’s monetary policy

reaction. It is only in Indonesia that both the impulse responses of monetary base to

the exchange rate shock and those of CPI to the monetary shock are positive, large and

statistically significant.   Fourth, when focusing on the post-crisis period, the

difference in the pass-through effect into CPI becomes more evident between

Indonesia and other crisis-affected countries.

         The pass-through examination using the VAR technique provides an important

insight into a crisis propagation mechanism in emerging market economies.          When

depreciation results in domestic inflation, a crisis become much more complicated and

the recovery process will be delayed.    The estimated results show that the Indonesia’s

disappointing recovery process after the crisis can be at least partly attributable to the

high pass-through of exchange rate shocks to CPI, the shock transmission from PPI to

CPI, and the central bank’s monetary policy reaction to depreciation.           Domestic

inflation of Indonesia had offset price competitiveness that resulted from a large

nominal depreciation relative to neighboring countries and erased any possibility of

nominal appreciation that would help damaged balance sheets of corporations and

banks.




                                            28
Appendix 1: Data Description
A. Common Variable

        Oil price: The US dollar-basis oil price index (2000=100, monthly series) is

taken from IMF, International Financial Statistics (IFS), CD-ROM.



B. Country-Specific Variables

B1. Indonesia

        Base money: The monthly series of base money is used from the CEIC Asia

Database. Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        Nominal effective exchange rate: The monthly series of the nominal effective

exchange rate index (2000=100) is constructed by the weighted average of eighteen

major trading partner countries (exports plus imports). The bilateral exchange rate

and the trade share are, respectively, obtained from IFS and IMF, Direction of Trade

Statistics, CD-ROM.

        Industrial production index: The monthly series of the manufacturing

industrial production index (2000=100) is taken from the CEIC Asia Database.

Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        CPI: The monthly series of CPI (2000=100) is taken from IFS. Seasonality is

adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        PPI: The monthly series of wholesale price index (including petroleum;

2000=100) is taken from IFS. Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        Import prices: The monthly series of the import unit value index (2000=100)

is constructed by dividing the total import value by the total import volume.   The US

dollar based total import values are converted into local currency values by using an

index of bilateral nominal exchange rate of rupiah vis-à-vis the US dollar (2000=1.00).


                                          29
The data for the total import value and volume are obtained from the CEIC Asia

Database. Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.



B2. Korea

        Base money: The monthly series of base money is used from the CEIC Asia

Database. Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        The monthly series of the nominal effective exchange rate index (2000=100)

is constructed by the weighted average of twenty major trading partner countries

(exports plus imports).    The bilateral exchange rate and the trade share are,

respectively, obtained from IFS and IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics, CD-ROM.

        Industrial production index: The monthly series of the industrial production

index (2000=100) is taken from the CEIC Asia Database.       Seasonality is adjusted

using the Census X12 program.

        CPI: The monthly series of CPI (2000=100) is taken from the CEIC Asia

Database. Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        PPI: The monthly series of producer price index (including all commodities

and services; 2000=100) is taken from the CEIC Asia Database.         Seasonality is

adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        Import prices: The monthly series of the import price index (the Korean won

basis; 2000=100) is obtained from the CEIC Asia Database.     Seasonality is adjusted

using the Census X12 program.



B3. Malaysia

        Money supply: The monthly series of money supply, M1, is used from the

CEIC Asia Database. Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program


                                         30
        Nominal effective exchange rate: The monthly series of the nominal effective

exchange rate index (2000=100) is obtained from IFS.

        Industrial production index: The monthly series of the industrial production

index (2000=100) is taken from the CEIC Asia Database.         Seasonality is adjusted

using the Census X12 program.

        CPI: The monthly series of CPI (2000=100) is taken from the CEIC Asia

Database. Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        PPI: The monthly series of producer price index (for goods in the domestic

economy; 2000=100) is taken from the CEIC Asia Database. Seasonality is adjusted

using the Census X12 program.



B4. Singapore

        Money supply: The monthly series of money supply, M1, is used from the

CEIC Asia Database. Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        Nominal effective exchange rate: The monthly series of the nominal effective

exchange rate index (2000=100) is obtained from IFS.

        Industrial production index: The monthly series of the industrial production

index (2000=100) is taken from the CEIC Asia Database.         Seasonality is adjusted

using the Census X12 program.

        CPI: The monthly series of CPI (2000=100) is taken from IFS. Seasonality

is adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        PPI: The monthly series of wholesale price index (2000=100) is taken from

IFS.   Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        Import prices: The monthly series of the import price index (2000=100) is

obtained from IFS. Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.


                                            31
B5. Thailand

        Base money: The monthly series of base money is used from the CEIC Asia

Database. Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        Nominal effective exchange rate: The monthly series of the nominal effective

exchange rate index (2000=100) is obtained from the CEIC Asia Database.

        Industrial production index: The monthly series of the manufacturing

production index (2000=100) is taken from the CEIC Asia Database. Seasonality is

adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        CPI: The monthly series of CPI (2000=100) is taken from IFS. Seasonality

is adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        PPI: The monthly series of producer price index (2000=100) is taken from

IFS.   Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.

        Import prices: The monthly series of the import value index (the Thai Baht

basis; 2000=100) is obtained from the CEIC Asia Database.      The data is available

from January 1996.   Seasonality is adjusted using the Census X12 program.




                                            32
References
Azis, I. J. and W. Thorbecke, 2004, “The Effects of Exchange Rate and Interest Rate

     Shocks on Bank Lending in Indonesia,” Economics and Finance in Indonesia,

     52(3), pp.279-295.

Campa, J. M. and L. S. Goldberg, 2005, “Exchange Rate Pass Through into Import

     Prices,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(4), pp.679-690.

Campa, J. M., L. S. Goldberg and J. M. González-Mínguez, 2005, “Exchange Rate

     Pass-Through to Import Prices in Euro Area,” NBER Working Paper 11632,

     National Bureau of Economic Research.

Caporale, G. M., A. Cipollini and P. O. Demetriades, 2005, “Monetary Policy and the

     Exchange     Rate    during   the    Asian    Crisis:   Identification   through

     Heteroscedasticity,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 24, pp.39-53.

de Brouwer, G., 2003, “‘Towards Improved Monetary Policy in Indonesia’: A

     Comment,” Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies, 39(3), pp.325-328.

Faruqee, H., 2004, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through in the Euro Area: The Role of

     Asymmetric Pricing Behavior,” IMF Working Paper WP/04/14, International

     Monetary Fund.

Feenstra, R. C., 1989, “Symmetric Pass-Through of Tariffs and Exchange Rates under

     Imperfect Competition: An Empirical Test,” Journal of International Economics,

     27, pp.25-45.

Goldberg, L. S. and J. M. Campa, 2006, “Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs, and

     the Sensitivity of the CPI to Exchange Rates,” NBER Working Paper 12121,

     National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hahn, E., 2003, “Pass-Through of External Shocks to Euro Area Inflation,” Working

     Paper, 243, European Central Bank.


                                          33
Ito, T. and Y. Hashimoto, 2002, “High-Frequency Contagion of Currency Crises in

     Asia,” NBER Working Paper, No.9376, December (Last Revised February 24,

     2005).

Ito, T., E. Ogawa and Y. N. Sasaki, 1998, “How Did the Dollar Peg Fail in Asia?”

     Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 12, pp.256-304.

Knetter, M. M., 1989, “Price Discrimination by U.S. and German Exporters,”

     American Economic Review, 79(1), pp.198-210.

Knetter, M. M., 1993, “International Comparison of Pricing-to-Market Behavior,”

     American Economic Review, 83(3), pp.473-486.

Marston, R. C., 1990, “Pricing to Market in Japanese Manufacturing,” Journal of

     International Economics, 29, pp.217-236.

McCarthy, J., 2000, “Pass-Through of Exchange Rates and Import Prices to Domestic

     Inflation in Some Industrialized Economies,” Staff Reports, 111, Federal Reserve

     Bank of New York.

McLeod, R. H., 2003, “Towards Improved Monetary Policy in Indonesia,” Bulletin of

     Indonesian Economic Studies, 39(3), pp.303-324.

Ohno, K., 1989, “Export Pricing Behavior of Manufacturing: a US-Japan

     Comparison,” International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 36, pp.550-79.

Olivei, G. P., 2002, “Exchange Rates and the Prices of Manufacturing Products

     Imported into the United States,” New England Economic Review, Federal

     Reserve Bank of Boston, First Quarter, pp.3-18.

Otani, A., S. Shiratsuka and T. Shirota, 2005, “Revisiting the Decline in the Exchange

     Rate Pass-Through: Further Evidence from Japan’s Import Prices,” IMES

     Discussion Paper No. 2005-E-6, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies,

     Bank of Japan.


                                          34
Parsons, C. and K. Sato, 2006, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through and Currency Invoicing:

     Implications for Monetary Integration in East Asia,” forthcoming in The World

     Economy.

Sasaki, Y. N., 2005, “Pass-Through of Exchange Rates on Import Prices in East Asian

     Countries,” Keizai Kenkyu (The Papers and Proceedings of Economics), 132,

     The Society of Economics, Meiji Gakuin University, pp.23-33.

Toh, M-H and Ho, H-J, 2001, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through for Selected Asian

     Economies,” Singapore Economic Review, 46(2), pp.247-273.




                                        35
Table 1. Unit Root Tests

                     Augumented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) Test
Variable             Indonesia       Korea       Malaysia                Singapore        Thailand
  oil                    -1.54
    Δoil                -11.49 **
    gap
    (in level)          -10.54 **       -3.06            -3.21      #       -3.59    *      -3.43    #
    m                     -1.47         -1.87            -2.48              -3.00           -2.26
    Δm                  -16.20 **      -19.01 **        -14.03      **     -18.19    **    -13.17    **
   efexr                  -1.90         -2.87            -2.25              -1.94           -3.04
   Δefexr               -10.01 **       -8.57 **        -10.37      **     -10.52    **     -8.24    **
   cpi                    -1.69         -2.02            -1.24              -2.83           -2.04
   Δcpi                   -5.20 **      -9.06 **        -11.36      **     -13.20    **     -3.34    *
   ppi                    -1.59         -2.16            -2.10              -0.98           -2.46
   Δppi                   -7.41 **      -6.95 **         -8.70      **      -9.30    **     -8.14    **
   imp                    -3.10         -2.96                 -             -1.41           -1.91
   Δimp                 -15.31 **       -8.58 **              -             -9.97    **    -10.73    **
                     Phillips-Perron (PP) Test
    oil                   -1.71
    Δoil                -11.50 **
    gap
    (in level)          -11.18   **       -6.06   **     -4.28      **      -8.72    **     -6.53    **
    m                    -1.64            -2.20          -2.59              -3.80    *      -2.91
    Δm                  -16.20   **      -20.35   **    -13.97      **     -18.31    **    -21.67    **
   efexr                  0.76            -2.45          -2.25              -1.97           -2.56
   Δefexr                -9.96   **       -8.21   **    -10.40      **     -10.54    **     -8.10    **
   cpi                   -1.59            -1.79          -1.30              -2.83           -1.52
   Δcpi                  -4.99   **       -9.06   **    -12.04      **     -13.32    **     -9.85    **
   ppi                   -1.61            -1.79          -1.69              -0.26           -2.12
   Δppi                  -7.31   **       -6.81   **     -8.57      **      -9.26    **     -8.09    **
   imp                   -2.95            -2.84               -             -1.19           -2.46
   Δimp                 -15.40   **       -6.96   **          -            -10.00    **    -10.82    **


Notes: Double asterisks (**), a single asterisk (*) and a sharp (#), respectively, denote the

significance at the one percent, five percent and ten percent level.           Sample period: from

January 1993 to August 2005.          The null hypothesis of the ADF and PP tests is that the

variable is nonstationary.   For the level of variables, constant and time trend are included.

For the first-difference of variables, only constant is included.




                                                  36
Figure 1. Nominal Exchange Rate vis-à-vis the US Dollar (1996=100)


     700

     600

     500
                                                                            EXR_Id
     400                                                                    EXR_Kr
                                                                            EXR_Ml
     300                                                                    EXR_Si
                                                                            EXR_Th
     200

     100

       0
    96 1


   19 M7
   19 M4

    99 1


   20 M7
   20 M4

    02 1


   20 M7
   20 M4

    05 1
   19 10




   20 10




   20 10




         10
  19 6M




  19 9M




  20 2M




  20 5M
       M




       M




       M




       M
      97
      98




      00
      01




      03
      04
      9




      9




      0




      0
   19




Note: Id (Indonesia), Kr (Korea), Ml (Malaysia), Si (Singapore) and Th (Thailand).

Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics, CD-ROM; The CEIC Asia Database.




                                          37
Figure 2. CPI (1996=100): East Asian Countries


     400

     350

     300
                                                                             CPI_Id
     250
                                                                             CPI_Kr
     200                                                                     CPI_Ml
                                                                             CPI_Si
     150
                                                                             CPI_Th
     100

      50

       0
    96 1


   19 M7
   19 M4

    99 1


   20 M7
   20 M4

    02 1


   20 M7
   20 M4

    05 1
   19 10




   20 10




   20 10




         10
  19 6M




  19 9M




  20 2M




  20 5M
       M




       M




       M




       M
      97
      98




     00
     01




     03
     04
      9




     9




     0




     0
   19




Note: Id (Indonesia), Kr (Korea), Ml (Malaysia), Si (Singapore) and Th (Thailand).

Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics, CD-ROM; The CEIC Asia Database.




                                          38
Figure 3. Real Exchange Rate vis-à-vis the US Dollar (1996=100)


     400

     350

     300
                                                                            EXR_Id
     250
                                                                            EXR_Kr
     200                                                                    EXR_Ml
                                                                            EXR_Si
     150
                                                                            EXR_Th
     100

      50

       0
    96 1


   19 M7
   19 M4

    99 1


   20 M7
   20 M4

    02 1


   20 M7
   20 M4

    05 1
   19 10




   20 10




   20 10




        10
  19 6M




  19 9M




  20 2M




  20 5M
      M




      M




      M




      M
     97
     98




     00
     01




     03
     04
     9




     9




     0




     0
   19




Note: Id (Indonesia), Kr (Korea), Ml (Malaysia), Si (Singapore) and Th (Thailand).

Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics, CD-ROM; The CEIC Asia Database.




                                          39
Figure 4. Impulse Response to the Exchange Rate Shock

1. Response of CPI                             2. Response of Base Money                          3. Response of Output Gap
(i) Indonesia                                  (i) Indonesia                                      (i) Indonesia
   6                                              5                                                   5
   5                                              4
   4                                              3                                                   0
   3                                                                                                      1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
                                                  2
   2                                                                                                 -5
                                                  1
   1
   0                                              0                                                 -10
  -1 1    3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23     -1 1     3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -2                                             -2                                                 -15


(ii) Korea                                     (ii) Korea                                         (ii) Korea
    1                                             2                                                   5

   0.5                                            1
                                                                                                      0
    0                                             0                                                       1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
         1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23               1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23         -5
  -0.5                                           -1

   -1                                            -2                                                 -10


(iii) Thailand                                 (iii) Thailand                                     (iii) Thailand
    1                                             2                                                   5

   0.5                                            1
                                                                                                      0
    0                                             0                                                       1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
         1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23               1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23         -5
  -0.5                                           -1

   -1                                            -2                                                 -10


(iv) Singapore                                 (iv) Singapore                                     (iv) Singapore
    1                                             2                                                  10

   0.5                                            1                                                   5

    0                                             0                                                   0
         1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23               1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23              1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -0.5                                           -1                                                  -5

   -1                                            -2                                                 -10


(v) Malaysia                                   (v) Malaysia                                       (v) Malaysia
    1                                             2                                                   5

   0.5                                            1                                                   0
                                                  0                                                       1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
    0                                                 1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23         -5
         1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23          -1
  -0.5                                           -2                                                 -10

   -1                                            -3                                                 -15




Notes: Baseline model (5-variable VAR).                               The accumulated impulse responses are presented.

All shocks are standardized to one-percent shocks.                                             The vertical axis indicates the

approximate percentage change in response to a one percent exchange rate shock.                                                            The

horizontal axis represents the time horizon (1 through 24 months).                                        The dotted line denotes a

two standard error confidence band around the estimate.


                                                                         40
Figure 5. Impulse Response of PPI and Import Prices to the Exchange Rate Shock

1. Response of PPI                              2. Response of Import Prices
(i) Indonesia                                   (i) Indonesia
   8                                              15
   7
   6                                              10
   5
   4
   3                                               5
   2
   1                                               0
   0
  -1 1     3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23              1    3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -2                                              -5


(ii) Korea                                      (ii) Korea
   2                                               5
                                                   4
   1                                               3
                                                   2
   0                                               1
       1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23      0
  -1                                              -1 1          3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23


(iii) Thailand                                  (iii) Thailand
   2                                               5
                                                   4
   1                                               3
                                                   2
   0                                               1
       1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23      0
  -1                                              -1 1          3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23


(iv) Singapore                                  (iv) Singapore
   2                                                   1

                                                   0.5
   1
                                                       0
   0                                                           1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
       1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23     -0.5

  -1                                               -1


(v) Malaysia
   2


   1


   0
       1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -1




Notes: Baseline model (5-variable VAR).                                     The accumulated impulse responses are presented.

All shocks are standardized to one-percent shocks.                                                   The vertical axis indicates the

approximate percentage change in response to a one percent exchange rate shock.                                                  The

horizontal axis represents the time horizon (1 through 24 months).                                          The dotted line denotes a

two standard error confidence band around the estimate.


                                                                               41
Figure 6. Impulse Response to the Exchange Rate Shock: 7-Variable VAR
1. Indonesia                                    2. Korea                                       3. Thailand                                     4. Singapore
(i) EXR shocks ==> Import Prices                (i) EXR shocks ==> Import Prices               (i) EXR shocks ==> Import Prices                (i) EXR shocks ==> Import Prices
  15                                               5                                                5                                                 2
                                                   4                                                4                                             1.5
  10                                               3                                                3                                                 1
                                                   2                                                2
   5                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                   1                                                1
                                                   0                                                0                                               0
   0
                                                  -1 1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23        -1 1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23     -0.5 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
       1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -5                                              -2                                               -2                                             -1


(ii) EXR shocks ==> PPI                         (ii) EXR shocks ==> PPI                        (ii) EXR shocks ==> PPI                         (ii) EXR shocks ==> PPI
  15                                               5                                                5                                                 2
                                                   4                                                4                                             1.5
  10                                               3                                                3                                                 1
                                                   2                                                2
   5                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                   1                                                1
                                                   0                                                0                                               0
   0
       1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23     -1 1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23        -1 1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23     -0.5 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -5                                              -2                                               -2                                             -1


(iii) EXR shocks ==> CPI                        (iii) EXR shocks ==> CPI                       (iii) EXR shocks ==> CPI                        (iii) EXR shocks ==> CPI
  15                                               5                                                5                                                 2
                                                   4                                                4                                             1.5
  10                                               3                                                3                                                 1
                                                   2                                                2
   5                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                   1                                                1
                                                   0                                                0                                               0
   0
       1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23     -1 1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23        -1 1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23     -0.5 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -5                                              -2                                               -2                                             -1


(iv) Import Price Shock ==> PPI                 (iv) Import Price Shock ==> PPI                (iv) Import Price Shock ==> PPI                 (iv) Import Price Shock ==> PPI
   3                                                2                                                2                                            2
   2                                              1.5                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                    1                                                1
   1
                                                  0.5                                              0.5                                            0
   0                                                                                                                                                      1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
                                                     0                                                0
       1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23                                                                                                    -1
  -1                                              -0.5 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23              -0.5 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -2                                               -1                                               -1                                           -2


(v) PPI Shock ==> CPI                           (v) PPI Shock ==> CPI                          (v) PPI Shock ==> CPI                           (v) PPI Shock ==> CPI
   3                                                2                                                2                                            2
   2                                              1.5                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                    1                                                1
   1
                                                  0.5                                              0.5                                            0
   0                                                                                                                                                      1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
                                                     0                                                0
       1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23                                                                                                    -1
  -1                                              -0.5 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23              -0.5 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -2                                               -1                                               -1                                           -2




Notes: 7-variable VAR model.                                         The accumulated impulse responses are presented. All shocks

are standardized to one-percent shocks.                                                       The vertical axis indicates the approximate

percentage change in response to a one percent exchange rate shock.                                                                                   The horizontal axis

represents the time horizon (1 through 24 months).                                                                The dotted line denotes a two standard

error confidence band around the estimate.




                                                                                              42
Figure 7. Impulse Response to the Monetary Policy Shock

1. Response of CPI                                   2. Response of Output Gap
(i) Indonesia                                        (i) Indonesia
   3                                                        5

   2
                                                            0
   1                                                            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
                                                        -5
   0
           1    3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -1                                                   -10


(ii) Korea                                           (ii) Korea
       1                                               10


   0.5                                                  5


       0                                                0
               1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23                   1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -0.5                                                 -5


(iii) Thailand                                       (iii) Thailand
       1                                                    5


   0.5                                                      0
                                                                1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
       0                                                -5
               1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -0.5                                                 -10


(iv) Singapore                                       (iv) Singapore
       1                                               15

                                                       10
   0.5
                                                        5
       0
               1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23           0
                                                                1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -0.5                                                 -5


(v) Malaysia                                         (v) Malaysia
       1                                               10


   0.5                                                  5


       0                                                0
               1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23                   1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
  -0.5                                                 -5




Notes: Baseline model (5-variable VAR).                                         The accumulated impulse responses are presented.

All shocks are standardized to one-percent shocks.                                                       The vertical axis indicates the

approximate percentage change in response to a one percent exchange rate shock.                                                      The

horizontal axis represents the time horizon (1 through 24 months).                                              The dotted line denotes a

two standard error confidence band around the estimate.


                                                                                   43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.03




                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1993M02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (ii) Korea
                                                                                                                                                                                                1993M02                                                             1993M02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1993M11


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (i) Indonesia
                                                                                                                                                                                                1993M11                                                             1993M11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (iii) Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1994M08
                                                                                                                                                                                                1994M08                                                             1994M08




                       respectively.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1995M05




     price variable.
                                                                                                                                                                                                1995M05                                                             1995M05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1996M02
                                                                                                                                                                                                1996M02                                                             1996M02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1996M11
                                                                                                                                                                                                1996M11                                                             1996M11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1997M08
                                                                                                                                                                                                1997M08                                                             1997M08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1998M05
                                                                                                                                                                                                1998M05                                                             1998M05
                                                                                                                                                                                                1999M02                                                             1999M02                                                           1999M02

                                                                                                                                                                                                1999M11                                                             1999M11                                                           1999M11

                                                                                                                                                                                                2000M08                                                             2000M08                                                           2000M08

                                                                                                                                                                                                2001M05                                                             2001M05                                                           2001M05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MP shock




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MP shock
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MP shock
                                                                                                                                                                                                2002M02                                                             2002M02                                                           2002M02

                                                                                                                                                                                                2002M11                                                             2002M11                                                           2002M11

                                                                                                                                                                                                2003M08                                                             2003M08                                                           2003M08

                                                                                                                                                                                                2004M05                                                             2004M05                                                           2004M05

                                                                                                                                                                                                2005M02                                                             2005M02                                                           2005M02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EXR shock




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EXR shock
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EXR shock




44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1993M02                                                           1993M02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (v) Malaysia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1993M11                                                           1993M11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (iv) Singapore




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1994M08                                                           1994M08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1995M05                                                           1995M05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1996M02                                                           1996M02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1996M11                                                           1996M11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1997M08                                                           1997M08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1998M05                                                           1998M05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1999M02                                                           1999M02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1999M11                                                           1999M11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2000M08                                                           2000M08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2001M05                                                           2001M05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MP shock




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MP shock




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2002M02                                                           2002M02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 8. Time Series of Structural Shocks to Base Money and Exchange Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2002M11                                                           2002M11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003M08                                                           2003M08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004M05                                                           2004M05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005M02                                                           2005M02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EXR shock




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EXR shock




                       The series of shocks are obtained from the baseline model that includes CPI as a
                                                                                                          Notes: MP shock and EXR shock denote monetary policy shock and exchange rate shock,
Figure 9. Variance Decomposition (VD) of CPI and Output Gap
1. VD of CPI                                                   2. VD of Output Gap
(i) Indonesia                                                  (i) Indonesia
            50                                                               20
            40                                                               15
  Percent




                                                                   Percent
            30
                                                                             10
            20
            10                                                                5
             0                                                                0
                 1   3   5   7   9     11 13 15 17 19 21 23                       1   3   5   7   9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23

                 Monetary        Gap        Oil price   EXR                       Monetary        Oil price   EXR      CPI


(ii) Korea                                                     (ii) Korea
            50                                                               20
            40                                                               15
  Percent




            30                                                     Percent
                                                                             10
            20
            10                                                                5
             0                                                                0
                 1   3   5   7   9     11 13 15 17 19 21 23                       1   3   5   7   9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23

                 Monetary        Gap        Oil price   EXR                       Monetary        Oil price   EXR      CPI


(iii) Thailand                                                 (iii) Thailand
            50                                                               20
            40                                                               15
  Percent




                                                                   Percent




            30
                                                                             10
            20
            10                                                                5
             0                                                                0
                 1   3   5   7   9     11 13 15 17 19 21 23                       1   3   5   7   9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23

                 Monetary        Gap        Oil price   EXR                       Monetary        Oil price   EXR      CPI


(iv) Singapore                                                 (iv) Singapore
            50                                                               20
            40                                                               15
  Percent




                                                                   Percent




            30
                                                                             10
            20
            10                                                                5
             0                                                                0
                 1   3   5   7   9     11 13 15 17 19 21 23                       1   3   5   7   9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23

                 Monetary        Gap        Oil price   EXR                       Monetary        Oil price   EXR      CPI


(v) Malaysia                                                   (v) Malaysia
            50                                                               20
            40                                                               15
  Percent




                                                                   Percent




            30
                                                                             10
            20
            10                                                                5
             0                                                                0
                 1   3   5   7   9     11 13 15 17 19 21 23                       1   3   5   7   9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23

                 Monetary        Gap        Oil price   EXR                       Monetary        Oil price   EXR      CPI




                                                              45
Figure 9. Variance Decomposition (VD) of CPI and Output Gap (cont’d)



Notes: The results of Variance Decomposition tests using the baseline model are presented.

The vertical axis shows the percentage contribution of shocks to the variance of the k-step

ahead forecast errors of respective variables.   The horizontal axis represents the time horizon

(1 through 24 months).    “Monetary” = monetary policy shock; “Gap” = demand (output gap)

shock; “Oil price” = oil price shock; “EXR” = exchange rate shock; and “CPI” = CPI shock.




                                                 46
Figure 10. Impulse Response of CPI to exchange rate and monetary policy shocks with

Different Sample Period and VAR Orderings
 1. Indonesia                                    2. Korea                                  3. Thailand
 Case 1: Baseline Model with the sub-sample from July 1997 to August 2005
 (i) EXR shock ==> CPI                 (i) EXR shock ==> CPI                               (i) EXR shock ==> CPI
    6                                                1                                         1
    5
    4                                               0.5                                       0.5
    3
                                                     0                                         0
    2
                                                          1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
    1                                              -0.5                                      -0.5
    0
   -1 1     3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23      -1                                        -1


 (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI              (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI        (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI
    6                                                1                                         1
    5
    4                                               0.5                                       0.5
    3
                                                     0                                         0
    2
                                                          1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
    1                                              -0.5                                      -0.5
    0
   -1 1     3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23      -1                                        -1




 Case 2: Alternative Model 1 with the sub-sample from July 1997 to August 2005
 (i) EXR shock ==> CPI                   (i) EXR shock ==> CPI                 (i) EXR shock ==> CPI
    6                                                1                                         1
    5
    4                                               0.5                                       0.5
    3
                                                     0                                         0
    2
                                                          1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
    1                                              -0.5                                      -0.5
    0
   -1 1     3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23      -1                                        -1


 (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI              (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI        (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI
    6                                                1                                         1
    5
    4                                               0.5                                       0.5
    3
                                                     0                                         0
    2
                                                          1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
    1                                              -0.5                                      -0.5
    0
   -1 1     3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23      -1                                        -1




 Case 3: Alternative Model 2 with the sub-sample from July 1997 to August 2005
 (i) EXR shock ==> CPI                   (i) EXR shock ==> CPI                 (i) EXR shock ==> CPI
    8                                                1                                         1
    7
    6                                               0.5                                       0.5
    5
    4
    3                                                0                                         0
    2                                                     1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
    1                                              -0.5                                      -0.5
    0
   -1 1     3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23      -1                                        -1


 (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI              (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI        (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI
    3                                                1                                         1

    2                                               0.5                                       0.5

    1                                                0                                         0
                                                          1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
    0                                              -0.5                                      -0.5
        1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
   -1                                               -1                                        -1




                                                                      47
Figure 10. Impulse Response of CPI to exchange rate and monetary policy shocks with

Different Sample Period and VAR Orderings (cont’d)
 4. Singapore                              5. Malaysia
 Case 1: Baseline Model with the sub-sample from July 1997 to August 2005
 (i) EXR shock ==> CPI                 (i) EXR shock ==> CPI
     1                                         1

    0.5                                       0.5

     0                                         0
          1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
   -0.5                                      -0.5

    -1                                        -1


 (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI        (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI
     1                                         1

    0.5                                       0.5

     0                                         0
          1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
   -0.5                                      -0.5

    -1                                        -1




 Case 2: Alternative Model 1 with the sub-sample from July 1997 to August 2005
 (i) EXR shock ==> CPI                   (i) EXR shock ==> CPI
     1                                         1

    0.5                                       0.5

     0                                         0
          1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
   -0.5                                      -0.5

    -1                                        -1


 (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI        (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI
     1                                         1

    0.5                                       0.5

     0                                         0
          1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
   -0.5                                      -0.5

    -1                                        -1




 Case 3: Alternative Model 2 with the sub-sample from July 1997 to August 2005
 (i) EXR shock ==> CPI                   (i) EXR shock ==> CPI
     1                                         1

    0.5                                       0.5

     0                                         0
          1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
   -0.5                                      -0.5

    -1                                        -1


 (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI        (ii) Monetary policy shock ==> CPI
     1                                         1

    0.5                                       0.5

     0                                         0
          1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23            1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
   -0.5                                      -0.5

    -1                                        -1




                                                                 48
Figure 10. Impulse Response of CPI to exchange rate and monetary policy shocks with

Different Sample Period and VAR Orderings (cont’d)



Notes: The response of CPI to the exchange rate (EXR) shock and the monetary policy shock

using the three different models are reported.

The baseline model: xt = (Δoilt , gapt , Δmt , Δefexrt , Δpt )′ .

The alternative model 1: xt = (Δoilt , Δmt , Δefexrt , gapt , Δpt )′ .

The alternative model 2: xt = (Δoilt , gapt , Δefexrt , Δmt , Δpt )′ .




                                                 49
