                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    OPTIMIZING THE RETIREMENT PORTFOLIO: ASSET
                   ALLOCATION, ANNUITIZATION, AND RISK AVERSION

                                           Wolfram J. Horneff
                                            Raimond Maurer
                                           Olivia S. Mitchell
                                               Ivica Dus

                                         Working Paper 12392
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12392


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




This research was conducted with support from the Social Security Administration via the Michigan
Retirement Research Center at the University of Michigan under subcontract to the Johann Wolfgang
Goethe-University of Frankfurt and a TIAA-CREF Institute grant to the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Additional support was provided by the Pension Research Council at The Wharton School of the
University of Pennsylvania and the Fritz-Thyssen Foundation. Opinions and errors are solely those of the
authors and not of the institutions with whom the authors are affiliated. This is part of the NBER Program
on the Economics of Aging. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Wolfram J. Horneff, Raimond Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell and Ivica Dus. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimizing the Retirement Portfolio: Asset Allocation, Annuitization, and Risk Aversion
Wolfram J. Horneff, Raimond Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell and Ivica Dus
NBER Working Paper No. 12392
July 2006
JEL No. G22, G23, J26, J32, H55

                                            ABSTRACT

Retirees must draw down their accumulated assets in an orderly fashion so as not to exhaust their
funds too soon. We derive the optimal retirement portfolio from a menu that includes payout
annuities as well as an investment allocation and a withdrawal strategy, assuming risk aversion,
stochastic capital markets, and uncertain lifetimes. The resulting portfolio allocation, when fixed as
of retirement, is then compared to phased withdrawal strategies such a “self-annuitization” plan or
the 401(k) “default” pattern encouraged under US tax law. Surprisingly, the fixed percentage
approach proves appealing for retirees across a wide range of risk preferences, supporting financial
planning advisors who often recommend this rule. We then permit the retiree to switch to an annuity
later, which gives her the chance to invest in the capital market and “bet on death.” As risk aversion
rises, annuities first crowd out bonds in retiree portfolios; at higher risk aversion still, annuities
replace equities in the portfolio. Making annuitization compulsory can also lead to substantial utility
losses for less risk-averse investors.


Wolfram J. Horneff                                     Olivia S. Mitchell
Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University of                   The Wharton School
Frankfurt                                              University of Pennsylvania
Department of Finance                                  3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SHDH
Kettenhofweg 139 (Uni-PF 58),                          Philadelphia, PA 19104
60054 Frankfurt                                        and NBER
GERMANY                                                mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu
horneff@finance.uni-frankfurt.de
                                                       Ivica Dus
Raimond Maurer                                         Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University of
Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University of                   Frankfurt
Frankfurt                                              Department of Finance
Department of Finance                                  Kettenhofweg 139 (Uni-PF 58),
Kettenhofweg 139 (Uni-PF 58),                          60054 Frankfurt
60054 Frankfurt                                        GERMANY
GERMANY                                                dus@finance.frankfurt-uni.de
rmaurer@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de
                              Optimizing the Retirement Portfolio:
                       Asset Allocation, Annuitization, and Risk Aversion

               WOLFRAM J. HORNEFF, RAIMOND MAURER, OLIVIA S. MITCHELL, AND IVICA DUS


           Baby Boomers nearing retirement are now targeted by competing financial service
providers seeking to help them manage their money in their golden years. Employer-based
pensions are also switching from defined benefit to defined contribution plans, further
underscoring retirees’ need for insights regarding how they might convert their accumulated
assets into a stream of retirement income without exhausting their funds too soon. On the one
hand, insurers offer life annuities as the preferred distribution mechanism. On the other, mutual
fund providers propose phased withdrawal plans as the better alternative. This paper compares
different retirement payout approaches to show how people can optimize their retirement
portfolios by simultaneously using investment-linked retirement rules along with life annuities.
           To explore this issue, we first evaluate payout products using the “default” pattern
adopted under US tax law for defined contribution or 401(k)-type pension portfolios. This
permits us to determine whether these withdrawal rules suit a broad range of investors, and we
illustrate the drawback of standardizing withdrawal rules. Next, we show that retirement
planning would not involve a simple choice between annuitizing all one’s money versus
selecting a phased withdrawal plan, but rather it requires a combined portfolio consisting of both
annuities and mutual fund investments. Using a lifetime utility framework, we compare the value
of purchasing a stand-alone life annuity versus a phased withdrawal strategy backed by a
properly diversified investment portfolio, as well as combinations of these two products. This
framework also enables us to demonstrate the welfare implications of making annuitization
compulsory at a specific age, as is currently the case in Germany and the UK.


Prior Studies
           The simplest form of life annuity is a bond-like investment with longevity insurance
protecting the retiree from outliving her resources, guaranteeing lifetime level payments to the
annuitant.1 Insurers hedge these contracts by pooling the longevity risks across a group of
annuity purchasers. Standard economic theory teaches us that life annuities will be valued by

1
    Accordingly, life annuities are similar to public defined benefit pensions with respect to their payout structure.
                                                                                                       2




risk-averse retirees, inasmuch as these contracts provide a steady income for life and hence they
protect the retiree against the risk of exhausting her assets.2 Thus Yaari (1965) showed that the
retiree maximizing a time separable utility function without a bequest motive would buy
annuities with all her wealth, given a single risk-free asset and facing actuarially fair annuities;
the approach has been extended by Davidoff et al. (2005) who again predicts full annuitization.
Yet available evidence from most countries indicates that very few retirees actually purchase
annuities with their disposable wealth.
           Efforts to explain this so-called “annuity puzzle” have noted some disadvantages of
annuitization; for example, buyers lose liquidity because the assets usually cannot be recovered
even to meet special needs (e.g. in the case of poor health; c.f. Brugiavini 1993). The presence of
a bequest motive also reduces retiree desires to annuitize wealth, and in the US, more than half
of the elderly anticipate leaving a bequest worth more than $10,000 (Bernheim, 2001; Hurd and
Smith, 1999). Other explanations for why people may be reluctant to buy annuities include high
insurance company loadings; the ability to pool longevity risk within families; asymmetric
mortality expectations between annuity buyers and sellers; and the existence of other annuitized
resources (e.g. Social Security or employer-sponsored pensions; c.f. Brown and Poterba, 2000;
Mitchell et al., 1999). In addition, annuities appear relatively expensive in a low interest rate
environment, as compared to equity-based mutual fund investments. And it also must be noted
that, in the US at least, many payout annuities sold by commercial insurers are fixed in nominal
terms, so the annuity purchaser does not participate in stock market performance (c.f. Davidoff et
al., 2005).
           Another reason people may not annuitize is that they believe they will do better by
continuing to invest their retirement assets, making withdrawals periodically over their
remaining lifetimes. Doing this is not so simple, however, as the retiree must select both an
investment strategy – how much to invest in stocks and bonds – and a withdrawal rate, spelling
out how much of her balance to spend per year. Financial advisors often recommend “rules of
thumb,” for instance dividing the portfolio roughly 60% stocks/40 % bonds and a spending rule
of 4-5% of the balance per year (Polyak, 2005; Whitaker, 2005). Compared to buying a fixed life
annuity, such an investment-linked phased withdrawal strategy has several advantages: it
provides greater liquidity, participation in capital market returns, possibly higher consumption

2
    See the studies reviewed in Mitchell et al. (1999).
                                                                                                                   3




while alive, and the chance of bequeathing assets in the event of early death. Yet a phased
withdrawal tactic also exposes the retiree to investment risk and it offers no longevity pooling, so
the retiree could possibly outlive her assets before her uncertain date of death. Thus any
withdrawal plan which includes some risky investments and also requires the retiree to draw a
fixed amount from her account each period involves a strictly positive probability of hitting zero
before the retiree dies. The risk of running out of money can be partially mitigated by linking the
drawdown to the fund balance each period, though of course this will produce benefit
fluctuations which might fall substantially below what the life annuity payment would have
been.
        Prior studies have compared the pros and cons of specific phased withdrawal plans with
life annuities that pay fixed benefits (see Table 1). For instance, some authors calculate the
probability of running out of money before the retiree’s uncertain date of death, using
assumptions about age, sex, capital market performance, and initial consumption-to-wealth
ratios.3 These analyses also show how an optimal asset mix can be set to minimize the
probability of zero income. Follow-on work by Dus et al. (2005) extended this research by
quantifying risk and return profiles of fixed versus variable withdrawal strategies using a
shortfall framework. On the return side, that study quantified the expected present value of the
bequest potential and the expected present value of benefit payments; conversely, it measured the
risk as the timing, probability, and magnitude of a loss when it occurs, compared to a fixed
annuity benchmark.
Table 1 here
        A natural next question to address is whether retirees might benefit from following a
mixed strategy, where the portfolio might involve both a life annuity and a withdrawal plan. A
mixed strategy seems intuitively appealing as it reduces the risk of payments falling below an
annuity benchmark and it also enhances payouts early on.4 It is also interesting that some
governments have mandated that tax-qualified retirement saving plans include a mandatory
annuity that starts after an initial phased withdrawal phase. For example, in the UK, accumulated

3
  See for instance Albrecht and Maurer (2002); Ameriks et al. (2001); Bengen (1994, 1997); Chen and Milevsky
(2003); Ho et al. (1994); Hughen et al. (2002); Milevsky (1998, 2001); Milevsky and Robinson (2000); Milevsky et
al. (1997); and Pye (2000, 2001).
4
  See Blake et al. (2003); Milevsky and Young (2002); Kingston and Thorp (2005); Milevsky et al. (2006); and Dus
et al. (2005). An alternative tactic would be to annuitize gradually (c.f. Kapur and Orszag, 1999); Milevsky and
Young (2003) show that purchasing constant life annuities is a barrier control problem.
                                                                                                                       4




pension assets had to be mandatorily annuitized by age 75 (this rule expired in 2006).
Germany’s “Riester” plans provide a tax inducement if life annuity payments begin to pay out at
age 85 (withdrawn amounts must either be constant or rising, prior to annuitization.) In the US,
of course, annuitization is not compulsory for 401(k) plans; as a result, most retirees roll them
over to an Individual Retirement Account and manage the funds themselves, subject to the tax
laws requiring minimum distributions to begin at age 70 ½.
        Despite the growing interest in the retirement payout problem, prior studies have not yet
fully evaluated the pros and cons of purchasing a stand-alone life annuity versus a phased
withdrawal strategy backed by a properly diversified investment portfolio, as well as
combinations of these two products. In what follows, we show that the appropriate mix depends
on the retiree’s attitude toward risk as well as key assumptions regarding the capital market and
actuarial tables.


Comparing Alternative Payout Rules
        Our model assumes that the retiree is endowed with an initial level wealth V0 . This can
be either used to purchase at cost PR0 a single-premium life annuity-due paying a constant
nominal annual benefit, or to finance a phased-withdrawal schedule of payments until the funds
are exhausted (Dus et al., 2005). In what follows, we focus on the case of the female retiree,
inasmuch as longevity risk is more important for women than for men.
The Constant Life Annuity. When the consumer purchases a life annuity, it pays her a constant
amount At conditional on her survival: A = At = PRt ⋅ a&&x−1 . Using the actuarial principle of

equivalence, we can determine the gross single premium of the annuity by calculating the present
value of expected benefits paid to the annuitant (including expense loadings). The annuity factor
a&&x for the retiree of age x is given by:5

                                    a&&x = ∑t =0
                                              w− x −1
                                                        (1 + δ )⋅t p x ⋅ (1 + rt ) −t ,                   (1)

where w is the assumed last age (radix) of the mortality table; tpx = px⋅ …⋅ px+t-1 is the probability
that a retiree of age x will survive to age x + t, where px are the year-to-year survival
probabilities for an individual aged x; δ is the expense factor; and rt is the yield on a zero


5
 Here we restrict our analysis to constant nominal annuities during the payout phase; further research will consider
variable annuities.
                                                                                                                     5




coupon bond maturing at time t taken from the current interest rate term structure.6 Survival
probabilities used to price the annuity are taken the female US Annuitant 2000 mortality table
provided by the Society of Actuaries. Given these assumptions, and an expense factor of 7.3
percent (Mitchell et al., 1999), we compute the yearly fixed nominal payout at the beginning of
each year for life as $7.2 per $100 premium.7
        This constant payout life annuity constitutes an asset class with a unique return profile, as
payments are conditional on the annuitant’s survival. The capital of those who die is allocated
across surviving members of the cohort. Accordingly, a survivor’s one-period total return from
an annuity is a function of her capital return on the assets plus a mortality credit. Other things
equal, the older the individual, the higher is the mortality credit.
Alternative Phased Withdrawal Plans. If the retiree instead pursued a phased withdrawal plan,
she can select either a fixed or a variable withdrawal pattern. If she elects the fixed benefit
approach, she will pay herself a constant benefit Bt = min( B, Vt ) until she dies or exhausts her
retirement assets (here Vt is the value of the retirement wealth at the beginning of year t= 0, 1, …
just before that year’s payment). In what follows, Bt is set to equal the initial payout of a life
annuity available for the same initial value Vt. The idea of the fixed benefit rule is to replicate the
payout from a life annuity as long as the funds permit (sometimes termed a “self-annuitization”
strategy), while at the same time retaining liquidity and some bequest potential in the event of an
early death. Of course the risk of such a self-annuitization strategy is that poor investment returns
could drive Vt to zero while the retiree is still alive.
        If she elects a variable phased withdrawal plan, several options are available. The three
we explore in detail here are the fixed percentage rule, the 1/T rule, and the 1/E(T) rule. Under
the first, a constant fraction is withdrawn each period from the remaining fund wealth; that is, the
benefit-wealth ratio is fixed over time so that:
                                                Bt
                                                   = ωt = ω .                                            (2)
                                                Vt
This withdrawal rule has the advantage of simplicity, requiring no information regarding the
maximum possible duration of the payout phase or the retiree’s personal characteristics. For
example, ω can be set at the fraction which equals the life annuity payout divided by initial
6
  To model the term structure of risk free interest rates we assume a Vasicek model and use the corresponding spot
rates to specify the discount factors. Details on parameterization are given in Appendix A.
7
  This is consistent with current quotes; see http://www.immediateannuities.com/
                                                                                                                         6




wealth.8 Alternatively, the 1/T rule determines the withdrawal fraction according to the
maximum possible duration of the plan, or for example, to the oldest age in a mortality table.
Therefore the withdrawal fraction under the 1/T framework is not constant but rather rises with
age. Formally, the benefit-wealth ratio at the beginning of year t (t = 0, 1, …T-1) of this
retirement plan is given according to:
                                                  Bt          1
                                                     = ωt =      .                                           (3)
                                                  Vt        T −t
Finally, the 1/E(T) withdrawal rule takes into account the retiree’s remaining life expectancy in a
dynamic way. Then, for a retiree of age x, her benefit-to-wealth ratio in period t conditional on
survival is given as:9
                                              Bt             1
                                                 = ωt =                .                                     (4)
                                              Vt        E[T ( x + t )]
The shorter is her expected remaining lifetime E[T(x+t)], the higher the fraction that she will
withdraw from her account. The 1/E(T) withdrawal rule is akin to the 401(k) rule, requiring
retirees to begin consuming assets from age 70½ to ensure that they will consume their tax-
qualified pension accounts instead of leaving them as bequests for their heirs. The female US
2000 Annuitant Table is used for expected remaining lifetimes.
           Figure 1 displays the retiree’s withdrawal rate for the three variable withdrawal rules. The
flat line for the fixed percentage rule contrasts with the rising fraction with age for both the 1/T
and 1/E(T) rules. The 1/T rule starts out with a small withdrawal fraction and remains moderate
for many years before rapidly increasing to reach a benefit-to-wealth ratio of one at age T = 100,
i.e. the maximum age assumed in our utility analysis. By contrast, the 1/E(T) rule starts with a
moderate withdrawal percentage and is less convex than the 1/T rule; consequently the 1/E(T)
path involves an earlier portfolio drawdown as compared to the 1/T rule.
Figure 1 here
Expected Benefits and Value at Risk under Alternative Payout Patterns. A retiree who pursues
a phased withdrawal plan must allocate her remaining assets across a portfolio of stocks and
bonds. To model the payout implications of alternative investment choices, we assume that the

8
    The first rate (ω-rule) is then equal to the 1/äx+t rule used in Blake et al. 2003 and in Milevsky and Young 2002.
9
    This assumes tpx is the conditional probability that an x-year old woman will attain age x + t, so the complete
                                                     w− x
expectation of life is calculated as E[T ( x + t )] = ∑ t p x .
                                                     t =0
                                                                                                        7




stochastic dynamics of the market returns of both asset classes follow a multi-dimensional
geometric random walk with drift. We calibrate the model for US data, using time series for
large cap equities and long term bonds ranging from 1974 to 2004 (details appear in Appendix
A). We assume that the retirement assets are rebalanced continuously to maintain an equity/bond
asset split of 60/40%, as this is commonly recommended by financial advisers for retirement
portfolios.
        Figure 2 compares expected benefit paths for the various distribution programs to the life
annuity profile, conditional on survival. Focusing first on the fixed benefit rule, in the first year
of her retirement, the retiree’s mean benefits equal her life annuity payout; this is sensible as this
rule was designed to mimic the fixed life annuity until funds are exhausted. At some point,
however, expected payments must decrease, reflecting the risk of running out of money. The
fixed percentage rule also starts in the first year with a benefit equal to the life annuity payout, by
construction. Thereafter, mean benefits rise as the retiree ages, because the pension account’s
expected gross rate of return exceeds the constant benefit-to-wealth-ratio.
Figure 2 here
       The other two payout patterns behave somewhat differently. Compared to the other
payout plans, the 1/T rule offers lower expected benefits until age 74, but expected benefits rise
extremely quickly after that, and to very high levels. This occurs because the 1/T rule pays the
retiree only a small amount of money during the first part of the retirement period, in fact, less
than her portfolio’s annual expected return. Accordingly, the retiree continues to build up saving
in earlier years which can boost her expected benefits later. The 1/E(T) rule begins with a lower
annual payout, which then rises above the fixed annuity payment when the retiree is still rather
young (age 69). Thereafter, the 1/E(T) benefits peak (at age 88) and decline; as less wealth
remains in the account, at some point expected benefits must fall, although the withdrawal
fraction increases.
        It is also instructive to report a “worst-case” risk measure for the phased withdrawal
plans. Figure 3 depicts the probable minimum benefit (to a confidence level of α = 1%)
compared to the life annuity profile. This PMB metric is defined as follows:
                                    P(Bt < PMBt, 1-α) = α = 1%                                 (5)
The PMBt, 99% of a distribution program represents the first percentile of the payout distribution
in each period, conditional on survival. In other word, if the retiree is still alive t years after
                                                                                                                        8




retirement, she would receive a payout from the payout program equal to or higher than the
PMBt, 99% with a probability of 99%. This metric looks at the lower tail of the payout
distribution, so it can be interpreted as a worst-case risk measure.
Figure 3 here
         It is important to note that, initially, the probable minimum benefit for the fixed benefit
rule is the same as the annuity payment, but it quickly falls over time and becomes zero at age
80, i.e. the retiree runs out of money. By contrast, the benefits in worst-case situations for all the
variable withdrawal plans are well below the annuity payments during the first 20 years of
retirement. The probable minimum benefits of the 1/T as well as of the 1/E(T) rules are much
lower than the annuity payment early on, and they increase thereafter. At age 85, the probable
minimum benefit for the 1/T even exceeds the annuity payment. On the contrary, the 1/E(T) rule
never exceeds the annuity payment. The probable minimum benefit of the fixed percentage rule
remains at a very low level and never recovers. In summary, all the distribution programs
examined incorporate worst-case risk profiles that are remarkably high for retirees.


A Utility Approach to Distribution Rules
         The expected benefit and the probable minimum benefit metrics described above are
useful in exploring risk/return tradeoffs of different payout strategies. Next we turn to a utility-
based approach which permits us to assess how a retiree might evaluate these distribution
programs while taking into account risk aversion and time preference.
Impact of Risk Aversion on the Choice of Distribution Rule. To understand how the various
distribution patterns would be assessed by people with different levels of risk aversion, we adopt
an additively time-separable utility function of the Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA)
class.10 As above, Bt denotes the nominal level of benefits from a phased withdrawal plan, while
At represents the benefits from a life annuity at time t. Here Vt represents the value of the
remaining assets in the retirement account, which also represents the bequest should the retiree
die. We assume the retiree’s objective function U is defined over total benefits received and
bequest left at death, and it takes the form:11



10
   This value function is also consistent with other studies which investigate payout strategies including annuities;
c.f. Table 1 as well as Dushi and Webb(2004) and Milevsky and Young (2003).
11
   In our model setup, the retiree uses all payouts only for consumption purposes.
                                                                                                                                      9




                  ⎡ K⎛        t −1
                                            ⎞⎡ t s            ⎛ (Bt + At )1−γ   ⎞                            ⎛ Vt 1−γ   ⎞⎤⎤
            U = E ⎢ ∑⎜⎜       ∏p     s
                                     x +i
                                            ⎟⎟ ⎢ β ⋅ p x +t   ⎜
                                                              ⎜     1− γ        ⎟
                                                                                           (
                                                                                ⎟ + k⋅ β t 1 − p xs +t   )   ⎜
                                                                                                             ⎜1 − γ
                                                                                                                        ⎟⎥⎥ ,
                                                                                                                        ⎟       (6)
                  ⎢⎣ t =0 ⎝   i =0           ⎠ ⎣⎢             ⎝                 ⎠                            ⎝          ⎠⎦⎥⎥⎦

where β reflects the time preference of the investor (set to 0.96, in line with Blake et al. 2003).
The strength of the bequest motive is represented by k (which can range from 0 to 1). The utility
of benefits in period t is weighted by the conditional probability tpx that a woman of age x at the
beginning of the retirement phase is still alive at t. The parameter γ reflects the individual’s
coefficient of relative risk aversion (RRA) and also her willingness to engage in intertemporal
substitution in consumption. The parameter plays an important role in evaluating the various
distribution programs when the payouts are uncertain because of stochastic asset returns. In what
follows, we report results using a range of risk aversion coefficients from 1 to 10. We classify as
least risk averse those with γ below 1; the moderately risk averse have γ from 1 to 5; and very
risk averse individuals have γ above 5.12
        Implementing this approach requires that we first select the optimal static (but
continuously rebalanced) asset allocation of stocks and bonds for each withdrawal rule, for each
level of risk aversion, and holding other parameters fixed. Next, we compute analytically the
expected lifetime utility given this asset allocation pattern for each phased withdrawal rule
(except for the fixed benefit rule). We then transform this utility level into an equivalent nominal
annuity income stream for life.13 The resulting certainty equivalents can then be directly
compared to the nominal life annuity benchmark. Finally, as a benchmark for the conventional
payout pattern, we also compute an optimal (variable) withdrawal plan for an individual without
access to an annuity market for every level of risk aversion using stochastic dynamic
programming. The stochastic component of the problem arises from uncertainty regarding date
of death as well as uncertain asset returns. This means that we select both the optimal withdrawal
pattern for ωt and its associated asset allocation path to maximize the expected lifetime utility
function given in (6) (see Appendix B for detail). The annuity-equivalent income stream can be
interpreted as the lifelong nominal annuity stream that would provide the same level of lifetime
utility to the retiree, if she lacked access to an annuity market.


12
   To price the annuity, we use female annuitant mortality tables from the Society of Actuaries; the female 2000
Population mortality table is used to weight utility (see www.soa.org).
13
   See Cocco et al. (2005) for a similar use of the equivalent constant consumption stream (equivalent annuity
stream).
                                                                                                                   10




        Figure 4 displays the results.14 The graph confirms that risk aversion plays an important
role in influencing the preferred payout (as in Brown et al. 2001). Furthermore, the fixed benefit
rule is consistent only with very low levels of risk aversion (<1), as it exposes the retiree to the
risk of outliving her assets. Also at those risk aversion levels, the fixed benefit approach is
dominated by all the other payout rules and the annuity path as well. Surprisingly, the fixed
percentage rule is preferred across a wide spectrum of risk preferences. It dominates the 1/T rule
for all levels of risk aversion considered, and it is more appealing than the annuity for
low/moderate levels of risk aversion. In this sense, our findings are supportive of those in the
financial planning industry who propose such a fixed benefit rule.
Figure 4 here
        We also find that the 1/T rule is clearly the least preferred of all the variable payout rules.
By contrast, the 1/E(T) rule does appeal to low and moderately risk averse retirees, but it is
unfavorable for the very risk averse. For extremely high levels of risk aversion, the 1/E(T) rule is
the least attractive of all variable payout rules. The optimal withdrawal plan provides higher
utility for low/moderate retires than the other payout rules and also than the annuity. Only the
very risk-averse will find the fixed annuity appealing, given these parameters.
        To illustrate the relative magnitudes, consider a 65-year old retiree with moderate risk
aversion (γ =3). Relative to buying an annuity, she would be 16.8% better off if she selected the
fixed percentage rule; 34.7% worse if she adopted the 1/T rule; 9.7% better if she adopted the
1/E(T) rule; and 30.4% better if she selected the optimal withdrawal plan. For the extremely risk-
averse retiree (γ=9), relative to buying an annuity, she would be 17.6% worse off if she selected
the fixed percentage rule; 52.4% worse if she adopted the 1/T rule; 63.4% worse off if she
adopted the 1/E(T) rule; and 3.1% worse if she selected the optimal withdrawal plan.
        Figure 5 shows the optimal asset allocation associated with each payout program. First,
we show that the asset allocation for the fixed benefit rule (relevant only to the extremely risk
preferring) has equity exposure of about 47%. Second, the asset allocation pattern is identical for
all of the variable phased withdrawal plans, but the pattern varies with γ. For values of risk
aversion up to 2, the retiree holds 100% equities, and as risk aversion rises, her preferred equity



14
 Similar to the case without a bequest motive, we computed certainty equivalents for k = 1. The level of bequest
motive is insensitive to the order of choice regarding a specific retirement rule.
                                                                                                                     11




exposure falls.15 It is interesting that the 60/40% stock/bond portfolio commonly recommended
by financial advisers is appropriate only for those with risk aversion of around 4, but the curve
slopes slowly so even very risk averse consumers will still hold 40% of their assets in equities.
Figure 5 here
Blending Portfolios of Annuities and Withdrawal Rules. To determine whether a blended
portfolio might provide greater utility than stand-alone strategies, we evaluate approaches that
combine both a life annuity product and a phased withdrawal rule. The 1/E(T) is a natural payout
rule to focus on, in view of the fact it mimics the “default” pattern under US tax law.16 We
consider first the case where the retiree at age 65 elects how much to annuitize and how much to
maintain in her withdrawal account.17 Next, we allow the retiree to default into the 1/E(T) plan at
retirement, and then she is permitted to switch the remainder of her wealth into an annuity at
some later point.18
         Figure 6 compares the results in the case where the blending rule must be set at
retirement. Those with low risk aversion do not annuitize, but as γ rises to 1.5, the demand for
annuities rises strongly. The retiree with γ = 4 invests 62.6% of her wealth in annuities and
37.4% is held in the phased withdrawal plan and held in equities. In this sense, the annuity
crowds out bonds and the withdrawal plan, as risk aversion rises.
Figure 6 here
         Table 2 summarizes results when the retiree stays in the phased withdrawal plan at age 65
yet she is permitted to annuitize completely at some later date; this strategy is now compared to
the initial blending strategy. The retiree may defer annuitization if she wants to continue to
participate in the equity market, or if she seeks to ensure that she can bequeath some assets to her
heirs.19 We take the investment weights and the withdrawal fractions from the previous
withdrawal analysis and try to determine when she would switch fully into annuities. We
constructed intertemporal portfolios of annuities and the 1/E(T) rule and computed the welfare

15
   The equity portion never falls to zero, because bonds are also somewhat risky.
16
   Milevsky and Young (2002) find that the optimal withdrawal fraction for a log investor in a deterministic
switching blending is identical to the IRA default case if the risk free rate is set to zero. Blake et al. (2003)’s
withdrawal rule collapses to the 1/E(T)-rule if the actuarial rate of return is set to zero. Dus et al. (2005) find
appealing characteristics of the 1/E(T)-rule in a shortfall framework.
17
   The program spans the state space by drawing 10,000 random numbers for each of the 36 retirement years. Then
we optimize the fraction invested in bonds and equities as well as the amount used for purchasing a life annuity.
18
   The program spans the state space by drawing 10,000 random numbers for each of the 36 retirement years. Then
we compare the utility outcomes for all possible switching ages and select the switching year with the highest utility.
19
   Future work could consider how the purchase of life insurance would change this problem.
                                                                                                                   12




gains compared to annuitizing immediately. The welfare loss from annuitizing immediately is
equivalent to the real option value of delaying annuitization (christened by Milevsky and Young
2002 the Real Option Value to Delay Annuitization or RODA). The retiree immediately
annuitizes if her γ exceeds 4.5. For instance, the retiree with moderate risk aversion (γ = 3)
postpones annuitizing her wealth until she turns 80. Compared to a mandatory annuitization at
age 65, she gains almost 11% from deferring annuitization for 15 years. As risk aversion
decreases, the utility gain over the benchmark rises substantially as well as the related switching
age.
Table 2 here
        The magnitude of the welfare gains for different levels of risk aversion that we estimate
are in line with those from Milevsky (2006) and Milevsky and Young (2002), though our capital
market model allows for more realism and our withdrawal rule follows the “default” pattern
mandated by the US tax law. Making switching mandatory at a certain age, say at age 75 as was
true in the UK until recently, penalizes everyone that has a lower risk aversion than γ = 3.5. A
switching age of 85 as in Germany, however, does not harm any retiree who considers a
complete switching strategy. Constructing portfolios over time works well for risk preferring
retirees, but moderate to extremely risk-averse retirees will benefit from blending withdrawal
strategies and life annuities initially. Even a retiree with a risk aversion of 10 would still hold a
very small fraction of her assets in a phased withdrawal plan, in order to be better off by almost
4% compared to immediate and complete annuitization.
        The preceding analysis has assumed that the retiree initially determines her optimal
switching age and does not account for future circumstances. Accordingly, next we let the retiree
react to changes in the yield curve using dynamic programming techniques.20 Figure 7 shows the
resulting switching frontiers for two different retirees. The lower left region of the frontier
indicates the area in which the retiree will want to continue to withdraw assets from her
retirement account. The upper right area shows the region in which the retiree has already
annuitized her assets because the short rate realization has been sufficiently high. Not
surprisingly, the higher the interest rate, the sooner the retiree annuitizes her entire asset base.

20
  The expectation operator in the Bellman equation is computed by resorting to Gaussian quadrature integration and
by cubic-splines interpolation. We then derive the optimal annuitization age by comparing the value of continuing
with the 1/E(T) withdrawal plan to the utility derived from switching to life-annuities completely. We used 40 states
for the short rate and a binary indicator variable It to determine the “switching into life annuities” strategy.
                                                                                                    13




However, a more risk-loving retiree will also demand a higher short rate than her risk-averse
counterpart. The switching frontier itself is concave because the mortality credit increases over
time and replaces cost advantages formerly generated by the related short rate. Accordingly,
Figure 7 shows the combined effect of interest rate level and mortality credit. The lower is risk
aversion, the higher the short rate must be to induce the retiree to annuitize her assets.
Figure 7 here
Further Results. This section describes other results of policy interest (not reported here in detail
but available on request). First, disregarding administrative costs included in the insurance
premium only modestly alters our results. Second, we have also computed certainty equivalence
values for the various payout strategies assuming a positive bequest motive. Of course, all
withdrawal plans seem more appealing once a bequest motive is taken into account. Further, the
lower the level of risk aversion, the larger the gains resulting from applying a particular
withdrawal rule. For instance, the fixed benefit approach becomes 57% more attractive with a
bequest motive, compared to the equivalent annuity stream. Full annuitization at the beginning of
the retirement period is inapplicable for γ ≥ 1. Nevertheless, the level of the bequest motive is
insensitive to the order of choice regarding specific retirement rules.
       Last, we have also examined the sensitivity of results to asymmetry of mortality beliefs.
Assuming that the 1/E(T) rule is adjusted for higher survival probabilities with age, the female
retiree who was exactly as healthy as the insurance company assumed when it set the annuity
premium would annuitize her wealth earlier. Conversely a retiree in worse-than-average health
would tend to postpone annuitization by up to two years, depending on her level of risk aversion.
But if, due to regulatory reasons, the 1/E(T) rule is not adjusted for higher survival probabilities,
retirees would prefer to annuitize later. Accordingly, this example shows that asymmetry
regarding mortality beliefs can contribute to explaining why individuals who believe themselves
to be less healthy than average are more likely to postpone annuitization.


Conclusions and Discussion
       Global disintermediation trends imply that workers are increasingly reaching retirement
age with substantial retirement accumulations which they will be called on to manage
themselves. As a result, they need advice how to optimally convert accumulated assets into a
stream of retirement income so as not to exhaust their funds too soon. Our utility framework
                                                                                                      14




enables us to compare the value of purchasing a stand-alone life annuity, versus a phased
withdrawal strategy backed by a properly diversified investment portfolio, as well as
combinations of these two tactics. We show that the appropriate mix depends on retiree attitudes
toward risk (as well as the underlying economic and demographic assumptions). Specifically,
comparing withdrawal rules often cited by financial planners and policymakers, such as the
1/E(T), the fixed percentage, the 1/T, and the fixed benefit rule, we find that:
   •   Somewhat surprisingly, the fixed percentage rule is appealing for retirees across a wide
   range of risk preferences. In this sense, this rule is supportive of some in the financial advice
   industry who propose such a rule.
   •   The 1/E(T) rule appeals to low/moderately risk-averse retirees, but it is unfavorable for
   the very risk-averse. The fixed benefit rule is not appealing for most retirees as it exposes
   them to the risk of outliving their assets, while the 1/T performs worse than any other
   variable withdrawal rule for a broad range of investors.
   •   For the three variable distribution plans, the optimal asset allocation is identical given a
   risk aversion level. Specifically, for low risk aversion, equities dominate and bonds play a
   greater role as risk aversion rises. By contrast, in the fixed benefit case, even risk-averse
   retirees are led to hold high fractions in bonds.
       Next, we compare stand-alone withdrawal rules versus immediate annuitization of the
entire portfolio. Consistent with previous studies, we show that annuities are attractive as a
stand-alone product when the retiree has sufficiently high risk aversion and lacks a bequest
motive. Withdrawal plans dominate annuities for low/moderate risk preferences, because the
retiree can gain by investing in the capital market and from “betting on death.”
       Finally, we examine combination/mixed strategies where retirees may both invest some
of their assets and also buy a payout annuity. In the case where the annuitization decision occurs
at the point of retirement, we find that:
   •   Annuities become appealing for those with moderate risk aversion, when retirees can
   hold both annuities and phased withdrawal plans as a mixed strategy. Withdrawal plans are
   now attractive for highly risk-averse retirees.
   • From an asset allocation perspective, annuities first crowd out bonds when risk aversion
   rises. As risk aversion increases further, annuities replace equities in the overall portfolio.
                                                                                                    15




When a retiree is permitted to switch into an annuity at some point after the retirement date, we
find that the optimal annuitization age is sensitive to the degree of risk aversion and interest rates
in the following manner:
   •   Less risk-averse retirees will wait longer until they switch to an annuity.
   •   Very risk-averse individuals will be willing to annuitize in a low interest rate
       environment, but higher interest rates are required to induce annuitization among risk
       preferrers.
       Our results are relevant to a wide range of financial service providers and regulators in
the retirement marketplace. Money managers and insurers should note that many retirees hold
suboptimal asset allocations, as we show that annuities first crowd out bonds as risk aversion
rises, and at higher levels of risk aversion, they replace equities in the retiree’s portfolio. Making
annuitization compulsory can also lead to substantial utility losses for less risk-averse investors,
if annuitization is forced too early. But it would appear that annuitization at age 85 could be a
sensible annuitization point if bequest motives are disregarded (and given our model
parameterizations). Mandatory annuitization has recently been implemented in Germany at
exactly this age for tax-sheltered Riester Personal Pension accounts; and in the U.S. compulsory
annuitization was recommended by the recent Commission to Strengthen Social Security.
       Thus far our model indicates that retirees find equity-linked phased withdrawal plans
attractive because investors are assumed to access the equity market only by using a phased
withdrawal plan. This assumption is realistic, insofar as in the US most payout annuities are
nominal (Brown et al. 2001). Future research will explore the role of equity-linked variable
payout annuities in retiree portfolios, to the extent that they complete the underlying asset
structure by including an equity premium and a mortality credit.
                                                                                               16




References
Albrecht, P. and R. Maurer, 2002, Self-Annuitization, Consumption Shortfall in Retirement and
        Asset Allocation: The Annuity Benchmark. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance,
        1 (3), 269-288.
Ameriks, J., R. Veres and M. J. Warshawsky, 2001, Making Retirement Income Last a Lifetime.
        Journal of Financial Planning, December, 60-76.
Babbs, S. H. and K.B. Nowman, 1999, Kalman Filtering of Generalized Vasicek-Term Structure
        Models. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 34 (1), 115-130.
Bengen, W.P., 1994, Determining Withdrawal Rates Using Historical Data. Journal of Financial
        Planning, 7 (4), 171-180.
Bengen, W.P., 1997, Conserving Client Portfolios During Retirement, Part III. Journal of
        Financial Planning, 10 (6), 84-97.
Bernheim, B.D., 1991, How Strong are Bequest Motives? Evidence Based on Estimates of the
        Demand for Life Insurance and Annuities. Journal of Political Economy, 99 (5), 899-927.
Blake, D., A.J.G. Cairns , and K. Dowd, 2003, PensionMetrics II: Stochastic Pension Plan
        Design During the Distribution Phase. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 33 (1),
        29-47.
Brown, J.R. and J. M. Poterba, 2000, Joint Life Annuities and Annuity Demand by Married
        Couples. Journal of Risk and Insurance, 67 (4), 527-553.
Brown, J.R., O.S. Mitchell, and J. M. Poterba, 2001, The Role of Real Annuities and Indexed
        Bonds in an Individual Accounts Retirement Program, in: In Risk Aspects of Investment-
        Based Social Security Reform. Chicago. University of Chicago Press.
Brugiavini, A., 1993, Uncertainty Resolution and the Timing of Annuity Purchases. Journal of
        Public Economics, 50 (1), 31-62.
Chen, P. and M.A. Milevsky, 2003, Merging Asset Allocation and Longevity Insurance: An
        Optimal Perspective on Payout Annuities. Journal of Financial Planning, 16(6), 52-62.
Cocco, J.F., F.J. Gomes, and P.J. Maenhout, 2005, Consumption and Portfolio Choice over the
        Life-Cycle. Review of Financial Studies, 18 (2), 491-533.
Cogan, J. and O.S. Mitchell, 2003, Perspectives from the President’s Commission on Social
        Security Reform. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17 (2), 149-172.
Davidoff, T., J.R. Brown, and P.A. Diamond, 2005, Annuities and Individual Welfare. American
        Economic Review, 95 (5), 1573-1590.
Dus, I., R. Maurer, and O.S. Mitchell, 2005, Betting on Death and Capital Markets in
        Retirement: A Shortfall Risk Analysis of Life Annuities versus Phased Withdrawal Plans.
        Financial Services Review 14, 169-196.
Dushi, I. and A. Webb, 2004, Household Annuitization Decisions: Simulations and Empirical
        Analysis, Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 3 (2), 109-143.
Feldstein, M., E. Ranguelova, and A. Samwick, 2001, The Transition to Investment-Based Social
        Security When Portfolio Returns and Capital Profitability are Uncertain. In: Risk Aspects
        of Investment-Based Social Security Reform. Chicago. University of Chicago Press, 41-
        81.
Ho, K., M. Milevsky, and C. Robinson, 1994, Asset Allocation, Life Expectancy and Shortfall.
        Financial Services Review 3 (2), 109-126.
Hughen, J.C., F.E. Laatsch, and D.P. Klein, 2002, Withdrawal Patterns and Rebalancing Costs
        for Taxable Portfolios. Financial Services Review 11 (4), 341-366.
                                                                                            17




Hurd, M.D. and J. P. Smith, 1999, Anticipated and Actual Bequests, NBER Working Papers
        7380, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Kapur, S. and J.M. Orszag, 1999, A Portfolio Approach to Investment and Annuitization During
        Retirement. Mimeo, Birbeck College, University of London, London, UK.
Kingston, G. and S. Thorp, 2005, Annuitization and Asset Allocation with HARA Utility,
        Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 4 (3), 225-248.
Merton, R. C., 1971, Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous Time Model.
        Journal of Economic Theory 3 (4), 373-413.
Merton, R.C., 1983, On Consumption Indexed Public Pension Plans. In: Bodie, Z., Shoven, J.
        (Eds.), Financial Aspects of the US Pension System, University of Chicago Press,
        Chicago, (Reprinted as Chapter 18 of Merton (1990)).
Merton, R. C., 1990, Continuous Time Finance, Blackwell, Cambridge, MA.
Milevsky, M.A., 1998, Optimal Asset Allocation Towards the End of the Life Cycle: To
        Annuitize or Not to Annuitize? Journal of Risk and Insurance 65 (3), 401-426.
Milevsky, M.A., 2001, Optimal Annuitization Policies: Analysis of the Options. North American
        Actuarial Journal, 5, 57-69.
Milevsky, M.A., 2006, The Calculus of Retirement Income: Financial Models for Pension
        Annuities and Life Insurance. Cambridge.
Milevsky, M.A., K. Ho, and C. Robinson, 1997, Asset Allocation Via the Conditional First Exit
        Time or How to Avoid Outliving Your Money. Review of Quantitative Finance and
        Accounting, 9 (1), 53-70.
Milevsky, M.A. and C. Robinson, 2000, Self-Annuitization and Ruin in Retirement. North
        American Actuarial JournaI, 4, 112-129.
Milevsky, M.A. and V.R. Young, 2002, Optimal Asset Allocation and The Real Option to Delay
        Annuitization: It's Not Now-or-Never, The Schulich School of Business, December, York
        University, Canada [11.02.2006] http://www.ifid.ca/pdf_workingpapers/ ].
Milevsky, M.A. and V.R. Young, 2003, Annuitization and Asset Allocation. Working Paper
        IFID Centre, The Schulich School of Business, December, York University, Canada
        [11.02.2006] http://www.ifid.ca/pdf_workingpapers/ ].
Milevsky, M.A., K.S. Moore, and V.R. Young, 2006, Optimal Asset Allocation and Ruin-
        Minimization Annuitization Strategies, Mathematical Finance, to appear.
Mitchell, O. S., J. M. Poterba, M. J. Warshawsky and J. R. Brown, 1999, New Evidence on the
        Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities. American Economic Review, 89 (5), 1299-1318.
Polyak, I., 2005, New Advice to Retirees: Spend More at First, Cut Back Later. New York Times,
        September 25, 2005.
Pye, G. B., 2000, Sustainable Investment Withdrawals. Journal of Portfolio Management,
        Summer, 26 (4) 73-83.
Pye, G. B., 2001, Adjusting Withdrawal Rates for Taxes and Expenses. Journal of Financial
        Planning, April, 14 (4) 126-136.
Stabile, G., 2003, Optimal timing of the Annuity Purchases: A Combined Stochastic Control and
        Optimal Stopping Problem. Working Paper, Universita degli Studi di Roma, Rome, Italy.
Whitaker, B., 2005, Managing Retirement, After You Really Retire. New York Times, October
        16, 2005.
Yaari, M. E., 1965, Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer. Review
        of Economic Studies, 32, 137-150.
                                                 100%


              Benefit-to-Wealth-Ratio                                 80%


                                                                      60%


                                                                      40%


                                                                      20%


                                                                                   0%
                                                                                        65        70         75        80          85         90         95            100
                                                                                                                       Retiree's Age
                                                                                                            1/E(T)          1/T         Fixed Percentage (=7.2)


Figure 1. Benefit-to-Wealth Patterns for Alternative Phased Distribution Rules
This figure displays benefit-to-wealth ratios for the three variable withdrawal rules of interest. The 1/E(T) path is
represented by a dotted line; the 1/T rule is a dash/dot line, and the fixed percentage rule (set here at 7.2%) is
represented by a dashed line.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                        Benefit-to-Initial Annuity Payment-Ratio




                                                                                   700%

                                                                                   600%

                                                                                   500%

                                                                                   400%

                                                                                   300%

                                                                                   200%

                                                                                   100%

                                                                                    0%
                                                                                             65        70         75         80         85          90            95         100
                                                                                                                             Retiree's Age
                                                                                                   1/E(T)                           Fixed Percentage (=7.2)
                                                                                                   1/T                              Fixed Benefit

Figure 2. Expected Benefit Ratios for Alternative Distribution Rules Conditional on Survival
This figure compares expected benefits under the three withdrawal rules (conditional on survival) to the life annuity
profile. The dotted line reflects expected consumption levels for the 1/E(T) rule; the dashed line shows the same for
the fixed percentage rule. The dash/dot line represents the 1/T withdrawal path, wile the bold dashes reflect the
expected fixed benefit path. The underlying asset allocation is a 60/40% split (stocks/bonds) and values are
expressed as a fraction of the life annuity payouts.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                                                                                                                      19




                                             Benefit-to-Initial Annuity Payment-Ratio
                                                                                         200%


                                                                                         150%


                                                                                         100%


                                                                                          50%


                                                                                           0%
                                                                                                65           70         75         80           85        90         95         100
                                                                                                                                   Retiree's Age

                                                                                                 1/E(T)                                        Fixed Percentage (=7.2)
                                                                                                 1/T                                           Fixed Benefit


Figure 3. Probable Minimum Benefits under Alternative Distribution Rules Conditional on Survival
This figure indicates probable minimum benefits (at the 1 percentile level) or ‘downside risk’ for the three
withdrawal rules. The dotted line shows the 1/E(T) rule downside risk; the dashed line represents the fixed
percentage downside risk. The dash/dot line represents the probable minimum benefit for the 1/T withdrawal rule
and the bold dashes reflect the downside risk of the fixed benefits. The underlying asset allocation is a 60/40% split
(stocks/bonds ) and values are expressed as a fraction of the life annuity payouts.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

                                      0.2
                                     0.18
           Eqv. Annuity Stream per




                                     0.16
                                     0.14
                1$ premium




                                     0.12
                                      0.1
                                     0.08
                                     0.06                                        Fixed Benefit
                                     0.04
                                     0.02
                                       0
                                            0.5                                            1.5         2.5        3.5    4.5       5.5         6.5     7.5     8.5        9.5
                                                                                                                         Risk Aversion
                                                                                        Optimum                                1/E(T)                             1/(T)
                                                                                        Fixed Percentage (=7.2)                Fixed Benefit                      Annuity

Figure 4. Equivalent Annuity Streams for Alternative Distribution Rules
This figure reports the annuity-equivalent income stream or the lifelong nominal annuity stream providing
equivalent lifetime utility to the retiree if she lacked access to an annuity market. For each level of risk aversion (γ),
the thin solid line displays the equivalent annuity stream of the optimal withdrawal strategy. The dotted line shows
the equivalent annuity stream for the 1/E(T) rule, while the dashed line represents the same for the fixed percentage
withdrawal rule. The dash/dot line represents the equivalent annuity stream for the 1/T withdrawal strategy, and the
bold dashes refer to the fixed benefit rule. The bar at the ordinate shows the equivalent annuity stream in the case of
a self-annuitization strategy; the thick solid line refers to the recurring payout of a life annuity purchased at age 65.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                                                                         20



                               100%


                                  80%

           Equity Exposure
                                  60%

                                                  Fixed Benefit
                                  40%


                                  20%


                                       0%
                                            0.5       1.5         2.5       3.5     4.5       5.5        6.5        7.5    8.5    9.5
                                                                                    Risk Aversion
                                                                        Variable Programs           Fixed Benefit

Figure 5. Optimal Equity Exposure for Alternative Distribution Rules
This figure indicates the optimal asset allocation associated with each payout program. The solid line shows the
optimal fraction invested in equity if the plan includes variable benefits. The bar at the ordinate represents the
optimal fraction invested in equity in case of the fixed benefit plan.
Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                       100%


                                       80%
                             Weights




                                       60%


                                       40%


                                       20%


                                        0%
                                              0.5        1.5        2.5       3.5     4.5       5.5        6.5       7.5    8.5    9.5
                                                                                      Risk Aversion


                                                                                     Equity               Annuity


Figure 6. Optimal Blend of Equity and Annuity Given One-Time Decision at Retirement for the 1/E(T) Rule
The graph shows, for different levels of risk aversion, the optimal blend of equity and annuities under the 1/E(T)
rule. The solid line displays the optimal fraction invested in equity; the dotted line represents the initial amount used
for purchasing a life annuity at the age of 65.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                                                      21




                               0.15

                               0.13

                               0.11
                  Short Rate
                               0.09

                               0.07

                               0.05

                               0.03

                               0.01
                                      65   70      75         80          85          90    95        100
                                                              Retiree's Age

                                                Risk Aversion (=3)   Risk Aversion (=0.5)


Figure 7. Optimal Switch To Annuities By Age Under the 1/E(T) Rule by Risk Aversion
This figure shows the optimal switching path with age, for retirees with lower and higher risk aversion. The solid
bars display the switching frontier for γ = 0.5; the black diamonds stand for the switching frontier that would apply
to a retiree with γ = 3. The lower left-hand side of the figure indicates the withdrawal region, and the upper right side
shows the annuitization region.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                                                                   22




 Category                                                 Framework Type
                                        1                                                     2
     A        Utility framework                             Shortfall framework
       B      Risk neutral                                  Risk averse
     C        Additive utility                              Habit formation
     D        No mortality credits before annuitization     Partial mortality credits before annuitization
       E      Withdrawal plan and constant life annuity     Withdrawal plan and variable life annuity
       F      No bequest motive                             Bequest utility
     G        Constant asset mix                            Dynamic asset mix
     H        Deterministic asset model                     Stochastic asset model
       I      Constant interest rates                       Stochastic interest rates

Year          Authors                                       Model features
    1965      Yaari                                         A1, (B1), (C1), (D1), E1, F1, G1, H1, I1
                                                            Immediate annuitization (constant life annuity).
    1983      Merton                                        A1 ,B2, C1, (D1), E2, F1, G1, H2, I1
                                                            Immediate annuitization; never opt for constant life annuity.
    1998      Milevsky                                      A2, B2, (D1), E2, F1, G1, H2, I1
                                                            Annuitization when mortality drag is equal/grater than equity risk
                                                            premium.
    1999      Kapur and Orszag                              A1, B2, C1, D2, E1, F1, G2, H2, I1
                                                            Gradual annuitization (constant life annuity) when mortality drag is
                                                            equal or greater than equity risk premium.
    2003      Blake, Cairns, and Dowd                       A1, B2, C1 or C2, D1, E1, F2, G1, H2, I1
                                                            Optimal deterministic switching and stochastic switching;
                                                            Withdrawal plan before T (includes optimized static asset mix);
                                                            T depends on risk aversion and bequest utility.
    2003      Milevsky and Young                            A1, B2, C1, D1, E1 or E2, F1 or F2, G2, H2, I1
    2002                                                    Optimal deterministic switching (includes optimized dynamic asset
                                                            mix);
                                                            Closed-form solution if time preference is equal to risk free rate;
                                                            Optimal gradual annuitization.
    2003      Stabile                                       A1, B2, C1, D1, E1, F1, G2, H2, I1
                                                            Complete stochastic switching;
                                                            Withdrawal plan before T includes dynamic asset mix.
    2005      Dus, Maurer, and Mitchell                     A2, B2, D1, E1, F2, G1, H2, I1
                                                            Switch at regulatory deterministic time T;
                                                            Withdrawal plan before T includes optimal constant asset mix.
    2005      Kingston and Thorp                            A1, B2, C2, D1, E1, F1, G1, H2, I1
                                                            Complete stochastic switching; closed-form solution.
    2006      Milevsky, Moore, and Young                    A2, B2, D1, E1, F1, G2, H2, I1
                                                            Complete stochastic switching (includes optimized dynamic asset
                                                            mix).
              Present paper                                 A1, B2, C1, D1, E1, F1 or F2, G1, H2, I2
                                                            Withdrawal plan before T (includes static asset mix);
                                                            Optimal initial annuitization, optimal deterministic and complete
                                                            stochastic switching;
                                                            T depends on term structure, utility, and time preference.


Table 1. Retirement Payout Research Overview: Assumptions and Specifications
The top panel describes the range of assumptions used in prior studies as well as the present analysis. The lower
panel employs this structure to categorize relevant studies combining life annuities and phased withdrawal plans.
Source: Adapted from Blake et al. (2003) with the addition of categories A, C, and I.
                                                                                                                    23




                       21                           Risk Aversion Level (γ)
                        0.5    1    1.5    2    2.5    3    3.5                    4      4.5     5    10
   Switching Age        85    84    84    82    81    80     77                    75     65     65    65
Switching/Blending vs. 77.67 54.81 38.23 26.10 17.32 10.98 6.21                  2.46    0      0     0
Annuity at age 65
Initial Blending vs.        74.02 52.36 36.47 25.17 18.79 14.93 12.36 10.52 9.18 8.13 3.79
Annuity at age 65

Table 2. Percentage Increase in Equivalent Annuity Stream for Blended Strategies
The table shows, for alternative risk aversion levels, the optimal switching age under a 1/E(T) phased withdrawal
rule, taking into account the optimal deterministic switching strategy. It also compares the gains in equivalent
annuity streams, from a blended switching tactic to that from undertaking immediate complete annuitization at age
65.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                                         24



Appendix A: Models and Parameterization

Interest Rate Model: We assume that the short rate follows an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process to describe
the interest rate exposure of annuities consistently:
                                                   (             )
                                     drt s = κ r θ r − rt s dt + σ r dWrt ,
where r is the short rate, θr represents the long run mean, and κr stands for the degree of mean reversion
        s

and σr is the volatility of the short rate. The term structure of zero bonds with maturities t > 0 is then
given by:
                                              Bt (τ ) = e − a (τ )−b (τ )r t
                                                             s




with
                                                    ⎛            σ r2      2⎞
                                     a (τ ) = y (∞ )⎜τ − b(τ ) +
                                                    ⎜                 b(τ ) ⎟⎟ ,
                                                    ⎝            4κ          ⎠
                                                       1
                                                             (
                                               b(τ ) = 1 − e −κτ ,
                                                      κ
                                                                          )
                                                       σ r ς r 1 σ r2
                                          y (∞ ) = θ +        −       .
                                                         κ      2 κ2
where y(∞) denotes the asymptotic zero-coupon yield as time-to-maturity goes to infinity, and ζ r is the
market price of risk. We use the Kalman Filter as applied by Babbs and Nowman (1999) for multifactor
term structure models to fit the one-factor Vasicek to the US yield curve data.

Asset Returns: The vector of risky assets (stocks and bonds) Pt follows a stochastic process of the form:
                                                            [
                                        dPt = diag (Pt ) µdt + Σ t dWt ,       ]
where W = (w1 , w2 ) is a two-dimensional standard Brownian motion, i.e. a vector of two independent
                     '


Brownian motions. The (2 x 2) matrix Σ measures the sensitivity of the risky assets to exogenous shocks
                                 '
in such a way that the matrix ΣΣ contains the variance and covariance of the instantaneous rates of return.
If the portfolio is rebalanced continuously to keep the fraction invested in different assets constant over
time, we can write the portfolio process as a one dimensional Geometric Brownian motion with drift:

                                       dPt = µ (π )Pt dt + σ (π )Pt dWt ,
where
                                              σ (π ) =       (Π ′ΣΠ )
                                                ⎛ π ′⎡                 2 ⎞
                                                ⎜ ⎡ ⎤ m + 0.5 ⋅ v1 ⎤ ⎟
                               µ (π ) = Π ' µ = ⎜ ⎢ 1 ⎥ ⎢ 1            2⎥
                                                                             .
                                                ⎜ ⎣π 2 ⎦ ⎣m2 + 0.5 ⋅ v2 ⎦ ⎟⎟
                                                ⎝                          ⎠
Note that mi is the expected value of the log returns and vi is the standard deviation of asset i. ∏ is the
vector of the individual portfolio weights πi. The stochastic differential equation was derived by Merton
(1971, 1990) and applied in Feldstein, Ranguelova, and Samwick (2001) for instance. Constant
rebalancing is also in line with Merton’s (1971) result for investors with CRRA utility.
                                                                                                      25



Parameter Estimation: Estimated parameters for the Geometric Brownian motion and the Vasicek
process are given in the following table:

          Stocks and Bonds                  Interest Rate Model             Correlation Matrix
                   Long Term                                        Stock    Bond     Federal Fund
     Large Caps       Bonds                      Vasicek              s        s          Rate
m       11.55          8.45            κ           5.47               1      0.33          0.13
v       15.33         10.28            θ           5.86                       1           -0.17
                                       σr          1.78                                     1
                                       ζ          23.19

Capital Market Parameterization: The Vasicek model is calibrated by using the monthly yield curve
data (06/1974:12/2004) provided by the Federal Reserve. The mean and standard deviation of the log
returns are estimated by using the Ibbotson time series for large caps and long term bonds data ranging
from 1974 to 2004. In addition, the correlation matrix for the Cholesky decomposition is estimated using
the Federal Funds Rate as an approximation to the unobservable short rate.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                                               26



Appendix B: Derivation of Optimal Variable Withdrawal Rule Without Annuities
Bellman Equation: The multi-period optimization problem can be split into several
one-period problems:
                                                    1−γ
                                                 Bt             V 1−γ
                                U t = p x +t          + q x +t k t + ßEt [ p x +tU t +1 ] .
                                                 1− γ           1− γ
Restate the absolute terms as fractions of the current period’s assets:

                            U t = px + t
                                             (btVt )1−γ   + qx + t k
                                                                       (υtVt )1−γ   + ßEt [ px + tU t +1 ] .
                                              1− γ                      1− γ
Dividing by Vt1−γ yields
                               Ut              b1−γ           υt1−γ       ⎡       U ⎤
                                 1− γ
                                      = p x +t      + q x+t k       + ßEt ⎢ px + t 1t−+γ1 ⎥ .
                              Vt               1− γ           1− γ        ⎣       Vt ⎦
Using the budget constraint
                                                                 Vt +1
                                                     Vt =
                                                             (1 − bt )Rt +1
leads to

                                                                          [                                ]
                                      1− γ
                                    bt             υ 1− γ
                                         + qx + t k t + ßEt px + t yt +1 [(1 − bt )Rt +1 ] ,
                                                                                          1− γ
                      yt = px + t
                                    1− γ           1− γ
where
                                                                       Ut
                                                            yt =            .
                                                                      Vt1−γ


Expected Utility: If the portfolio is rebalanced continuously in order to keep the fraction in each risky
asset constant over time, the portfolio return is also log-normal distributed. For the sake of simplicity, we
assume that the payout is drawn at the start of each year. Let ωt = Bt/Vt (t = 0,1,....,n) then be a
predetermined sequence of benefit-to-wealth ratios 0 ≤ ωt ≤ 1, and define
                                                                t
                                                    cω t = ∏ (1 −ω i ) .
                                                               i =0
If the risky asset in the retirement account follows a geometric Brownian motion with drift, the nominal
log returns I will be normally distributed with a mean µ( π )-0.5 σ 2 (π ) and a variance σ 2 (π ) . For an
initial endowment V0, the market value of the retiree’s account at the beginning of year t (t = 1,2,…,n) just
before the withdrawal Bt for that year can be written as follows:

                                                                            ⎛ t ⎞
                             Vt = (1 − ωt −1 )Vt −1 exp(I t ) = cωt −1V0 exp⎜ ∑ I i ⎟ .
                                                                            ⎝ i =1 ⎠
The market value of the retiree’s account at the beginning of year t (t = 1,2,…,n) just before the
withdrawal Bt for that year. Vt is distributed log-normal, i.e. ln(Vt) ~ N(kt, vt2 ) follows a normal-
distribution with mean kt = ln[cωt-1 V0] + t[µ( π )-0.5 σ 2 (π ) ] and variance vt2 = tσ 2 (π ) .
                                                                                                                  27




Similarly, the payouts Bt at the beginning of each period are also log-normal distributed, i.e.
ln(Bt) ~ N(nt, vt2 ) with parameters nt = ln[ωt cωt-1 V0] + t[µ( π )-0.5 σ 2 (π ) ] and variance vt2 = tσ 2 (π ) :

                                                                   ⎛ t ⎞
                                        Bt = ωtVt = ωt cωt −1V0 exp⎜ ∑ I i ⎟ .
                                                                   ⎝ i =1 ⎠
Applying Itô’s lemma we obtain the following expression of the utility dynamics:
                         dU t = (1 − γ )U t (µ (π ) − 0.5γσ 2 (π ) )dt + (1 − γ )σ (π )U t dWt .

The distribution of ln(Ut) can be written as:

                     [
                     ⎛
                                (                     )] 1
                                                         2
                                                                  2                             2
                                                                                                        (   )
                                                                                                            ⎞
       ln (U t ) ~ N ⎜ (1 − γ ) µ (π ) − 0.5γσ 2 (π ) t − (1 − γ ) σ 2 (π )t + ln U 0 , (1 − γ ) σ 2 (π ) t ⎟ .
                     ⎝                                                                                      ⎠
The expected utility gained from the benefits in period t and the expected utility gained from the
remaining value of the assets in the retirement account can be expressed in terms of a constant mix
portfolio strategy as:


                    E [U (Bt )] =
                                  (ωt cωt −1V0 )(1−γ ) exp ⎛⎜ (1 − γ )⎛ µ (π ) − 1 γ ⋅σ 2 (π ) ⎞ t⎞⎟;
                                                            ⎜         ⎜                        ⎟⎟
                                       (1 − γ )             ⎝         ⎝          2             ⎠⎠

                    E [U (Vt )] =
                                  (cωt −1V0 ) exp⎛⎜ (1 − γ )⎛ µ (π ) − 1 γ ⋅σ 2 (π ) ⎞ t⎞⎟.
                                             (1− γ )
                                                        ⎜         ⎜                        ⎟⎟
                                     (1 − γ )           ⎝         ⎝           2            ⎠⎠
