                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 HOW PROGRESSIVE IS THE U.S. FEDERAL TAX SYSTEM?
                  A HISTORICAL AND INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE

                                             Thomas Piketty
                                             Emmanuel Saez

                                          Working Paper 12404
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12404


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




Thomas Piketty is Professor of Economics, Paris School of Economics (PSE), Paris, France, and a Research
Fellow, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London, United Kingdom. Emmanuel Saez is Professor of
Economics, University of California, Berkeley, California, and Research Associate, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Their e-mail addresses are <thomas.piketty@ens.fr> and
<saez@econ.berkeley.edu>, respectively. This paper was prepared for the Fall 2006 issue of the Journal of
Economic Perspectives. We are grateful to Anthony B. Atkinson and the editors of this Journal for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
How Progressive is the U.S. Federal Tax System? A Historical and International Perspective
Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 12404
July 2006
JEL No. H2

                                            ABSTRACT


This paper provides estimates of federal tax rates by income groups in the United States since 1960,
with special emphasis on very top income groups. We include individual and corporate income
taxes, payroll taxes, and estate and gift taxes. The progressivity of the U.S. federal tax system at the
top of the income distribution has declined dramatically since the 1960s. This dramatic drop in
progressivity is due primarily to a drop in corporate taxes and in estate and gift taxes combined with
a sharp change in the composition of top incomes away from capital income and toward labor
income. The sharp drop in statutory top marginal individual income tax rates has contributed only
moderately to the decline in tax progressivity. International comparisons confirm that is it critical
to take into account other taxes than the individual income tax to properly assess the extent of overall
tax progressivity, both for time trends and for cross-country comparisons. The pattern for the United
Kingdom is similar to the US pattern. France had less progressive taxes than the US or UK in 1970
but has experienced an increase in tax progressivity and has now a more progressive tax system than
the US or the UK.


Thomas Piketty
Ecole Normale Superieure
48 Boulevard Jourdan
75014 Paris
FRANCE
thomas.piketty@ens.fr

Emmanuel Saez
University of California
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu
                                                                                 1



      Over the last 40 years, the U.S. federal tax system has undergone three
striking changes, each of which seems to move the federal tax system in the
direction of less progressivity. First, there has been a dramatic decline in top
marginal individual income tax rates. In the early 1960s, the statutory individual
income tax rate applied to the marginal dollar of the highest incomes was 91
percent. This marginal tax rate on the highest incomes declined to 28 percent by
1988, increased significantly to 39.6 percent in 1993, and fell to 35 percent as of
2003. Second, corporate income taxes as a fraction of gross domestic product
have fallen by half, from around 3.5-4.0 percent of GDP in the early 1960s to
less than 2 percent of GDP in the early 2000s (for example, Auerbach, 2006).
However, corporate profits as a share of GDP have not declined during this
period, suggesting that capital owners – who are disproportionately of above-
average incomes -- get to earn relatively more net of taxes today than in the
1960s. Third, there has been a substantial increase in payroll tax rates financing
Social Security retirement benefits and Medicare. The combined employee-
employer payroll tax rate on labor income has increased from 6 percent in the
early 1960s to over 15 percent in the 1990s and 2000s. Moreover, the Social
Security payroll tax applies only up to a cap--equal to $90,000 of annual earnings
in 2005--and is therefore a relatively smaller tax burden as incomes rise above
the cap.
      However, the conclusion that these three changes have reduced the
progressivity of the federal tax system less obvious than it may at first appear.
For example, in the case of the individual income tax, the numerous deductions
and exemptions mean that the tax rates listed in the tax tables might be a poor
measure of the actual tax burden faced by each income group. In addition, some
forms of income, such as capital gains, have traditionally faced lower tax rates,
which benefits disproportionately high income taxpayers. In the case of the
corporate income tax, there are competing theories about who bears the burden
of the tax: for example, does it reduce returns for stockholders, or reduce the
returns on other assets such as bonds or pensions of future retirees, or is it paid
                                                                                   2

by workers in the form or lower wages, or is it paid by consumers in the form of
higher prices?
       We begin this paper by using the large public micro-file tax return data to
estimate the current progressivity of the U.S. federal tax system, which
essentially includes individual and corporate income taxes, estate taxes, and
payroll taxes. We will lay out what we think are the most plausible and simple
assumptions about the incidence of taxes based on previous work. We will then
look at trends in the progressivity of the U.S. tax system from 1960 to the
present. Throughout this discussion, we will pay particular attention to small
groups at the top of the income distribution, who often represent a significant
fraction of aggregate income and aggregate taxes paid, and who often face tax
rules that have their main impact at the top of the income distribution.
Government agencies such as the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the
Congressional    Budget    Office   (CBO)   produce    annual   statistics   on   tax
progressivity in the United States. Our approach differs from the IRS statistics
(Parisi, 2004-05; Strudler et al., 2005), because those IRS statistics ignore other
federal taxes such as the corporate income tax, the estate tax, or payroll taxes.
Our approach differs from the CBO statistics (CBO, 2001) because we focus
primarily on top incomes while they focus primarily on income quintiles.1 Our
approach also differes from classic comprehensive studies of tax progressivity
like Pechman and Okun (1974), Pechman (1985), or Kasten et al. (1994),
because our more basic method does not incorporate state and local taxes, and
we ignore government transfers. However, we provide progressivity results for
over 40 years, while previous studies have focused on a few years at most. We
will then contrast the U.S. results with the experience from other countries. Using
a similar (if simplified) methodology, we will present progressivity results for the
tax systems of France and the United Kingdom.
                                                                                                3


Current Federal Tax Progressivity in the United States


        The definition of a progressive tax system usually starts with the idea of a
proportional tax, in which everyone pays the same share of income in taxes.
From that baseline, a progressive tax is when the share of income paid in taxes
rises with income, and a regressive tax is when the share of income paid in taxes
falls with income. Of course, real-world tax codes are complex and full of rules
that have different effects across the income distribution. Thus, a more general
definition is that a tax system can be defined as progressive if after-tax income is
more equally distributed than before-tax income, and regressive if after-tax
income is less equally distributed than before-tax income.
        Inequality and tax progressivity have many facets and should be explored
along different measures depending on the specific issue one wants to examine.
For example, an analyst can look at the impact of taxes on the poverty rate or on
a measure of inequality like the Gini coefficient. In this paper, we will focus on top
income shares, defined as how the tax code affects the fraction of total income
going to a given group in the income distribution, such as the top decile or top
percentile.2
        We begin with estimates of the progressivity of the U.S. tax code in 2004.
More precisely, we use data on incomes for the year 2000, which is the most
recent year for which detailed micro data on types of income is available. We
adjust for nominal and real growth to 2004 dollars, and then apply the tax code
as it stood in 2004.


        Income Groups



1
  The department of Treasury and the Joint Committee on Taxation also produce distributional
analyses to evaluate tax reforms. Their distributional analyses are close to those of CBO (see
CBO, 2001).
2
  The after-tax income share is equal to before-tax income share times the ratio of one minus the
tax rate for the given group to one minus the average tax rate across the full distribution. Or in
algebraic terms: after-tax income share = before tax income share * (1-average tax rate for the
group)/(1- average tax rate economy wide).
                                                                                               4

        The first column of Table 1 displays the groups we are considering
according to the percentile of income, ranging from the second quintile
(Percentile 20-40) to the top 0.01 percent (P99.99-100). We exclude the bottom
quintile (P0-20) from the analysis because many low income earners have zero
market income and receive only government transfers such as Social Security or
Disability income, and do not file income tax returns. Groups are based on “tax
units”. A tax unit is defined in the U.S. tax code as a married couple or a single
person, with their dependents if they have any. The total number of tax units in
2004 is 144 million and is taken from Piketty and Saez (2003, 2006). It is
estimated from census data as the sum of all adults (aged 18 and above in the
U.S. population) less all married women. In other words, this is the total number
of tax units in the United States if every family had been required to file an
individual tax return. In recent decades, about 90 to 95 percent of tax units file a
tax return. Non-filers have in general very low incomes and they owe little or no
income tax.
        The average income for each group of tax units is shown in column 2.
Income is defined as all sources of market income reported on income tax
returns. This includes wages and salaries (before employer and employee Social
Security and Medicare payroll taxes are deducted), bonuses and exercised
stock-options, employer and private pensions, self-employment income, business
income, dividends, interest, and rents, as well as realized capital gains.3 We also
exclude all government transfers such as Social Security retirement and disability
benefits, government-provided health benefits (Medicare and Medicaid),
unemployment and workers compensation, and all cash and in-kind welfare

        3
            Because realized capital gains are not an annual regular stream of income and tend to
be realized by individuals in a lumpy way once every few years, we rank tax units based on
income excluding realized capital gains when we define the income fractiles. We then add back
realized capital gains to the incomes of each of those income groups (Piketty and Saez, 2003 use
the same definition for one set of their top income share series). Ranking individuals based on
income including capital gains would make the individual income tax look less progressive as
capital gains have generally received a favorable treatment.
                                                                                        5

programs. Our admittedly simple approach sidesteps a number of issues about
how to measure income appropriately: for example, our income measure does
not include the value of imputed rent for homeowners and does not exclude
interest payments on debts such as mortgages or consumer credit. Our income
measure also excludes non-taxable benefits such as employer provided health
care. At the end of this section, we offer some further discussion of conceptual
issues that can arise in measuring income. We use the large publicly available
micro dataset of individual tax returns produced by IRS, available most years
from 1960 to 2001 to estimate individual income and construct our various
income fractiles. Full details on our estimation methodology, as well as a
comparison with estimates from previous contributions, are reported in appendix.




         Taxes, Tax Rates, and Tax Incidence
         We consider four federal taxes: the individual income tax, the corporate
income tax, the estate (and gift) tax, and the payroll tax financing disability,
retirement, and health benefits for the elderly. Those four federal taxes represent
over 90 percent of all federal taxes. The remaining federal taxes are primarily
excise taxes like those on gasoline, alcohol and tobacco and various other small
taxes such as stamp duties.
         The federal individual income tax is the largest tax, typically collecting 7-
10 percent of GDP in most years since the 1960s. Individual income taxes
declined sharply from 2000 to 2004 following the tax cuts of the Bush
administration, falling from 10.3 percent of GDP in 2000 to 7.0 percent of GDP in
2004. The payroll tax financing Social Security and Medicare has increased
significantly, climbing from about 2 percent of GDP in the 1960s to 6.4 percent of
GDP by 2004. The corporate income tax has shrunk dramatically: it was typically
3.5-4.0 percent of GDP in the 1960s, but had fallen to 1.6 percent of GDP by
2004. The estate and gift tax has always been very small relative to the other
taxes,    although    it   is   important   for   distributional   analysis   because   it
                                                                                         6

disproportionately affects those with higher incomes. The estate tax collected
about 0.6 percent of GDP in the 1960s, and 0.25 percent of GDP in 2004.
       Columns 3 to 6 display the average (not the marginal) tax rate for each of
the four federal taxes we are considering; that is, what share of income for that
group was collected by that tax in 2004. Column (7) displays the sum of the
average tax rate of all four taxes combined.
       We use the TAXSIM calculator developed at the National Bureau of
Economic Research (Coutts and Feenberg, 1993) to compute federal individual
income taxes.
        Payroll taxes are by definition paid based on wages and salaries and
shared between employers and employees. This distinction is in principle
irrelevant. We assume that both the employer and employee payroll tax is paid
by the wage earner, so that for most employees in recent years, the federal
payroll tax rate is 15.3% (and not 7.65%).
       We will assume that the corporate income tax falls entirely on capital
income and that all financial assets (and not only corporate stock) bear the tax
equally. Auerbach (2006) summarizes the literature on the incidence of the
corporate income tax and points out that there is still considerable uncertainty on
the question because of the inherent difficulty in measuring empirically the
economy-wide incidence of the corporate tax. Our assumption that the corporate
income tax falls on capital income in general can be seen as a middle-ground
assumption between two scenarios. In one scenario, the corporate income tax
falls solely on shareholders. Because corporate stock ownership is more
concentrated than wealth ownership in general, the corporate income tax would
look more progressive under this scenario. In the other scenario, the corporate
tax is shifted on to labor income, either in the form of reduced wages or
increased commodity prices. Because capital income is more concentrated than
labor income, the corporate income tax would look less progressive under this
scenario.4


4
  The increased openness of the US economy might have shifted the corporate tax more toward
labor income, which would accentuate the trends we document here.
                                                                                   7

       The federal estate tax is paid based on total net worth of the decedents
after various exemptions such as spousal bequests and charitable donations.
Only net estates larger than $1.5 million in 2004 are liable for the estate tax. As a
result, only about 1 percent of all adult decedents are liable for the estate tax in
2004. We use IRS published tabulations reporting the number of estates and
estate taxes paid by size of estate to estimate the amount of taxes paid by each
fractile of decedents (relative to the total number of adult deaths). We then
assume that those taxes are borne by the corresponding fractile of tax units. This
basic method is valid to the extent that ranking by income is relatively close to
ranking by wealth at the top of the distribution.


       How Taxes Affect the Income Distribution
       Column 8 of Table 1 displays the share of pre-tax income for each group.
Column 9 displays the share of post-tax income for each group. These statistics
illustrate several themes. First, the federal tax system as a whole was
progressive in 2004. The post-tax share of income is higher than the pre-tax
share of income for those income groups that are lower in the income
distribution; conversely, the post-tax share of income is lower than the pre-tax
share of income for the groups highest in the income distribution, above the 90th
percentile. Second, the statistics show that, even though the very top groups are
very small in terms of number of families, they represent a large share of income
earned, and an even larger share of total taxes paid. For example, the upper half
of 1 percent of the income distribution earned 15.6 percent of total, and paid 22.5
percent of all federal taxes.


       Some Caveats
       The calculations presented in Table 1 sidestep or ignore a number of
issues. We mention seven of those issues here.
       First,   government      transfers,   such   as   welfare   programs,   accrue
disproportionately to the bottom of the income distribution and also reduce
inequality in disposable income. Conceptually, transfers should be included (as a
                                                                                              8

negative) in the tax rates to estimate the full redistribution carried out by the
government through taxes and transfers. However, as our focus in this paper will
primarily be on the top of the income distribution, and since transfers represent a
very small fraction of middle and high-income earners incomes, ignoring
transfers has little impact on our results.
        Second and related, there is an argument that the payroll taxes that
finance Social Security benefits should not be treated as a pure tax because
Social Security benefits depend on payroll taxes paid. In principle, one would
want to subtract the value of future Social Security benefits from payroll taxes
paid on an individual basis and consider only the pure tax component of the tax.
For simplicity, we count the entire payroll tax financing Social Security as a tax.5
Social Security benefits are overall progressive (the progressive benefits formula
more than compensates for the lower life expectancy of lower income groups,
Liebman, 2002). Hence, taking into account Social Security benefits would make
the Social Security payroll tax look less regressive but would not affect much top
income groups.
        Third, we focus on annual incomes, which are not a perfect measure of
permanent income over the course of a lifetime. Several studies have shown
that, because of year-to-year transitory fluctuations in income, progressive
individual income taxes appear less progressive from a lifetime perspective than
from an annual perspective (for example, Fullerton and Rogers, 1993). However,
there is also substantial evidence that consumption tracks income closely, either
because households face borrowing constraints or because they do not plan
according to the classic inter-temporal utility model (Akerlof, 2005). Thus, the
best measure of economic affluence is probably in between the extreme cases of
the annual perspective and the lifetime perspective. Measuring lifetime income
requires longitudinal data, but there are no publicly available longitudinal data




5
  Medicare benefits are independent of payroll tax contributions, and hence the Medicare payroll
tax is a pure tax.
                                                                                           9

that do a good job of the very top of the U.S. income distribution. In this paper,
we focus solely on the annual perspective.6
       Fourth, our analysis ignores behavioral responses to taxation such as tax
avoidance, reduction in labor supply or savings due to taxation. Those behavioral
responses create an excess burden on taxpayers over and above the taxes paid;
Fullerton and Rogers (1993) build a general equilibrium model where they
estimate total tax burdens, including excess burdens. However, economists have
substantial disagreement on the size of behavioral responses to taxation, and so
considering the basic case with no behavioral response is a useful starting place.
       Fifth, we ignore untaxed income, which is especially important in the case
of in-kind employer benefits such as health care insurance and the imputed rent
of homeowners.7 Health benefits and pensions accrue disproportionately (relative
to income) to the middle and upper middle class and would reduce estimated
average tax rates for those groups. However, this would probably not affect much
the time series analysis for top groups.
       Sixth, a number of issues arise in thinking about the treatment of capital
gains. In our approach, capital gains serve as a way of counting corporate
income. After all, retained earnings are reflected in the stock prices and will be
part of our income definition when capital gains are realized on those stocks. In
the long-run and in the aggregate, realized capital gains on corporate stock
reported on individual tax returns are of comparable magnitude to retained
earnings from corporations estimated in national accounts. Realized capital gains
(or equivalently retained earnings) are net of corporate income taxes. Because
we include corporate income taxes in the analysis, we need to add back
corporate income taxes to income (see e.g., Feldstein, 1988). There are also
issues regarding what portion of capital gains should be counted as income, and
when it should be counted. In principle, capital gains should be counted as

6
  Kopczuk, Saez, and Song (2006) show that mobility has been quite stable within top wage
income groups since the 1950s suggesting taking a longer term perspective for measuring
income would probably not bias the trend of declining progressivity that we document here.
7
  Similarly, our income measure excludes contributions to employer pensions (either defined
benefits or defined contribution pensions), but we do include employer pensions when they are
                                                                                                  10

income when they accrue rather than when they are realized. However, our
income measure includes only realized capital mainly because unrealized gains
are difficult to observe.8 Also, there is an argument in principle for adjusting
capital income for inflation and only counting real gains as income, both in the
case of capital gains and in the case of interest income (Feldstein, 1988). We do
not attempt such a correction here.
        Finally, we ignore state and local taxes in this study. Federal taxes
represent about two-thirds of all U.S. taxes, the remaining third are state and
local taxes. State and local taxes in the United States are primarily of three types.
First, state income taxes (individual and corporate) tend to be progressive and
are about 25 percent of state and local tax revenues on average.9 Second,
property income taxes, primarily on residential real estate, are about 30 percent
of state and local tax revenue. Property taxes are progressive if incidence falls
primarily on property owners, but become regressive if they are shifted on rents.
Third, sales and excise taxes, which are regressive as lower income families
spend a larger fraction of their income on taxed consumption goods, are about
35 percent of state revenue. Overall, state and local taxes are believed to be
somewhat regressive but this depends on the assumed incidence of the property
tax. If the property tax is assumed to fall on owners of capital, then overall,
Pechman (1985) shows that state and local taxes are very close to being
proportional to income across income groups. In that case, ignoring state and
local states would be of no consequence when assessing overall tax
progressivity.




received. Thus, our pension income measure, like our measure of capital gains, can be viewed as
based on realization rather than accrual
8
  Capital gains are never realized on individual tax returns if the assets are transferred at death or
through inter-vivos gifts. Poterba and Weisbenner (2001) estimate that, in 1998, such capital
gains on transferred assets represent about 35 percent of the value of gross estates reported on
estate tax returns. The fraction of never realized gains passed at death for financial assets are
small relative to realized capital gains reported on individual tax returns and are ignored in this
study.
9
  State income taxes can be deducted as an itemized deduction from income for federal income
tax purposes. As we do not include state taxes in our analysis, we have also not deducted state
taxes in our individual income tax TAXSIM computations.
                                                                                   11


U.S Trends in Federal Tax Progressivity


       To examine the evolution of U.S. federal tax progressivity over time, it is
necessary to look at the patterns of how the tax code has evolved over time and
how sources and size of income – especially for the very top of the income
distribution – have evolved over time.


       Federal Tax Rates Over Time
       Figure 3 displays the average federal tax rate paid in 1960 and 2004 for
various groups along the income distribution. Again, as in Table 1, because the
latest IRS micro data is only available until year 2001 (before most of the recent
tax cuts took place), we report tax rates based on 2004 tax law, applied to
incomes reported in 2000 and adjusted for nominal and real growth.
       The federal tax system is clearly progressive. In 2004, the average tax
rate increases smoothly with income from less than 10 percent in the second
quintile (P20-40) to around 35 percent at the very top. In that year, the average
tax rate increases only modestly from 30 percent in the bottom half of the top
percentile (P99-99.5) to 35 percent at the very top (P99.99-100), suggesting that
the current federal tax system is relatively close to a flat tax rate within the top 1
percent (incomes above around $300,000 in 2004).
       The figure also shows how the total federal tax rate is decomposed into
individual income tax, payroll tax, corporate income tax, and estate tax average
rates. The individual income tax is the main component driving progressivity in
2004. The average individual tax rate is actually negative at the bottom of the
income distribution (primarily because of the refundable Earned Income tax
Credit) and increases to an average rate of over 25 percent at the very top. The
progressivity of the federal income tax is due to the increasing structure of
marginal tax rates coupled with exemptions and credits, which benefit lower
incomes disproportionately. The average tax rate, however, remains substantially
below the top marginal tax rate of 35 percent even at the very top, because of
lower tax rates on long-term capital gains and dividends (a 15 percent maximum
                                                                                  12

rate) and, to a lesser extent, deductions for mortgage interest payments and
charitable contributions.
       The corporate income tax and the estate tax are also progressive in 2004:
– they increase from a combined average rate of less than 2 percent at the
bottom of the income distribution to about 7 percent at the very top – but are
small relative to the individual income tax. Those two taxes are progressive
because capital income is concentrated at the top of the income distribution. The
estate tax also has a very progressive structure coupled with very large
exemptions, so that less than 1 percent of adults who die are liable to pay any
estate tax. Finally, the payroll tax is regressive, involving an average tax rate of
about 11 percent of total income below the top decile and declining to about 1
percent at the very top. This is due to the cap in the Social Security payroll tax
(above $87,900 in 2004) and the fact that labor income is a smaller fraction of
total income at the top than in the middle of the distribution.
       The contrast between the progressivity of federal taxes in 2004 and in
1960 is striking, as shown in Panel B in Figure 3. In 1960 federal tax system
imposed higher average tax rates on those with low incomes, then lower rates on
a middle group up to the 95th percentile, and much higher rates within the top 5
percent of the income distribution, especially in very top groups. The lower tax
burden in 1960 for the middle groups is largely due to the fact that the payroll tax,
which falls primarily on the groups from P20 to P95, was much smaller in 1960
than today. The 1960 federal tax system was very progressive even within the
top percentile with an average tax rate of around 35 percent in the bottom half of
the top percentile to over 70 percent in the top 0.01 percent.          This finding
illustrates the theme that it is important to decompose the top of the income
distribution into very small groups in order to capture the progressivity of a tax
system. Although very top groups contain few taxpayers, they account for a
substantial share of income earned, and an even larger share of taxes paid.
       Interestingly, the larger progressivity in 1960 is not mainly due to the
individual income tax. The average individual income tax rate in 1960 reached an
average rate of 31 percent at the very top, only slightly above the 25 percent
                                                                                 13

average rate at the very top in 2004. Within the 1960 version of the individual
income tax, lower rates on realized capital gains, as well as deductions for
interest payments and charitable contributions, reduced dramatically what
otherwise looked like an extremely progressive tax schedule, with a top marginal
tax rate on individual income of 91 percent.
       The greater progressivity of federal taxes in 1960, in contrast to 2004,
stems from the corporate income tax and the estate tax. The corporate tax
collected about 6.5 percent of total personal income in 1960 and only around 2.5
percent of total income today. Because capital income is very concentrated, it
generated a substantial burden on top income groups. The estate tax has also
decreased from 0.8 percent of total personal income in 1960 to about 0.35
percent of total income today. As a result, the burden of the estate tax relative to
income has declined very sharply since 1960 in the top income groups.
       Table 2 displays the pattern of federal average tax rates for different
income groups in 1960, 1980, 1990, 2000, and the projection for 2004. The table
shows a flattening of the tax rate structure. In 1960, average taxes collected were
fairly flat up from the 20th the 90th percentile, and then rose sharply. By 1980,
average taxes collected from the very top income groups, especially within the
top percentile, had declined sharply, while average tax rates collected from
between the 40th and 95th percentiles had risen. From 1980 to 1990, tax rates at
the top declined, while tax rates in the middle class stayed constant. In the
1990s, tax rates increased only within the top 5 percent. The 2004 projected tax
rates restore lower rates of 1990 at the top and reduce tax rates on the middle
class below the levels of 1980, 1990, or 2000.


       Income and Taxes At the Top of the Income Distribution
       The changes in progressivity of the income distribution since 1960 have
been most marked at the very top of the income distribution, which as Table 1
illustrated, accounts for a substantial share of total income. Piketty and Saez
(2003) document the evolution of the incomes of those at the very top of the
                                                                                  14

income distribution. Figure 2 displays the total share of income received by the
top 0.1 percent of the income distribution and its composition.
       Two important facts stand out. First, the share of income going to the top
0.1 percent of the income distribution has grown tremendously since the late
1970s: the share of total income received by the top 0.1 percent was around 2.5
of total income in the 1970s and reached a peak above 9 percent of total income
2000. In fact, most of the overall increase in the inequality of income has been
driven by the very top of the income distribution. The U.S. Bureau of the Census
reports, using a somewhat different definition of income than ours, that the top
quintile of the income distribution received 43-44 percent of all income in the
1970s, but this share had increased to about 50 percent by 2001. Piketty and
Saez (2003) show that most of the relative income gains for the top quintile have
been concentrated within the top 1 percent -- and especially the top 0.1 percent -
- with relatively modest gains in the top decile excluding the top percentile (P90-
95 and P95-99).
       Second, the composition of top incomes has changed substantially. Figure
2 shows the breakdown into wage income, business income, capital income,
realized capital gains, and imputed corporate taxes. In the 1960s, top incomes
were primarily composed of capital income: mostly dividends and capital gains.
The surge in top incomes since the 1970s has been driven in large part by a
steep increase in the labor income component, due in large part to the explosion
of executive compensation. As a result, labor income now represents a
substantial fraction of income at the top. This change in composition is important
to keep in mind, because the corporate and estate taxes that had such a strong
effect on creating progressivity in the 1960s would have relatively little effect on
labor income.
       Figure 3 shows how the progressivity of the federal income tax system
has mitigated income concentration since 1960. Panel A displays the share of
total income received by the top 0.1 percent of the distribution before and after all
federal taxes. Panel A shows that the federal tax system reduced income
concentration the most in the 1960s and 1970s when income concentration was
                                                                                              15

relatively low, and that the federal tax system has a relatively modest effect on
the top 0.1 percent income share in recent years when income inequality has
become higher. To put it another way, the pre-tax share of income for the top 0.1
percent rose from 2.6 percent in 1970 to 9.3 percent in 2000. The rise in after-tax
income shares was from 1.2 percent in 1970 to over 7.3 percent in 2000. In
percentage point terms, the increase in pre-tax incomes is slightly greater than
the increase in post-tax incomes. But in terms of observing what those with very
high incomes can afford to consume, the after-tax share of income for those in
this income group multiplied by a factor of 6.1, while the pre-tax share of income
multiplied by a factor of 3.5. The tax reductions enacted in 2001 and 2003 have
further weakened the redistributive power of the federal income tax today.10
        When the pattern of redistribution is broken down into different taxes, an
expected pattern emerges. The overall extent of redistribution from the very top
of the income distribution was higher in the 1960s, mainly because of the impact
of the corporate income tax and the estate tax. In more recent years, as the
relative magnitude of the corporate and estate taxes has diminished and as
average income tax rates have dropped a great deal at the bottom of the income
distribution, the income tax has become the primary element of progressivity –
that is, creating a gap between pre-tax and post-tax income for those at the
highest income levels -- in the overall federal tax code.
        Panel B of Figure 3 displays the average tax rate of the top 0.1% (on the
left axis) and shows that most of the decline was concentrated in a relatively brief
period from 1976 to 1988 when the average rate dropped from over 60% to 35%.
The share of taxes paid by various income groups is sometimes used as a
measure of progressivity, but this measure is improper and misleading. Panel B

        10
            It is a disputed question whether the surge in reported top incomes has been caused
by the reduction in taxation at the top through behavioral responses. There is clear evidence of
short-term responses to changes in tax rates through retiming of income realization or shifts from
the corporate to the individual tax base. Demonstrating a long-term causal relationship from top
tax rates to more economic activity at the top, and especially the surge in top wage compensation
is almost impossible (Saez, 2004). It is conceivable that causality might have run in reverse way
and that non-tax forces generated an increase in income concentration and that top income
earners were able to use their greater incomes to influence the political process and obtain a
reduction in tax progressivity subsequently.
                                                                                             16

also shows the fraction of total taxes paid by the top 0.1% income group (on the
right axis). The share of taxes paid is given by


Top 0.1% share of tax = Top 0.1% tax rate * Top 0.1% income share/ Average
tax rate.


Panel A shows that the share of income received by the top 0.1 percent has risen
dramatically over several decades, and it is not surprising the see that indeed the
share of tax series follows the income share series. But although the share of tax
paid by the top 0.1 percent of the income distribution has increased substantially
over the last 30 years, the average tax rate of the top 0.1% has declined
substantially over that same time. When the share of income received by the top
income groups is changing, the share of tax paid by those top income groups is a
misleading method for evaluating the progressivity of the tax system.


International Perspectives


        In this section, we apply the same methodology to France and the United
Kingdom, and we compare the resulting patterns of effective tax rates for 1970
and a recent year with those obtained for the United States.11 The top half of
displays the average tax rates in all three countries across income groups for
1970; the bottom half of the table shows the results for a recent year: 2005 in
France, 2004 in the United States, and 2000 in the United Kingdom. The table
also shows how those tax rates are broken down into individual income taxes,
payroll taxes, and estate and wealth taxes. We did not include the corporate tax
in the French and British analysis because it would have required a much more
in depth analysis. However, in contrast to the United States, the ratio of corporate

11
  The estimates presented for France and the U.K. rely on a number of simplifying assumptions
which are presented in the technical appendices to the working paper version Piketty and Saez
2006). In particular, we exclude the large value added taxes and excise taxes from our French
and U.K. estimates which are slightly regressive. Those taxes constitute about one third of tax
revenue in those countries. As France and the U.K. have very small local taxes, this indirect tax
                                                                                            17

taxes to has been fairly stable in France and the United Kingdom since 1960,
suggesting that including the corporate tax would not alter the direction of change
in tax progressivity in those countries. The British results build upon the top
income share series and individual tax rate series built by Atkinson (2006) and
the French results build upon Piketty (2003).
       Three key findings emerge from our international perspective. First, in all
three countries, individual income tax progressivity has declined substantially
since 1970. The decline has been particularly sharp in the United Kingdom,
where the average share of income collected by income tax for fractile P99.95-
100 dropped from over 69 percent to less than 35 percent in 2005. In contrast to
the United States, the very high British top marginal rates prevailing in 1970 were
not tempered by tax deductions and tax loopholes.
       In recent years, individual income tax burdens incurred by top income
groups are virtually identical in all three countries today, with average tax rates
around 30 percent at the very top. In particular, contrarily to popularly-held
beliefs, effective individual income tax rates currently incurred by top income
groups are smaller in France than in Anglo-Saxon countries. At fractile P99-99.5,
the average income tax rate was only 11.6 percent in France as of 2005, as
compared to 21.4 percent in the United States and 27.4 percent in the United
Kingdom. That is, most high-wage individuals currently pay a substantially higher
share of their income in the form of individual income taxes in the United States
or in the United Kingdom than in France. The statutory top marginal rate is
currently 48 percent in France, versus 35 percent in the United States and 40
percent in the United Kingdom.12 But the higher top marginal tax rates in France
are largely undone by the large base exemptions and tax deductions that have
always characterized the French individual income tax system. Also, the share of
French taxpayers facing these very high marginal rates is relatively low. The last
columns of the recent data show that the share of income received by the top 0.5

exclusion is thus comparable to excluding the local and state taxes in the U.S. case, which are
also seen as slightly regressive.
                                                                                           18

or 0.1 percent of the income distribution in France is much smaller than in the
United States or the United Kingdom.
        In 1970, the progressivity of the tax code taken as a whole was
unambiguously smaller in France than in the United Kingdom or the United
States. For example, the top .01 percent of the distribution paid 75 percent of
income in taxes in the United States in 1970 over 90 percent of income in taxes
in the United Kingdom, but only 48.8 percent of this group’s total income went to
taxes in France. During most of the post-war period, income tax progressivity
has been substantially larger in Anglo-Saxon countries than in France and most
other continental European countries. For example, Dell (2006) presents an
analysis of Germany, which appears fairly close to France.
       This pattern illustrates a general point made by Lindert (2004): countries in
which government spending is a fairly high share of GDP have always relied on a
mix of taxes that create relatively low distortion, with less progressivity, large
exemptions for capital income, and so on. Meanwhile, Anglo-Saxon countries in
which government spending is a relatively low share of GDP have historically
relied on more progressive taxes. According to Lindert, this pattern is the key
reason why the huge rise of social transfers in high government-spending
countries such as France did not generate large efficiency losses and hence
reductions in aggregate growth. Although Lindert’s point holds true if one adopts
a long-run perspective, the novelty from the recent decades is that Anglo-Saxon
countries have gone through a series of significant top rate cuts since the 1970s,
and have converged (and overshot) towards the average of the OECD countries
in terms of the progressivity of their overall tax code.
       A second major finding from Table 2 is that the payroll tax burden has
increased substantially over the 1970-2005 period in all three countries. The rise
in payroll tax burden has been particularly large in France. As of 2005, the
employee payroll tax is 22.5 percent of gross wages in France, and the employer
payroll tax is 42.5 percent. In practice, this means that the total labor cost

12
  Estimates for France were computed using 2005 tax law, and did not take into account the new
income tax cuts recently announced by the French government (the top marginal rate is
                                                                                  19

corresponding to a net wage of 77.5 is as large as 142.5 (and the income tax
then applies to the remaining 77.5). In France in 1970, the employee and
employer payroll tax rates were respectively 8.2 percent and 32.8 percent of
gross wages. Moreover, most payroll taxes were capped in 1970, and most have
been gradually uncapped between 1970 and 2005 and now apply to all wages,
including very top wages.
        As all internationally-mobile high-wage earners should know, the reason
why the overall tax burden is on average much higher in France than in Anglo-
Saxon countries has little to do with the individual income tax, and a lot to do with
the many social contributions levied through payroll taxation. However, because
very top incomes are disproportionately composed of business and capital
income rather than wage income (and especially so in France), the overall impact
of payroll taxation on tax progressivity is regressive. In France, as of 2005, the
regressivity of the payroll tax system undoes the progressivity of the individual
income tax system, so that the resulting tax system is basically flat. The last two
columns of Table 2 for France in 2005 show that the pre-tax and post-tax shares
of income in France are almost the same. For instance, the combined income
and payroll average tax rate is 36.6 percent at the level of fractile P0-90 (1.8
percent income tax, 34.8 percent payroll tax), and 37.3 percent at the level of
fractile P99.99-100 (28.8 percent income tax, 8.5 percent payroll tax). Of course,
the overall picture of how government affects the distribution of income would
look substantially different if we were to look at the benefits side, which are not
taken into account in this paper, and not only at the tax side.
       The third key conclusion emerging from our international perspective is
that in spite of the parallel evolutions of income and payroll tax components,
overall tax progressivity has not evolved in the same way in all three countries
during the 1970-2005 period. Figure 6 illustrates this by displaying the (full)
average tax rates across income groups in the three countries in 1970 (Panel A)
and more recently (Panel B). In this case, however, we show the bottom 90
percent of the income distribution grouped together, while separating out the

scheduled to drop to around 42 percent in 2007).
                                                                                  20

percentiles above which make such a substantial difference to productivity.
Progressivity of the overall tax code has unambiguously declined in the United
States and in the United Kingdom. The average share of income paid by those at
the very top of the income distribution has dropped substantially. However,
progressivity in the overall French tax code did not change much from 1970 to
2005, and may even have increased somewhat, especially at the very top end of
the distribution. This is due to a combination of two factors: the estate tax and the
wealth tax. First, while the impact of the estate tax on progressivity has declined
enormously in the United States and in the United Kingdom, it has increased in
France. The progressivity of estate taxation has always been fairly moderate in
France, just as in a number of continental European countries such as Germany,
especially for estates transmitted to spouses and children (so-called “direct line”
estates). The top marginal estate tax rate was only 20 percent in France until
1983, when it was raised to 40 percent. In contrast, the top marginal estate tax
rate in the United States and in the United Kingdom was above 70 percent during
most of the post-World War II period, and was gradually reduced since the
1980s. As a consequence, the contribution of estate taxation to overall tax
progressivity has declined substantially in the United States and in the United
Kingdom between 1970 and 2005, while it has increased somewhat in France.
       The other important factor is the creation of a wealth tax in France
following the 1981 election, which brought a socialist party to power. France then
repealed the wealth tax in 1986 and re-introduced it in 1989. It is now levied on
the top 1 percent wealth holders, with a top marginal rate of 1.8 percent on
wealth above 15 millions euros (or approximately $20 million U.S. dollars). As
one can see from Table 2, the contribution of the wealth tax to overall tax
progressivity is sizeable. The wealth tax pushes the effective average taxes
above 60 percent in France in 2005. This level of average taxation for groups at
the very top of the income scale in France in 2005 is still far less than the levels
observed in 1970 in the United States and in the United Kingdom for the very top
groups. Thus, the French socialist governments of the 1980s-1990s are
                                                                                 21

supporters of progressive taxation, but less so than the Democrat and Labor
Anglo-Saxon governments of the 1950s-1960s.
       Although these comparative results for the United States, France and the
United Kingdom results rely on incomplete and exploratory estimates, we believe
they illustrate several points. First, to assess progressivity of an overall tax
system, it is critical to take a broad view of the tax system. Without taking estate
and wealth taxation into account, it would not be apparent that tax progressivity
has increased somewhat in a country like France between 1970 and 2005, while
it has declined enormously in the United Kingdom and in the United States.
Second, these findings suggest show that Lindert’s (2004) law is either about to
change or has already done so. That is, Anglo-Saxon countries with relatively low
levels of government spending relative to GDP used to have a more progressive
tax system than high-spending welfare states. However, today, a high-spending
welfare state like France seems to display both higher average tax rates and
higher tax progressivity. This interesting issue deserves further research. In
particular, one would need to look at a much broader set of countries, especially
from the viewpoint of intra-European tax competition, and to develop more
systematic and rigorous methodologies encompassing a broader set of taxes.


Conclusion


       This paper has discussed the progressivity of the U.S. federal tax system,
its evolution since 1960, and how it compares with other countries. Several
important findings emerge.
       First, the progressivity of the U.S. federal tax system at the top of the
income distribution has declined dramatically since the 1960s. For example, the
top 0.01 percent of earners paid over 70 percent of their income in federal taxes
in 1960, while they paid only about 35 percent of their income in 2005. Average
federal tax rates for the middle class have remained roughly constant over time.
This dramatic drop in progressivity at the upper end of the income distribution is
due primarily to a drop in corporate taxes and to a lesser extent estate and gift
                                                                                              22

taxes which fall on capital income combined with a sharp change in the
composition of top incomes away from capital income and toward labor income.
The reduction in top marginal individual income tax rates has contributed only
marginally to the decline of progressivity of the federal tax system, because with
various deductions and exemptions, along with favored treatment for capital
gains, the average tax rate paid by those with very high income levels has
changed much less over time than the top marginal rates. These large reductions
in tax progressivity since the 1960s took place primarily during two periods: the
Reagan presidency in the 1980s and the Bush administration in the early 2000s.
The only significant increase in tax progressivity since 1960 took place in the
early 1990s during the first Clinton administration.
        Second, the most dramatic changes in the federal tax system progressivity
almost always take place within the top 1 percent of income earners, with
relatively small changes occurring below the top percentile. For example, many
of the recent tax provisions that are currently hotly debated in Congress, such as
whether there should be a permanent reduction in tax rates for capital gains and
dividends, or whether the estate tax should be repealed, affect primarily the top
percentile of the distribution – or even just an upper slice of the top percentile.
This pattern strongly suggests that, in contrast to the standard political economy
model, the progressivity of the current tax system is not being shaped by the self-
interest of the median voter.13
        Third, international comparisons confirm that is it critical to take into
account other taxes than the individual income tax to properly assess the extent
of overall tax progressivity, both for time trends and for cross-country
comparisons. We hope that the preliminary international comparisons presented
in this paper will contribute to stimulate more systematic comparative research in
this area.



13
   Permanent reductions in dividend and capital gains combined with a repeal in the estate tax
would certainly reduce the current progressivity of federal taxes and favor large wealth holders.
The Alternative Mininum Tax, which is not indexed for inflation and hits more and more tax filers,
will mostly increase tax burdens on the upper middle class but will not affect much the top 0.1%.
                                                                             23



References

Akerlof, George A., (2005) “The Missing Motivation in Macroeconomics”,
Presidential Address, American Economic Association, 2007, preliminary draft.

Atkinson, Anthony B. (2006) “The Distribution of Top Incomes in the United
Kingdom 1908-2000”, in Eds. A. B. Atkinson and T. Piketty, Top Incomes over
the Twentieth Century: A Contrast Between European and English Speaking
Countries, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Auerbach, Alan (2006) “Who Bears the Corporate Tax?”, in Ed. J. Poterba Tax
Policy and the Economy 20, Cambridge: the MIT Press.

Congressional Budget Office, (2001) Effective Federal Tax Rates, 1979-1997,
U.S Government Printing Press: Washington DC (annual updates available
online).

Dell, Fabien (2006), “The Distribution of Top Incomes in Germany, 1890-2000”,
in Eds. A. B. Atkinson and T. Piketty, Top Incomes over the Twentieth Century: A
Contrast Between European and English Speaking Countries, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Feldstein, Martin (1988) “Imputing Corporate Tax Liabilities to Individual
Taxpayers”, National Tax Journal, 41(1), March, 37-59.

Fullerton, Don and Rogers, Diane Lim. Who Bears the Lifetime Tax Burden?
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1993.

Kasten, Richard; Sammartino, Frank and Toder, Eric. "Trends in Federal Tax
Progressivity, 1980-93," J. Slemrod, Tax Progressivity and Income Inequality.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994, pp. 9-50.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, Saez, Emmanuel, and Jae Song (2006) “Income Mobility in
the United States, 1937-2004: Evidence from Social Security Earnings Records”,
Working Paper.

Liebman, Jeffrey, “Redistribution in the Current U.S. Social Security System” in
Martin Feldstein and Jeffrey B. Liebman, editors, The Distributional Aspects of
Social Security and Social Security Reform (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press), 2002.

Lindert, Peter (2004), Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth
since the 18th Century, Cambridge University Press
                                                                         24

Parisi, Michael (2004-05) “Individual Income Tax Rates and Shares, 2002”,
Statistics of Income Bulletin, Winter, 20-58.

Pechman, J. Who Paid the Taxes: 1966-85? Washington DC: Brookings, 1985.

Pechman, Joseph A. and Okner, Benjamin A. Who Bears the Tax Burden?
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1974.

Piketty, Thomas (2003), “Income Inequality in France, 1901-1998”, Journal of
Political Economy, 111(5), 1004-1042.

Piketty Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez (2003), “Income Inequality in the United
States, 1913-1998”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 1-39.

Poterba, James and Scott Weisbenner (2001) “The Distributional Burden of
Taxing Estates and Unrealized Capital Gains at Death,” Rethinking Estate and
Gift Taxation, edited by William G. Gale, James R. Hines, and Joel Slemrod,
Brookings Institution, 422-449.

Saez, Emmanuel (2004), "Reported Incomes and Marginal Tax Rates, 1960-
2000: Evidence and Policy Implications" in Ed. J. Poterba Tax Policy and the
Economy 18, Cambridge: the MIT Press.

Strudler, Michael, Petska Tom, and Ryan Petska, "Further Analysis of the
Distribution of Income and Taxes, 1979-2003." October 2005, Internal Revenue
Service Working Paper.
     Table 1. Income and Federal Tax Rate Statistics in 2004 (based on 2000 inflated incomes)

                                                                    Average tax rates (percent)                           Income shares

                                                              Payroll
                                                              (Social
                              Average                        security+           Federal                        Total    Pre-tax   Post-tax
                               Income              Federal medicare) Federal      Estate                       Federal   income    income
   Income Groups              (pre-tax)           Individual    Tax    Corporate and Gift                       Taxes     share     share
        (1)                      (2)                  (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)                           (7)       (8)       (9)
    Full Population            $52,110                11.5            9.3            2.3           0.4            23.4    100.0     100.0
(144 million families)

         P20-40                $15,897                -3.2           10.6            2.0           0.0            9.4      6.1       7.2
         P40-60                $29,870                 3.2           11.2            1.7           0.0            16.1    11.5       12.6
         P60-80                $52,137                 7.3           11.6            1.6           0.0            20.5    20.0       20.8
         P80-90                $83,012                 9.2           11.9            1.6           0.0            22.7    15.9       16.1
       P90-95                 $117,709                11.6           11.5            1.8           0.0            24.9    11.3       11.1
       P95-99                 $199,033                16.4            8.1            2.5           0.1            27.2    15.3       14.5
      P99-99.5                $428,690                21.4            4.6            3.7           1.6            31.3     4.1        3.7
     P99.5-99.9               $863,607                23.8            3.0            4.3           1.9            33.0     6.6        5.8
     P99.9-99.99             $3,158,720               25.1            1.6            4.9           2.4            34.1     5.5        4.7
      P99.99-100            $18,113,612               26.2            1.4            4.6           2.5            34.7     3.5       3.0


Notes: Computations are based on income tax return statistics and NBER TAXSIM calculator.
They are based on incomes from 2000 adjusted for growth and using 2004 tax law.
Families are ranked based on market income excluding realized capital gains and imputed payroll and corporate taxes.
P20-40 denotes families between percentile 20th and percentile 40th of the income distribution (second quintile), etc.
Average income includes realized capital gains and imputed payroll and corporate taxes. Tax rates are estimated
relative to income including realized capital gains and imputed payroll and corporate taxes.
Payroll tax includes employee+employer Social Security and Medicare taxes (excludes payroll taxes for unemployment
and workers compensation)
    Table 2. Federal Tax Rates by Income Groups from 1960 to 2004

                                   Average federal tax rates (percent)

 Income Groups             1960         1970          1980          1990        2000          2004
      (1)                   (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)
  Full Population          21.4          23.3         26.6          25.8         27.4         23.4

       P20-40              13.9          18.5         16.3          16.2         13.1          9.4
       P40-60              15.9          20.2         21.4          21.0         20.0         16.1
       P60-80              16.7          20.7         24.5          24.3         23.9         20.5
       P80-90              17.4          20.5         26.7          26.2         26.4         22.7
      P90-95               18.7          21.4         27.9          27.9         28.7         24.9
      P95-99               23.5          25.6         31.0          28.6         31.1         27.2
     P99-99.5              34.0          36.1         37.6          31.5         35.7         31.3
    P99.5-99.9             41.4          44.6         43.0          33.0         38.4         33.0
    P99.9-99.99            55.3          59.1         51.0          34.3         40.2         34.1
    P99.99-100             71.4          74.6         59.3          35.4         40.8         34.7


The Table displays the average federal tax rate (including individual, corporate, payroll, and estate)
for various groups of the income distribution, for various years.
2004 figures are based on 2004 tax law applied to 2000 incomes adjusted for economic growth.
                                                          Table 3. International and Historical Comparison of Tax Rates

                                              1970 (US, France, and UK)                                                         2004 (US), 2005 (France), 2000 (UK)
                                  Average tax rates (percent)                             Shares (percent)                   Average tax rates (percent)             Shares (percent)


                                               Estate,                                                                                  Estate,
                   Individua                  Gift, and Corporat                          Pre-tax Post-tax         Individua           Gift, and Corporat            Pre-tax Post-tax
    Income          l Income Payroll           Wealth     e Tax           Total           income income             l Income Payroll    Wealth     e Tax     Total   income income
    Groups              Tax  Taxes              Tax     (US only)         Taxes            share   share                Tax  Taxes       Tax     (US only)   Taxes    share   share



A. United States
Full Population        12.5          5.8          0.7          4.3          23.3           100.00     100.00         11.5      9.3       0.4       2.3       23.4    100.00   100.00

P0-90                  9.9           7.2         0.0           3.2          20.2            67.61      70.54         5.4      11.5       0.0       1.5       18.5    53.75     57.28
P90-95                 13.7          4.5         0.0           3.2          21.4            10.76      11.03         11.6     11.5       0.0       1.8       24.9    11.29     11.07
P95-99                 16.1          3.0         0.7           5.7          25.6            12.60      12.23         16.4     8.1        0.1       2.5       27.2    15.28     14.51
P99-99.5               20.7          1.5         3.8           10.0         36.1            2.87       2.39          21.4     4.6        1.6       3.7       31.3    4.11      3.69
P99.5-99.9             25.8          0.9         5.8           12.0         44.6            3.63       2.62          23.8     3.0        1.9       4.3       33.0    6.63      5.80
P99.9-99.99            31.5          0.4         12.5          14.7         59.1            1.76       0.94          25.1     1.6        2.4       4.9       34.1    5.46      4.69
P99.99-100             32.2          0.1         23.4          19.0         74.6            0.76       0.25          26.2     1.4        2.5       4.6       34.7    3.48      2.96

B. France
Full Population         5.3         20.8          0.3                       26.4           100.00     100.00         3.8      33.3       0.7                 37.8    100.00   100.00

P0-90                  2.3          24.0          0.0                       26.3            69.30      69.39         1.8      34.8       0.1                 36.7    68.93     70.19
P90-95                 6.4          17.6          0.2                       24.2            10.65      10.97         4.5      33.7       0.6                 38.8    11.57     11.39
P95-99                 10.6         14.1          0.4                       25.1            12.51      12.74         7.0      31.4       1.4                 39.8    12.84     12.44
P99-99.5               16.8         10.6          0.8                       28.2            2.59       2.52          11.6     26.5       2.2                 40.3    2.36      2.27
P99.5-99.9             21.9         7.4           1.9                       31.2            3.09       2.88          16.4     21.4       5.1                 43.0    2.67      2.45
P99.9-99.99            30.2         4.2           4.2                       38.6            1.37       1.14          22.3     16.5       8.9                 47.8    1.19      1.00
P99.99-100             40.1         1.7           6.9                       48.8            0.50       0.35          28.8     8.5        24.2                61.5    0.43      0.26

C. United Kingdom
Full Population        17.1          7.0          1.1                       25.1           100.00     100.00         15.0      8.3       0.3                 23.7    100.00   100.00

P0-90                  13.0          8.1         0.0                        21.2            71.64      75.42         9.7      7.6        0.0                 17.3    61.22     66.34
P90-95                 19.0          5.8         0.2                        25.0            10.10      10.12         15.8     13.8       0.0                 29.6    11.72     10.81
P95-99                 25.0          4.1         2.1                        31.2            11.41      10.49         21.7     11.9       1.0                 34.6    14.79     12.66
P99-99.5               32.3          2.4         5.5                        40.3            2.40       1.91          27.4     10.1       1.3                 38.8    3.45      2.76
P99.5-99.9             41.3          1.6         10.4                       53.4            2.86       1.78          30.5     8.6        1.3                 40.5    4.81      3.76
P99.9-99.95            52.3          1.0         16.5                       69.8            0.57       0.23          33.2     7.6        1.4                 42.2    1.30      0.98
P99.95-100             69.2          0.6         21.9                       91.7            1.01       0.11          34.5     6.5        1.5                 42.5    3.42      2.58


Notes: Computations based on income tax return statistics. United Kingdom computations based on Atkinson (2006).
See Piketty and Saez (2006) for complete details on methodology.
Note that top group in the United Kingdom is P99.95-100 (and not P99.99-100 as in the US or France)
US numbers are based on 2004 tax law applied to 2000 incomes (adjusted to economic growth).
France numbers are based on 2005 tax law applied to 1998 incomes (adjusted to economic growth).
UK numbers are based on 2000 tax law applied to 2000 incomes (adjusted to economic growth).
UK and French computations exclude the corporate income tax.
                                             A. Tax rates in 2004                                                                                                      B. Tax rates in 1960
       80%                                                                                                                         80%

       70%                                                                                                                         70%

       60%                     Individual Tax            Payroll Tax                                                               60%                     Individual Tax         Payroll Tax


       50%                     Corporate Tax             Estate Tax                                                                50%                     Corporate Tax          Estate Tax


       40%                                                                                                                         40%

       30%                                                                                                                         30%

       20%                                                                                                                         20%

       10%                                                                                                                         10%

        0%                                                                                                                         0%
             P20-40


                      P40-60


                                    P60-80


                                                P80-90


                                                           P90-95


                                                                      P95-99


                                                                                P99-99.5


                                                                                           P99.5-99.9


                                                                                                        P99.9-99.99


                                                                                                                      P99.99-100




                                                                                                                                         P20-40


                                                                                                                                                  P40-60


                                                                                                                                                              P60-80


                                                                                                                                                                         P80-90


                                                                                                                                                                                  P90-95


                                                                                                                                                                                           P95-99


                                                                                                                                                                                                    P99-99.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                               P99.5-99.9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P99.9-99.99


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P99.99-100
                                                                                                      FIGURE 1
                                                                               Federal Tax Rates in the United States in 2004 and 1960


Figures display the tax rate for each of the 4 federal taxes for various groups of the income distribution
in 2004 (based on 2000 incomes adjusted for economic growth) and in 1960.
    10%

      9%
                                Wage Income                          Business Income
      8%

      7%
                                Capital Income                       Capital Gains
      6%

      5%

      4%

      3%

      2%

      1%

      0%
           1960
                  1962
                         1964
                                 1966
                                        1968
                                               1970
                                                      1972
                                                             1974
                                                                    1976
                                                                           1978
                                                                                  1980
                                                                                         1982
                                                                                                1984
                                                                                                       1986
                                                                                                              1988
                                                                                                                     1990
                                                                                                                            1992
                                                                                                                                   1994
                                                                                                                                          1996
                                                                                                                                                 1998
                                                                                                                                                        2000
                                       FIGURE 2
                  The Top 0.1% Income Share and Composition, 1960-2001

The figure displays the income share of the top 0.1% tax units, and how the top 0.1% incomes are
divided into four income components: wages and salaries (including exercised stock options),
business income (S-corporation profits, partnership profits, sole proprietorship profits), capital income (di
interest and rents), realized capital gains. Imputed corporate taxes are included in the corresponding cat
Top 0.1% is defined based on individual market income excluding realized capital gains and corporate ta
                               A. Top 0.1% income share, before and after tax                                                 B. Top 0.1% average tax rate and share of taxes paid
                         10%                                                                                            70%                                                          14%

                         9%
                                    Full income before tax                                                              60%                                                          12%
                         8%
Top 0.1% income shares




                         7%         After all federal taxes                                                             50%                                                          10%




                                                                                                                                                                                           Share of taxes paid
                                                                                                     Average tax rate
                         6%
                                                                                                                        40%                                                          8%
                         5%

                         4%                                                                                             30%                                                          6%

                         3%                                                                                             20%                                                          4%
                         2%                                                                                                                       Average Tax Rate
                                                                                                                        10%                       share tax paid                     2%
                         1%
                         0%                                                                                             0%                                                           0%
                               1960
                               1962
                               1964
                               1966
                               1968
                               1970
                               1972
                               1974
                               1976
                               1978
                               1980
                               1982
                               1984
                               1986
                               1988
                               1990
                               1992
                               1994
                               1996
                               1998
                               2000




                                                                                                                              1960
                                                                                                                              1962
                                                                                                                              1964
                                                                                                                              1966
                                                                                                                              1968
                                                                                                                              1970
                                                                                                                              1972
                                                                                                                              1974
                                                                                                                              1976
                                                                                                                              1978
                                                                                                                              1980
                                                                                                                              1982
                                                                                                                              1984
                                                                                                                              1986
                                                                                                                              1988
                                                                                                                              1990
                                                                                                                              1992
                                                                                                                              1994
                                                                                                                              1996
                                                                                                                              1998
                                                                                                                              2000
                                                                          FIGURE 3
                                       Top 0.1% income shares before and after tax, average tax rate, and share of taxes paid
                                 A. Tax rates in 1970                                                                                B. Tax rates today

       100%                                                                                            100%

        90%                     France                                                                   90%
                                                                                                                                  France
        80%                     United Kingdom                                                           80%
                                                                                                                                  United Kingdom
        70%                     United States                                                            70%                      United States
        60%                                                                                              60%

        50%                                                                                              50%

        40%                                                                                              40%

        30%                                                                                              30%

        20%                                                                                              20%

        10%                                                                                              10%

         0%                                                                                               0%




                                                                                                               P0-90



                                                                                                                         P90-95



                                                                                                                                       P95-99



                                                                                                                                                  P99-99.5



                                                                                                                                                             P99.5-99.9



                                                                                                                                                                          P99.9-99.99



                                                                                                                                                                                        P99.99-100
              P0-90



                       P90-95



                                      P95-99



                                                    P99-99.5



                                                               P99.5-99.9



                                                                            P99.9-99.99



                                                                                          P99.99-100

                                                                                  FIGURE 4
                                               Tax Rates in France, the United Kingdom, and the United States in 1970 and today


Figure displays tax rates across income groups in the three countries.
Note that tax rates in the US include the 4 federal income taxes.
Tax rates in France and the United Kingdom include individual income taxes, payroll taxes, and estate and wealth taxes
but exclude corporate income taxes.
In the United Kingdom, the two top groups are P99.9-99.95 and P99.95-100 (instead of P99.9-99.99 and P99.99-100)
Appendix A: Sources and Methodology for Income and Tax Rates Statistics for
the United States 1960-2004


A.1 Data and Methodology


We use the publicly available individual tax return micro data constructed by the IRS.
The data are repeated cross sections available quasi-annually from 1960 to 2001.1
The data oversample high income tax returns and allow a very detailed analysis of
the top of the income distribution.


First, we rank tax returns based on a measure of gross income, which includes the
sum of all market income components reported on tax returns but excluding realized
capital gains. Those components include wages and salaries, employer and private
pensions, small business income (sole proprietorships, partnerships, subchapter S
corporations), taxable interest income, dividends, net rents, and other smaller items
such as royalties or fiduciary income reported on tax returns. Our measure of income
is consistent over the years and is essentially defined as Adjusted Gross Income
(AGI) for tax purposes less realized capital gains included in AGI, less government
transfers included in AGI such as Unemployment Insurance or Social Security
Benefits, plus all the small adjustments which are made to gross income obtain AGI
(such as moving expenses, self-employment taxes, etc.).


Second, we define groups such as quintiles, top decile, top percentile, etc. based on
all tax units in the United States had everybody been required to file a tax return. This
total number of tax units is taken from Piketty and Saez (2003) and was estimated
from census data as the sum of all single adults (aged 20 and above) plus all married
couples. From 1960 to 2001, about 90% of tax units did file a tax return. We assume
that non-filing tax units earn 20% of the average income of filing units. Non-filers tend
to be retirees with social security transfer income and very small market incomes.


Third, we compute income earned by each group as the market income used for
ranking tax units plus realized capital gains reported on tax returns plus the employer


1
    All years except 1961, 1963, and 1965 are available.
part of federal payroll taxes (which is not included in wages and salaries reported on
tax returns) plus imputed corporate taxes (see below for the imputation method). The
shares of income accruing to each group are obtained by dividing the income of the
group by total income from all groups (assuming again that non-filing units earn 20%
of the average income of filing units).


Fourth, we compute taxes at the individual level in the micro-data as follows:


Individual federal income tax is computed using the TAXSIM calculator developed at
the NBER. When doing those calculations, we do not deduct state income tax
liabilities for federal tax purposes. As a result, our federal tax liability is slightly larger
than the actual federal tax liability but gives a more accurate picture of federal tax
progressivity as we are ignoring state taxes in this analysis.


Payroll taxes are computed based on the simple rate formulas. We include both the
employee and the employer component of federal payroll taxes, which finance the
Social Security and Disability benefits as well as Medicare benefits. For example, in
2004, those taxes are equal to 15.3 percent of wages and salaries up to the $90,000
cap and 2.9% of wages and salaries above the $90,000 cap. The tax return data do
not provide the breakdown of wages salaries at the individual level but payroll taxes
are based on individual wages and salaries. As a result, we assume that wages and
salaries for married tax filers are taxed up to 120% of the individual cap.


Corporate taxes are assumed to fall on all capital income earned by financial assets
in the U.S. economy.2 We first compute total capital income earned by individuals as
the sum of all capital income reported on tax returns (defined as realized capital
gains, interest, dividends, rents and royalties, fiduciary income, and two thirds of
profits from small businesses) and capital income earned by pension and insurance
funds. The amount of capital income earned by pension and insurance funds is
computed so that the ratio of capital income from those funds to capital income
reported on individual returns is the same as the ratio of pension and insurance fund
assets to other financial assets held by individuals (from the flow of funds accounts).

2
  We do not assume that corporate taxes fall on returns to real estate assets because we ignore
imputed rents of home owners in this study.
       We then compute an effective corporate tax rate defined as federal corporate
tax liabilities (accruing in the current calendar year and reported in the National
Income Accounts) divided by total capital income estimated as above.
       This corporate rate is applied to capital income reported on tax returns
(defined as above). This corporate rate is also applied to estimated capital income
form pension and insurance funds. We then assume that this part of the corporate tax
falls proportionately on wages and salaries and pensions (as the vast majority of
returns from pension funds accrues to current employees and retired employees).


Total federal estate and gift taxes are taken from National Income Accounts. We
assume that estate and gift taxes fall on decedents. We assume that the top 1%
decedents are in the top 1% income group, etc. We define the top 1% decedents as
one percent of all adult decedents (aged 20 and above) in the United States. Then,
using the distribution tables produced by the IRS for estate tax, we estimate the
fraction of estate taxes paid by the top 1% decedents. We then assume that the top
1% income earners bear the same fraction of all estate and gifts taxes estimated in
the National Income Accounts.


Once the four federal taxes are computed for each group, we divide taxes paid by
income earned for each group to obtain the corresponding tax rates. The total federal
tax rate is the sum of all four taxes.


Table A0 displays the total number of tax units, the number of tax returns actually
filed, and the nominal average income per tax unit.


Tables A1 and A2 display the pre-tax and post-tax (respectively) income shares for
the various income groups we consider.


Table A3 reports the tax rates for each of the four taxes we consider (individual,
payroll, corporate, and estate) as we as the total tax rate for all the income groups we
consider.


A.2 Comparison with US government agencies estimates
Government agencies such as the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) produce annual statistics on tax progressivity in
the United States. Our approach differs from the IRS statistics (Parisi, 2004-05;
Strudler et al., 2005), because those IRS statistics ignore other federal taxes such as
the corporate income tax, the estate tax, or payroll taxes.


CBO (2001) has also produced federal tax estimates by income groups for the period
1979-2001 (updated to 2004). The department of Treasury and the Joint Committee
on Taxation also produce distributional analyses to evaluate tax reforms. Their
distributional analyses are close to those of CBO (see CBO, 2001). Those two
agencies do not produce systematic annual estimations as the CBO does but rather
produce distributional calculations for any tax reform that is proposed by the Treasury
department or Congress. As a result, we will focus on the comparison with CBO
estimates. CBO estimates differ from the current estimates for a number of reasons
(see Chapter 2 in CBO (2001) for a detailed methodological description). By order of
importance:


       First, CBO focuses primarily on quintiles and breaks down the top quintile in
the top decile, and top percentile but does not study smaller groups within the top
percentile. Hence while our analysis is primarily focused on progressivity within the
top decile and especially the top percentile, CBO focuses more on overall
progressivity.
       Second and related, CBO does not include estate taxes in its estimates which
is not very important below the top percentile but would substantially change our
findings within top groups. In contrast to our study, CBO does include federal excise
taxes (mostly taxes on tobacco, alcohol and gasoline) which are relatively small and
negligible at the top.
       Third, CBO estimates are based on a more comprehensive definition of
income that the one we use. CBO definition also includes the imputed cash value of
employer provided benefits (such as health insurance), voluntary retirement
contributions (such as 401(k)s),3 and all transfer programs from the government


3
  CBO (2001) acknowledges that counting both workers contributions to retirement plans and pension
withdrawals of retirees is double counting. Therefore, it seems more rational to us to count only
income when the tax is due (typically at retirement for most US retirement programs).
(cash welfare but also in-kind programs such as Medicaid, and Medicare, food
stamps). Our view is that an AGI based measure of income is much more familiar to
readers than a more comprehensive measure including in-kind employer benefits.
More importantly, we believe that government transfers should be conceptually
considered as part of the tax and transfer system as they are two tools that the
government uses simultaneously for redistribution. Hence we think that it is
preferable to ignore transfers entirely (and focus on top groups where they are not
important) as we do here rather than count them in income and offer a partial and
somewhat arbitrary view of government redistribution as the CBO does.
        Furthermore, in the CBO study, income groups are determined based on full
income including realized gains. This latter assumption reduces significantly
individual income tax rates at the top in the period 1979-1986 when realized capital
gains were treated very favourably (only 40% of gains were included in taxable
income). As discussed in the main text, realized capital gains are a very volatile and
lumpy source of income so that we believe that it is more meaningful to rank tax units
based on income excluding realized capital gains and then add back those gains to
our income measures.4 This is an especially important issue for top groups.
        Fourth, CBO focuses on households instead of tax units. A household is
defined as the set of individuals living together and may contain several tax units (for
example, two single adult sisters living together). There are about 144 million tax
units in the United States in 2004 (had everybody been required to file a tax returns)
but there are only about 110 million households. In order to rank household into
income groups, CBO adjusts household income by the number of individuals in the
household by dividing household income by the square root of the number of
individuals. For example, a family of four earning $100,000 will be assigned income
$50,000=100,000/sqrt(4) in the ranking. Income groups such as quintiles are chosen
to contain the same number of individuals (but not of households). Those complex
adjustments are made to try and measure better real disposable income at the
individual level. However, they come at a cost in complexity: groups are no longer
transparently defined groups by thresholds based on a familiar AGI type measure of
income.


4
 CBO is aware of this issue and mentions that the ideal solution is to make a life-time based analysis
of income and taxes. We agree with CBO but still believe that our ranking excluding capital gains is an
acceptable short-cut which parsimoniously removes the largest issue with fluctuating incomes.
      Finally, CBO imputes corporate taxes only on reported capital income while we
impute corporate taxes on all capital income either reported as capital income on tax
returns or accruing to non-taxable pension funds (which we impute on wage income).
Because of the large development of pension funds since 1980, corporate taxes fall
relatively more on labor income today than in previous decades. This factor
contributes to reducing the progressivity of corporate taxes.


      Figure A3 and A4 report the average tax rates for the top 1% from our
estimates and from CBO respectively. Those series overlap for years 1979 to 2001.
The broad patterns are comparable. We see that the CBO estimates are slightly
lower because of their more comprehensive income definition. CBO also finds a
lower decline in individual tax rates in the 1980s primarily because they include
realized capital gains in the ranking of tax units. As a result, their tax rates are
relatively higher in the pre-1987 period when capital gains received a very favourable
treatment (only 40% of such gains were included in taxable income).


Appendix B : Sources and Methodology for Income and Tax Rates Statistics for
France and the United Kingdom 1970 and today


Table A4 reports various aggregate income and tax statistics for the United States,
the United Kingdom, and France in 1970 and today (2004 for the US, 2000 for the
UK, and 2005 for France). Panel A reports aggregate statistics: total personal
income, total number of tax units, average real pre and post tax income per tax unit,
as well as average tax rate for each of the taxes we consider. Panel B reports
average tax rates from OECD (2005) for all taxes. Those rates are computed as the
ratio of the nominal amounts reported in OECD (2005) divided by the total income
used in this study (reported in Panel A). US tax rates reported by OECD include not
only federal but also state and local taxes, explaining the discrepancy. The main
discrepancies between the French and UK tax rates used in the study and the OECD
rates are explained below.


B.1 France
Income levels: net-of-payroll-tax income levels for fractiles P0-90, P90-95,..,P99.99-
100 are borrowed from Piketty (2001, Appendix B).5 These were computed using
published tax tabulations annualy available since 1914 and large tax returns micro
files available since 1988. Income levels for 2005 were obtained by updating 1998
estimates (the latest year covered in Piketty (2001)), using 1998-2002 published tax
tabulations and average household income growth rates for 2002-2005. In the same
way as for the U.S., tax units were ranked based on income excluding realized
capital gains, and realized capital gains were then added back to the average income
of each fractile and incorporated into the capital income component.6 Finally,
employer and employee payroll tax (both are deductible from income subject to the
income tax in France) were added to the average income of each fractile and
incorportated into the wage income component, using the methodology described
below.


Individual Income tax rates: income tax rates for fractiles P0-90, P90-95,..,P99.99-
100 are borrowed from Piketty (2001, Appendix B). These were computed using
published tax tabulations annually available since 1914 and large tax returns micro
files available since 1988. Income levels for 2005 were obtained by updating 1998
estimates (the latest year covered in Piketty (2001)), using 1998-2005 changes in the
income tax schedule (current tax schedules are available on www.impots.gouv.fr).
Tax on the capital gains component (a flat tax of 15%) was incorporated in the
effective income tax rate of each fractile.

Payroll tax rates: payroll tax rates for fractiles P0-90, P90-95,...,P99,99-100 were
computed using the detailed 1950-2005 payroll tax schedules published by INSEE.7
Payroll tax schedules are fairly complex in France, and we made the following
simplifying assumptions. In France gross wages w are subject to a total employee
payroll tax rate t1 and to a total employer payroll tax rate t2. Total labor cost is equal
to (1+ t2)w, and net-of-payroll-tax wage is equal to (1- t1)w (this is the wage income
subject to the income tax). Therefore one needs to multiply income-tax wage income
by (1+ t2)/(1- t1) in order to compute imputed payroll tax. This is roughly what we did
5
  A much shortened, English-language version of Piketty (2001) was published in Piketty (2003).
6
  We used both for 1970 and 2005 the average percentages in additional income corresponding to
capital gains reported in Piketty (2001, Appendix B) for years 1988-1995 (percentages rank from 0.4%
for fractile P0-90 to 5.0% for fractile P99-99.5 and 21.0% for fractile P99.99-100).
7
  See INSEE Résultats n°735, « Séries longues sur les salaires édition 200x » (various years).
for each fractile P0-90, P90-95,..,P99.99-100 for years 1970 and 2005, using data on
income composition by fractile (wage income share, capital income share, business
income share) borrowed from Piketty (2001, Appendix B). In 2005, we used t1=22.5%
and t2=42.5%. In 1970, we used t1=8.2% and t2=32.8%. For both years and for both
employee and employer payroll tax, the pure-tax component of payroll taxes (i.e.
those designed to pay for lump-sum benefits such as health insurance, worker
training programmes, etc., and means-tested benefits such as family benefits) and
the contributions-related component of payroll taxes (i.e. those designed to pay for
pensions and unemployment insurance benefits).8                     Most contributions-related
benefits are roughly proportional to contributions (and hence to wages), with
numerous exceptions and complications due to intergenerational redistribution
effects, so that according to standard estimates around 50% of contributions-related
payroll taxes can be viewed as a pure tax. For simplicity, in this study, we consider
that entire payroll tax financing benefits in France as a pure tax. An additional
complication comes from the fact that some payroll taxes are levied up to a wage
ceiling and some are levied on all wages. The key parameter is the so-called
“plafond de la Sécurité sociale” P. The level of P is adjusted every year and is
currently equal to about 29,000 € (gross annual wage), i.e. about twice the minimum
wage. In 2005, out of the 22.5% total employee payroll tax rate, 5.0% was levied on
wages up to 4P, 8.8% on wages up to 8P, and 8.7% on all wages (no ceiling). Out of
the 42.5% total employer payroll tax rate, 7.5% was levied up to 4P, and 35% on all
wages. In 1970, out of the 8.2% total employee payroll tax rate, 5.6% was levied on
wages up to 1P, 1.6% on wages up to 4P, and 1% on all wages (no ceiling). Out of
the 32.8% total employer payroll tax rate, 19.3% was levied up to 1P, 9.9% on wages
up to 4P, and 3.6% on all wages. We applied to those rules to average wage income
for each fractile P0-90, P90-95,..,P99.99-100 (assuming all tax units in each fractile
receive the same average wage income). Note that although most benefits are non-
taxable in France (and are therefore excluded from the income concept used for our
computations), most pensions are taxable (with the exception of minimum pensions)
and are incorporated in the wage income category of tax statistics. Pure wage
income (excluding pension income) made up about 80% of total wage income in

8
  For simplicity and for the sake of comparability, we include CSG (Contribution Sociale Generalisee)
in employee payroll tax in 2005. CSG is the proportional income tax on all incomes (not only wage
income) which gradually replaced health-insurance employee payroll tax (and partly family-benefits
employee payroll tax) since 1991.
2005 and 90% in 1970, so we applied payroll taxes to 80% and 90% of wage income
(respectively). Finally, note that payroll tax rates applied to public-sector wages are
significantly smaller than the rates applied to private-sector wages, especially
because there is virtually no formal employer payroll tax in the public sector (in
particular, public sector pensions are unfunded and are paid out of the general
budget). However, income-tax-based income statistics do not offer any public/private
wage decomposition, so we chose to apply private-sector payroll tax rates to all wage
incomes. This largely explains why our estimated aggregate payroll tax rates (33.3%
of total income in 2005, 20.8% in 1970) are somewhat larger than actual payroll
income tax receipts (our estimates are about 5% larger than tax receipts for 1970,
and about 15% larger in 2005). In a sense, our larger estimates are closer to the true
economic payroll tax rates (unfunded public-sector benefits are paid for by general
taxes such as the VAT). In 2005, our slight overestimate of payroll tax receipts is
reinforced by the fact that we neglected the low-wage employer payroll tax cut
schemes that were set up in France since the mid-1990s in order to boost low-skill
labor demand. As of 2005, the 42.5% employer payroll tax rate was reduced to
24.5% at the minimum wage level, and increased linearly up to the statutory 42.5%
rate at the level of 1.6 minimum wages (the exemption corresponds to the health-
insurance and family-benefits components). However these low-wage payroll tax cut
schemes change virtually every year, and they are difficult to properly take into
account using income-tax-based income statistics (leaving alone the fact that they
are mostly shifted on the employer side, due to high unemployment and the minimum
wage constraint).


Estate tax rates: estate tax rates for fractiles P0-90, P90-95,..,P99.99-100 were
computed using top estate fractiles borrowed from Piketty (2001, Appendix J).9 In the
same way as for the United States, we computed estate tax rates using estate
fractiles (estate fractiles were defined using the population of all adult decedents,
including those with no wealth at death), and we then assume that those taxes are
borne by the corresponding fractiles of income tax returns. Updated estate tax
schedules for 2005 are available on www.impots.gouv.fr (they were virtually


9
  Estate tax tabulations and micro-files unfortunately do not exist on an annual basis in France (see
Piketty (2001, Appendix J). For 2005, we updated the 1994 figures using the 1994-2005 income
growth rate. For 1970, we updated the 1964 figures using the 1964-1970 income growth rate.
unchanged since 1984, when the top marginal rate was raised from 20% to 40%).
Estate tax schedules for 1970 are given in Piketty (2001, Appendix J). In France,
estate tax rates are vastly higher when estates are transmitted to indivuals outside
the family (or even to brothers and sisters) than when they are transmitted to
spouses and children (so-called “transmission en ligne directe”, “direct line estate”).
We used the “direct-line” estate tax schedules, but we then scaled up effective rates
so as to match observed estate tax receipts for 1970 and 2005 (receipts are available
in published estate tax tabulations).


Wealth tax rates: wealth tax (“impôt sur la fortune”, ISF) rates for fractiles P0-90,
P90-95,..,P99.99-100 were computed using top wealth fractiles borrowed from
Piketty (2001b, statistical appendix).10 The wealth tax currently applied in France did
not exist in 1970: it was created in 1981 following the election of the socialist
government (“impôt sur les grandes fortunes”, IGF), repealed in 1986, and reinstated
again in 1989 (“impôt sur la fortune”, ISF) to finance the minimum income scheme
(RMI) introduced by the new socialist government. As of 2005, the wealth tax applies
to all tax units with total wealth above 750,000 € (about 1% of all tax units), and the
top marginal rate (above 15.5 millions €) is 1.8% (see www.impots.gouv.fr for the full
schedule). We applied the 2005 schedules to 2005 top wealth fractiles (fractiles were
defined using the population of all tax units). Because we could not take into account
all tax exemptions and tax loopholes, this leads to a slight overestimate of tax
receipts, so we scaled down all rates to reproduce tax receipts. In the same way as
for the estate tax, we then assumes that those taxes are borne by the corresponding
fractiles of income tax returns.


Table A5 provides the real income levels for each group, along with the tax rates for
each of the taxes estimated for France in 1970 and 2005.


B.2 United Kingdom


Income levels: net-of-payroll-tax income levels for fractiles P0-90, P90-95,...,P99,99-
100 are borrowed from Aktinson (2006). These were computed using published tax


10
     For 2005, we updated the 2000 figures using the 1990-2000 annual average wealthgrowth rate.
tabulations annually available and reported in Inland Revenue Statistics. Those
estimates exclude realized capital gains. In contrast to the French and US case, the
UK income estimates do not include realized capital gains. Finally, employer payroll
taxes are added to the average income of each fractile and incorporated into the
wage income component, using the methodology described below. It is important to
note that, in contrast to the US and French cases, the top group for the UK in
Atkinson (2006) series is P99.95-100 and not P99.99-100. As a result, we have also
had to use P99.95-100 as our top group for the UK case.


Individual Income tax rates: income tax rates for fractiles P0-90, P90-95,...,P99.95-
100 are estimated from Atkinson (2006) who reports top income shares both pre-tax
and post-tax. Tax rates are estimated as one minus the ratio of post tax shares to pre
tax shares multiplied by the ratio of pre tax to post tax total income. It should be
noted that post tax shares in Atkinson (2006) are estimated based on tax units
ranked by post-tax income (instead of pre-tax income for France and the United
States). This would tend to make UK income tax rates slightly lower than US and
French tax rates. Because ranking of incomes pre and post tax must be very close,
this effect is probably almost negligible. The individual income tax does not include
the supplementary tax on realized capital gains.

Payroll tax rates:
In 1970, payroll tax financing social security on employees is 7% of earnings below a
cap (close to average earnings) and the payroll tax financing social security on
employers is 8% of earnings below the same cap.11 The cap applies to weekly
earnings and the annual value of the cap is around 1,000 Pounds. In 2000, payroll
tax on employees is 10% of earnings between 4,000 and 28,000 Pounds. The payroll
tax on employer is 12.2% of earnings above 4,000 Pounds with no cap. The
threshold and cap also apply at the weekly level which we have annualised. Payroll
taxes in the UK finance primarily the Universal government provided health insurance
system, and hence can be considered as a pure tax. We have used the
decomposition of income into labor and capital income components reported in

11
  There was also an additiona small payroll tax on the workforce (which did not finance social security
programs) which is excluded from the study but reported included the payroll tax statistics from OECD
reported on Table A4 which explains the (small) discrepency between the total payroll tax rate used in
the study and the OECD payroll tax rate. Exlcuding this tax has only very minor effects on top groups.
Atkinson (2006) to estimate corresponding payroll tax rates using the same
methodology as in the case of France.


Estate tax rates: estate tax rates for fractiles P0-90, P90-95,..,P99.95-100 were
computed using estate tax statistics. In the same way as for the US and France, we
computed estate tax rates using estate fractiles (estate fractiles were defined using
the population of all decedents, including those with no wealth at death), and we then
assumes that those taxes are borne by the corresponding fractiles of income tax
returns. Estate tax statistics for the United Kingdom are published in Inland Revenue
Statistics (various years).
Appendix Additional References

Inland Revenue (various years), Inland Revenue Statistics, London: Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office.

OECD (2001), Revenue Statistics, 1965-2004, Paris: OECD Publishing.

Piketty, Thomas (2001a), Les hauts revenus en France au 20eme siecle – Inegalites
et redistributions, 1901-1998, Paris : Editions Grasset (812p.)

Piketty, Thomas (2001b), « Les Inégalités dans le long terme », in Conseil d'analyse
économique: Inégalités économiques, Paris : la Documentation française, 2001,
pp.137-204.
        TABLE A0. Reference Totals for Tax Units and Income, 1960-2004
                                    Tax Units and Population
                           (1)                   (2)             (3)               (8)
                        Tax Units          Number of           (2)/(1)       Average income
                                           tax returns          (%)            (nominal $)
                          ('000s)             ('000s)
       1960              68,681              61,028            88.9               5,175
       1961              69,997              61,499            87.9
       1962              71,254              62,712            88.0               5,472
       1963              72,464              63,943            88.2
       1964              73,660              65,376            88.8               6,119
       1965              74,772              67,596            90.4
       1966              75,831              70,160            92.5              7,018
       1967              76,856              71,652            93.2              7,440
       1968              77,826              73,729            94.7              8,122
       1969              78,793              75,834            96.2              8,559
       1970              79,924              74,280            92.9              8,838
       1971              81,849              74,576            91.1              9,302
       1972              83,670              77,573            92.7              10,089
       1973              85,442              80,693            94.4              10,954
       1974              87,228              83,340            95.5              11,688
       1975              89,127              82,229            92.3              12,015
       1976              91,048              84,670            93.0              13,153
       1977              93,076              86,635            93.1              14,170
       1978              95,213              89,771            94.3              15,562
       1979              97,457              92,694            95.1              17,202
       1980              99,625              93,902            94.3              18,412
       1981              101,432             95,396            94.0              19,891
       1982              103,250             95,337            92.3              20,526
       1983              105,067             96,321            91.7              21,563
       1984              106,871             99,439            93.0              23,298
       1985              108,736             101,660           93.5              24,666
       1986              110,684             103,045           93.1              26,433
       1987              112,640             106,996           95.0              26,817
       1988              114,656             109,708           95.7              29,194
       1989              116,759             112,136           96.0              30,222
       1990              120,447             113,717           94.4              30,756
       1991              120,453             114,730           95.2              31,199
       1992              121,944             113,605           93.2              32,357
       1993              123,378             114,602           92.9              32,987
       1994              124,716             115,943           93.0              34,345
       1995              126,023             118,218           93.8              36,401
       1996              127,798             120,351           94.2              38,660
       1997              129,532             122,422           94.5              41,539
       1998              131,720             124,771           94.7              44,204
       1999              133,233             127,075           95.4              47,133
       2000              134,473             129,374           96.2              50,122
       2001              137,088             130,255           95.0              47,968
       2002              139,703             130,076           93.1
       2003              141,843             130,424           91.9
       2004              143,982             132,385           91.9

Notes: Population and tax units estimates based on census and current population surveys.
Tax units estimated as sum of married men, divorced and widowed men and women, and singles men and
women aged 20 and over. Income defined as market income reported on income tax
returns plus employer federal payroll taxes and imputed corporate taxes.
Income includes all realized capital gains reported on tax returns.
Income of non-filers is imputed as 20% of average income.
                                          Table A1. Pre-tax Top Income Shares in the United States, 1960-2001

             Top 20%   Top 10%   Top 5%    Top 1%   Top .5%    Top .1%   Top .01%      P20-40    P40-60    P60-80    P80-90   P90-95     P95-99     P99-99.5 P99.5-99.9 P99.9-99.99 P99.99-100


   1960       49.27    33.09     22.69     10.07      7.02      3.01      0.93          7.58     15.59     23.84     16.19     10.42     12.63       3.06       4.01       2.08       0.93
   1962       50.25    33.60     22.86     10.00      6.92      2.90      0.87          7.39     15.55     24.18     16.65     10.73     12.81       3.05       3.97       2.01       0.86
   1964       50.84    34.23     23.52     10.44      7.27      3.10      0.97          7.29     15.32     24.26     16.61     10.70     13.06       3.16       4.14       2.12       0.97
   1966       50.35    33.88     23.35     10.43      7.26      3.17      1.00          7.59     15.47     24.23     16.47     10.52     12.90       3.16       4.06       2.16       0.99
   1967       50.80    34.37     23.77     10.71      7.50      3.23      0.97          7.66     15.41     23.97     16.42     10.60     13.06       3.20       4.26       2.26       0.96
   1968       51.16    34.75     24.19     11.13      7.87      3.43      1.02          7.81     15.36     23.90     16.41     10.57     13.05       3.26       4.44       2.40       1.01
   1969       50.46    33.77     23.15     10.31      7.25      3.18      1.02          8.11     15.78     24.48     16.69     10.62     12.82       3.06       4.06       2.15       1.01
   1970       49.29    32.47     21.71      9.09      6.20      2.55      0.77          8.06     15.73     24.48     16.82     10.76     12.60       2.87       3.63       1.76       0.76
   1971       49.93    32.93     22.06      9.24      6.33      2.63      0.79          7.63     15.39     24.49     17.00     10.87     12.80       2.90       3.69       1.83       0.78
   1972       49.79    32.83     21.95      9.19      6.26      2.59      0.80          8.02     15.43     24.48     16.96     10.88     12.75       2.92       3.66       1.79       0.79
   1973       49.73    32.72     21.82      8.82      5.94      2.38      0.67          7.95     15.43     24.68     17.00     10.89     12.98       2.86       3.55       1.69       0.66
   1974       50.11    32.96     21.94      8.98      6.09      2.49      0.71          8.16     15.36     24.65     17.15     11.01     12.94       2.88       3.58       1.76       0.70
   1975       50.63    33.06     21.77      8.76      5.89      2.38      0.71          7.46     14.96     24.78     17.56     11.29     13.00       2.85       3.50       1.66       0.70
   1976       50.52    32.98     21.72      8.73      5.90      2.40      0.72          7.69     14.96     24.75     17.54     11.25     12.98       2.82       3.49       1.67       0.71
   1977       50.63    33.10     21.82      8.80      5.95      2.43      0.72          7.59     14.92     24.79     17.52     11.28     13.01       2.84       3.51       1.70       0.71
   1978       50.65    33.06     21.79      8.78      5.95      2.44      0.72          7.75     14.84     24.69     17.58     11.27     12.99       2.82       3.50       1.72       0.71
   1979       50.93    33.49     22.34      9.42      6.56      2.94      0.99          7.90     14.72     24.38     17.44     11.15     12.91       2.85       3.62       1.94       0.99
   1980       51.48    33.81     22.45      9.28      6.40      2.76      0.86          7.63     14.64     24.39     17.66     11.36     13.16       2.87       3.63       1.90       0.86
   1981       51.45    33.56     22.04      9.01      6.24      2.73      0.87          7.64     14.64     24.56     17.88     11.53     13.02       2.76       3.50       1.85       0.87
   1982       52.76    34.70     23.04      9.84      7.01      3.31      1.15          7.24     14.12     24.45     18.06     11.66     13.19       2.83       3.70       2.15       1.15
   1983       53.58    35.55     23.78     10.37      7.48      3.58      1.27          6.95     13.93     24.27     18.03     11.77     13.41       2.89       3.90       2.31       1.27
   1984       53.74    35.84     24.13     10.73      7.86      3.92      1.42          7.19     14.05     23.99     17.90     11.71     13.40       2.87       3.94       2.50       1.42
   1985       54.35    36.49     24.76     11.20      8.23      4.07      1.45          7.17     13.91     23.78     17.86     11.73     13.55       2.97       4.17       2.61       1.45
   1986       55.94    38.34     26.68     12.74      9.52      5.01      2.00          6.88     13.62     23.50     17.60     11.66     13.94       3.22       4.52       3.01       2.01
   1987       55.16    37.44     25.70     11.90      8.74      4.31      1.55          6.93     13.63     23.52     17.73     11.73     13.80       3.16       4.42       2.76       1.54
   1988       56.97    39.91     28.53     14.78     11.40      6.18      2.44          6.74     13.10     22.54     17.05     11.38     13.74       3.38       5.22       3.74       2.43
   1989       56.69    39.48     27.92     13.95     10.55      5.56      2.15          6.84     13.06     22.65     17.21     11.56     13.96       3.40       4.99       3.40       2.15
   1990       57.11    39.75     28.07     13.96     10.58      5.47      2.13          6.56     13.04     22.70     17.36     11.68     14.10       3.38       5.09       3.34       2.12
   1991       56.71    39.19     27.36     13.02      9.64      4.80      1.78          6.67     13.06     22.77     17.52     11.83     14.33       3.37       4.83       3.02       1.77
   1992       58.00    40.64     28.82     14.37     10.88      5.72      2.22          6.22     12.63     22.37     17.36     11.82     14.45       3.49       5.15       3.49       2.22
   1993       57.96    40.47     28.57     13.93     10.43      5.38      2.03          6.23     12.62     22.32     17.50     11.90     14.63       3.49       5.04       3.35       2.02
   1994       57.97    40.51     28.66     14.01     10.47      5.36      2.02          6.27     12.55     22.20     17.46     11.85     14.65       3.54       5.10       3.33       2.02
   1995       58.51    41.37     29.52     14.72     11.05      5.70      2.09          6.24     12.40     21.85     17.14     11.84     14.79       3.67       5.36       3.60       2.08
   1996       59.39    42.52     30.84     15.90     12.12      6.44      2.47          6.20     12.14     21.36     16.86     11.68     14.94       3.78       5.68       3.98       2.47
   1997       60.07    43.54     32.05     17.00     13.12      7.21      2.71          6.15     12.01     20.99     16.52     11.49     15.05       3.87       5.92       4.52       2.71
   1998       60.43    44.14     32.74     17.68     13.73      7.61      2.93          6.16     11.85     20.70     16.29     11.40     15.07       3.95       6.13       4.70       2.93
   1999       61.12    44.96     33.60     18.37     14.36      8.02      3.09          6.05     11.58     20.34     16.16     11.36     15.23       4.02       6.36       4.94       3.09
   2000       62.13    46.20     34.90     19.63     15.52      8.91      3.47          6.10     11.46     20.01     15.93     11.29     15.28       4.11       6.63       5.46       3.48
   2001       60.20    43.63     31.95     16.88     13.06      7.12      2.75          6.14     11.91     20.78     16.57     11.68     15.07       3.82       5.94       4.38       2.75


Notes: Computations by authors on tax return statistics. Taxpayers are ranked by gross income (excluding capital gains and government transfers).
Income of non-filers is imputed as 20% of average income. Groups defined relative to all tax units (filers and non-filers).
Income include employer payroll taxes, realized capital gains, and imputed corporate taxes.
                                            Table A2. Post-tax Top Income Shares in the United States, 1960-2001

             Top 20%    Top 10%   Top 5%     Top 1%    Top .5%    Top .1%   Top .01%   P20-40    P40-60   P60-80    P80-90    P90-95    P95-99      P99-99.5 P99.5-99.9 P99.9-99.99 P99.99-100


   1960       47.36      30.32     19.50      7.13       4.55      1.53       0.34      8.31     16.68     25.26    17.02     10.78     12.30        2.57       2.99       1.19       0.34
   1962       47.56      30.19     19.17      6.88       4.36      1.46       0.32      7.86     16.35     25.38    17.35     10.98     12.22        2.51       2.88       1.13       0.32
   1964       48.09      30.72     19.71      7.13       4.51      1.51       0.34      7.76     16.12     25.45    17.34     10.97     12.48        2.60       2.96       1.16       0.35
   1966       47.77      30.58     19.73      7.23       4.61      1.61       0.39      8.10     16.20     25.29    17.16     10.81     12.41        2.61       2.96       1.22       0.39
   1967       48.49      31.40     20.49      7.77       5.04      1.81       0.44      8.13     16.06     24.89    17.05     10.87     12.64        2.70       3.20       1.37       0.44
   1968       48.29      31.21     20.33      7.67       4.97      1.75       0.41      8.40     16.21     24.97    17.04     10.83     12.55        2.67       3.17       1.33       0.41
   1969       48.07      30.72     19.79      7.28       4.70      1.68       0.43      8.65     16.47     25.39    17.31     10.89     12.41        2.55       2.97       1.23       0.43
   1970       47.08      29.62     18.56      6.26       3.85      1.20       0.25      8.57     16.36     25.31    17.44     11.03     12.23        2.39       2.62       0.94       0.25
   1971       47.84      30.26     19.06      6.51       4.03      1.27       0.26      8.17     15.97     25.21    17.56     11.15     12.46        2.46       2.72       1.00       0.27
   1972       47.52      30.03     18.91      6.53       4.07      1.33       0.30      8.67     16.07     25.20    17.46     11.08     12.31        2.45       2.71       1.01       0.30
   1973       47.47      29.98     18.88      6.35       3.93      1.26       0.26      8.64     16.08     25.30    17.47     11.07     12.48        2.40       2.66       0.99       0.26
   1974       47.85      30.37     19.22      6.64       4.16      1.39       0.30      8.85     16.05     25.24    17.47     11.13     12.54        2.48       2.76       1.08       0.30
   1975       47.96      30.13     18.76      6.26       3.87      1.25       0.28      8.35     15.83     25.42    17.81     11.35     12.46        2.39       2.61       0.96       0.28
   1976       47.98      30.14     18.78      6.26       3.88      1.26       0.27      8.46     15.78     25.43    17.81     11.35     12.47        2.37       2.61       0.98       0.28
   1977       47.99      30.13     18.71      6.26       3.90      1.30       0.30      8.43     15.78     25.46    17.85     11.40     12.42        2.35       2.59       1.00       0.30
   1978       48.42      30.51     19.08      6.53       4.12      1.42       0.34      8.50     15.51     25.22    17.91     11.41     12.52        2.41       2.69       1.08       0.34
   1979       47.74      30.24     19.17      6.96       4.55      1.77       0.52      8.94     15.72     25.12    17.49     11.04     12.17        2.39       2.76       1.24       0.52
   1980       48.28      30.62     19.44      7.03       4.58      1.74       0.48      8.70     15.68     25.11    17.64     11.17     12.37        2.44       2.83       1.26       0.48
   1981       48.31      30.55     19.32      7.03       4.64      1.82       0.53      8.73     15.68     25.21    17.75     11.21     12.26        2.38       2.80       1.29       0.53
   1982       50.23      32.33     20.90      8.22       5.68      2.53       0.85      8.15     15.01     24.92    17.89     11.42     12.64        2.54       3.13       1.67       0.85
   1983       51.14      33.23     21.71      8.75       6.10      2.73       0.93      7.79     14.79     24.77    17.90     11.50     12.92        2.64       3.36       1.80       0.93
   1984       51.33      33.53     22.07      9.10       6.47      3.04       1.06      8.00     14.88     24.47    17.78     11.45     12.92        2.62       3.42       1.98       1.06
   1985       51.92      34.17     22.70      9.57       6.82      3.18       1.10      8.01     14.76     24.25    17.74     11.46     13.09        2.74       3.63       2.08       1.10
   1986       53.52      36.05     24.66     11.11       8.12      4.10       1.62      7.69     14.46     23.95    17.45     11.36     13.48        2.98       4.00       2.47       1.62
   1987       52.42      34.66     23.19     10.03       7.18      3.38       1.17      7.82     14.59     24.17    17.75     11.45     13.15        2.85       3.79       2.22       1.17
   1988       54.60      37.60     26.47     13.23      10.12      5.42       2.12      7.57     13.93     23.02    16.99     11.12     13.23        3.10       4.70       3.30       2.12
   1989       54.29      37.14     25.87     12.41       9.30      4.81       1.83      7.70     13.89     23.14    17.14     11.26     13.42        3.11       4.48       2.98       1.83
   1990       54.75      37.47     26.11     12.53       9.41      4.80       1.84      7.41     13.89     23.16    17.27     11.35     13.57        3.12       4.60       2.96       1.84
   1991       54.21      36.76     25.23     11.43       8.33      4.04       1.47      7.60     13.94     23.24    17.45     11.52     13.78        3.10       4.28       2.57       1.47
   1992       55.35      37.97     26.42     12.53       9.36      4.83       1.86      7.16     13.62     22.92    17.38     11.54     13.87        3.17       4.53       2.97       1.86
   1993       54.86      37.22     25.53     11.44       8.31      4.08       1.49      7.26     13.74     23.09    17.63     11.68     14.06        3.13       4.22       2.59       1.49
   1994       54.50      36.87     25.25     11.28       8.17      3.99       1.47      7.45     13.77     23.02    17.62     11.61     13.94        3.11       4.18       2.52       1.47
   1995       54.85      37.49     25.84     11.75       8.57      4.22       1.51      7.50     13.64     22.72    17.35     11.64     14.06        3.17       4.35       2.71       1.51
   1996       55.62      38.53     27.02     12.78       9.50      4.87       1.83      7.46     13.41     22.27    17.09     11.49     14.20        3.27       4.63       3.04       1.83
   1997       56.44      39.73     28.42     14.03      10.62      5.68       2.11      7.39     13.20     21.82    16.69     11.29     14.34        3.41       4.92       3.58       2.11
   1998       56.69      40.18     28.97     14.62      11.16      6.04       2.30      7.39     13.06     21.61    16.49     11.19     14.30        3.46       5.12       3.74       2.30
   1999       57.33      40.96     29.79     15.33      11.80      6.46       2.47      7.26     12.80     21.30    16.36     11.14     14.42        3.52       5.33       3.99       2.47
   2000       58.41      42.24     31.13     16.60      12.95      7.32       2.83      7.30     12.62     20.95    16.14     11.08     14.50        3.64       5.63       4.49       2.83
   2001       56.42      39.69     28.30     14.03      10.67      5.69       2.18      7.38     13.20     21.73    16.71     11.38     14.24        3.35       4.98       3.51       2.18


Notes: Computations by authors on tax return statistics. Taxpayers are ranked by gross income (excluding capital gains and government transfers).
Income of non-filers is imputed as 20% of average income. Groups defined relative to all tax units (filers and non-filers).
Income include employer payroll taxes, realized capital gains, and imputed corporate taxes.
Taxes include federal individual, payroll, corporate, and estate and gift taxes.
                                                                    Table A3. Average Tax Rates by Income Groups, 1960-2004
                      P0-100                                           P80-100                                           P90-100                                           P95-100
         All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate                 All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate                 All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate                 All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate
1960    21.4   11.4    3.5    6.0    0.6          1960    24.5   15.0    2.4    5.9    1.2          1960    28.0   16.9    1.7    7.6    1.8          1960    32.5   18.8    1.1    9.8    2.7
1962    21.9   11.9    3.7    5.8    0.6          1962    26.1   15.2    2.5    7.3    1.1          1962    29.8   16.9    1.8    9.3    1.8          1962    34.5   18.8    1.3   11.8    2.7
1964    21.1   10.9    3.8    5.8    0.6          1964    25.3   14.1    2.4    7.6    1.3          1964    29.2   15.9    1.7    9.6    2.0          1964    33.9   17.6    1.2   12.1    3.0
1966    22.4   10.8    5.1    5.9    0.6          1966    26.4   14.1    3.6    7.6    1.2          1966    30.0   15.9    2.6    9.7    1.9          1966    34.5   17.7    1.8   12.1    2.8
1967    22.0   11.0    5.2    5.2    0.5          1967    25.5   14.1    3.5    6.8    1.1          1967    28.7   15.8    2.5    8.7    1.7          1967    32.7   17.6    1.8   10.8    2.6
1968    24.0   12.5    5.1    5.7    0.6          1968    28.2   16.0    3.5    7.5    1.2          1968    31.7   18.0    2.5    9.4    1.8          1968    36.1   19.9    1.7   11.7    2.8
1969    24.5   12.8    5.8    5.4    0.5          1969    28.0   16.2    4.0    6.8    1.1          1969    31.3   18.0    2.9    8.6    1.8          1969    35.4   19.8    2.1   10.8    2.7
1970    23.3   12.5    5.8    4.3    0.7          1970    26.7   16.0    3.9    5.4    1.3          1970    30.0   18.0    2.9    7.0    2.1          1970    34.4   20.1    2.1    8.9    3.3
1971    22.4   11.3    6.0    4.4    0.7          1971    25.6   14.7    4.0    5.5    1.5          1971    28.7   16.4    3.0    7.0    2.3          1971    32.9   18.3    2.2    8.9    3.5
1972    22.8   11.7    6.2    4.3    0.6          1972    26.4   15.5    4.3    5.3    1.2          1972    29.4   17.6    3.2    6.7    1.9          1972    33.5   19.8    2.3    8.4    3.0
1973    24.5   12.1    7.3    4.6    0.5          1973    28.0   16.0    5.3    5.7    1.0          1973    30.9   18.1    3.9    7.2    1.6          1973    34.7   20.3    2.9    9.0    2.6
1974    24.8   12.2    7.7    4.4    0.5          1974    28.2   15.9    5.9    5.4    1.0          1974    30.7   17.9    4.4    6.9    1.5          1974    34.1   20.0    3.2    8.5    2.3
1975    24.4   12.1    7.7    4.1    0.5          1975    28.4   16.4    6.1    4.9    1.0          1975    31.1   18.8    4.6    6.1    1.6          1975    34.9   21.3    3.4    7.6    2.5
1976    24.7   11.9    7.6    4.6    0.6          1976    28.5   15.9    6.0    5.3    1.2          1976    31.2   18.1    4.6    6.6    1.9          1976    34.9   20.4    3.4    8.1    2.9
1977    24.1   11.4    7.6    4.7    0.4          1977    28.0   15.8    6.0    5.4    0.8          1977    30.9   18.4    4.6    6.7    1.2          1977    34.9   21.3    3.4    8.3    1.9
1978    24.2   11.3    7.8    4.8    0.4          1978    27.6   15.1    6.1    5.6    0.7          1978    30.1   17.5    4.6    6.8    1.2          1978    33.7   20.0    3.5    8.4    1.8
1979    26.3   13.2    8.3    4.4    0.4          1979    30.9   18.0    6.9    5.2    0.8          1979    33.5   20.4    5.4    6.4    1.2          1979    36.8   22.9    4.0    8.0    1.9
1980    26.6   14.1    8.3    3.8    0.4          1980    31.2   18.9    7.1    4.4    0.7          1980    33.6   21.4    5.6    5.4    1.2          1980    36.5   23.9    4.1    6.6    1.8
1981    27.4   14.6    9.1    3.3    0.4          1981    31.8   19.4    7.9    3.7    0.7          1981    33.9   21.9    6.4    4.5    1.1          1981    36.3   24.3    4.8    5.4    1.8
1982    25.3   13.6    9.2    2.3    0.3          1982    28.9   17.7    8.1    2.6    0.5          1982    30.4   19.9    6.5    3.2    0.8          1982    32.3   22.2    4.9    3.9    1.3
1983    24.8   12.7    9.1    2.7    0.3          1983    28.2   16.6    8.1    3.0    0.5          1983    29.7   18.6    6.7    3.5    0.8          1983    31.3   20.8    5.0    4.3    1.2
1984    25.3   12.6    9.4    3.0    0.3          1984    28.7   16.5    8.4    3.3    0.5          1984    30.2   18.6    6.9    4.0    0.8          1984    31.7   20.7    5.1    4.7    1.2
1985    25.2   12.7    9.4    2.8    0.3          1985    28.6   16.6    8.3    3.2    0.5          1985    30.0   18.6    6.8    3.8    0.8          1985    31.4   20.7    5.0    4.5    1.2
1986    25.2   12.9    9.2    2.9    0.2          1986    28.4   16.6    8.1    3.3    0.5          1986    29.6   18.5    6.5    3.9    0.7          1986    30.8   20.4    4.7    4.6    1.1
1987    25.6   12.5    9.5    3.4    0.2          1987    29.3   16.7    8.4    3.7    0.5          1987    31.1   19.2    6.9    4.3    0.7          1987    32.9   21.6    5.1    5.2    1.0
1988    25.7   12.6    9.5    3.3    0.3          1988    28.8   16.5    8.1    3.8    0.5          1988    30.0   18.5    6.4    4.4    0.7          1988    31.1   20.3    4.5    5.3    1.0
1989    25.8   12.6    9.6    3.3    0.3          1989    29.0   16.4    8.3    3.7    0.6          1989    30.2   18.4    6.6    4.4    0.9          1989    31.3   20.2    4.7    5.2    1.3
1990    25.8   12.4    9.9    3.2    0.3          1990    28.9   16.1    8.7    3.6    0.5          1990    30.1   18.1    7.0    4.1    0.8          1990    31.0   19.9    5.1    4.9    1.1
1991    25.6   12.2   10.1    2.9    0.3          1991    28.8   16.1    9.0    3.2    0.5          1991    30.2   18.2    7.4    3.8    0.8          1991    31.3   20.2    5.4    4.5    1.1
1992    25.8   12.5   10.0    3.0    0.3          1992    29.2   16.5    8.8    3.4    0.6          1992    30.7   18.7    7.2    3.9    0.8          1992    32.0   20.9    5.2    4.7    1.2
1993    26.7   12.8   10.1    3.4    0.4          1993    30.6   17.2    8.9    3.9    0.6          1993    32.6   19.8    7.3    4.5    0.9          1993    34.5   22.3    5.4    5.4    1.4
1994    27.2   12.9   10.3    3.7    0.3          1994    31.6   17.4    9.4    4.2    0.6          1994    33.7   19.9    8.0    4.9    0.9          1994    35.9   22.4    6.3    5.9    1.3
1995    27.6   13.2   10.1    3.9    0.4          1995    32.1   18.0    9.0    4.5    0.7          1995    34.4   20.6    7.6    5.2    1.0          1995    36.6   23.1    5.9    6.2    1.4
1996    27.8   13.7    9.8    3.9    0.4          1996    32.3   18.6    8.6    4.5    0.7          1996    34.6   21.2    7.2    5.2    1.0          1996    36.7   23.7    5.5    6.1    1.5
1997    27.5   13.7    9.5    3.8    0.5          1997    31.8   18.4    8.3    4.4    0.8          1997    33.8   20.8    6.8    5.1    1.1          1997    35.7   23.0    5.2    5.9    1.6
1998    27.1   13.7    9.4    3.5    0.5          1998    31.6   18.6    8.1    4.1    0.8          1998    33.7   21.1    6.7    4.7    1.2          1998    35.5   23.4    5.0    5.5    1.7
1999    27.4   14.3    9.2    3.4    0.4          1999    31.9   19.2    7.9    4.0    0.8          1999    33.8   21.7    6.5    4.6    1.1          1999    35.6   24.0    4.9    5.2    1.5
2000    27.4   14.6    9.1    3.3    0.4          2000    31.7   19.5    7.7    3.8    0.7          2000    33.6   22.0    6.3    4.4    1.0          2000    35.2   24.2    4.7    5.0    1.3
2001    25.8   13.1    9.8    2.5    0.4          2001    30.4   18.3    8.6    2.9    0.7          2001    32.5   21.0    7.2    3.4    0.9          2001    34.3   23.5    5.5    4.0    1.3


2004    23.4   11.5    9.3    2.3    0.4          2004    25.7   14.0    8.9    2.4    0.5          2004    27.4   16.1    8.0    2.7    0.6          2004    29.1   18.5    6.6    3.1    0.9


Notes: Computations are based on individual tax return micro data. Groups ranked by market income excluding realized capital gains. Income (used to compute taxes) includes employer payroll taxes,
realized capital gains, and imputed corporate taxes. Individual income tax is computed using TAXSIM and assuming no deduction for state and local taxes.
Corporate taxes are imputed as a proportion to total personal capital income defined as all capital income reported on tax returns and returns imputed to pension funds (and imputed to labor income).
2004 tax rates are based on 2004 tax law applied to 2000 income adjusted for income growth.
                                                     Table A3. Average Tax Rates by Income Groups, 1960-2004 (continued 2)
                    P99-100                                    P99.5-100                                   P99.9-100                                   P99.99-100
        All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate           All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate           All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate           All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate
1960   44.4   23.6   0.4    14.4    6.0     1960   49.1   25.8   0.3    15.6    7.5     1960   60.0   29.5   0.1    18.4    11.8    1960   71.4   31.5   0.0    22.3    17.6
1962   46.2   23.3   0.5    16.5    6.0     1962   50.8   25.3   0.4    17.7    7.4     1962   60.7   28.3   0.2    20.2    12.1    1962   71.0   29.1   0.1    23.6    18.2
1964   46.1   22.2   0.4    16.8    6.7     1964   51.0   24.2   0.3    18.2    8.4     1964   61.5   26.9   0.1    20.8    13.6    1964   72.1   27.6   0.0    24.2    20.3
1966   46.2   22.5   0.7    16.7    6.2     1966   50.8   24.6   0.5    17.9    7.8     1966   60.6   27.6   0.2    20.5    12.3    1966   70.2   28.5   0.1    23.5    18.1
1967   43.4   22.1   0.7    14.8    5.8     1967   47.5   23.9   0.5    15.9    7.2     1967   56.3   26.5   0.2    18.1    11.5    1967   64.9   27.2   0.1    20.5    17.0
1968   47.6   24.8   0.6    16.1    6.1     1968   52.0   26.7   0.4    17.3    7.6     1968   61.0   29.2   0.2    19.6    12.1    1968   69.4   29.2   0.1    21.8    18.4
1969   46.7   24.3   0.9    15.4    6.1     1969   51.0   26.0   0.6    16.7    7.7     1969   60.0   28.0   0.3    19.2    12.5    1969   68.0   27.1   0.1    22.0    18.9
1970   47.2   25.7   1.0    13.1    7.5     1970   52.4   28.0   0.7    14.3    9.4     1970   63.9   31.4   0.3    16.8    15.4    1970   75.2   31.8   0.1    19.9    23.4
1971   45.4   23.4   1.0    12.9    8.2     1971   50.6   25.5   0.7    14.1    10.3    1971   62.4   28.6   0.3    16.5    17.0    1971   74.1   28.8   0.1    19.4    25.8
1972   45.2   25.3   1.0    11.9    7.0     1972   49.9   27.5   0.8    12.8    8.8     1972   60.5   30.8   0.4    14.9    14.5    1972   70.8   31.3   0.1    17.5    21.8
1973   45.7   26.0   1.3    12.4    6.0     1973   50.1   28.1   1.0    13.4    7.6     1973   60.1   31.4   0.5    15.7    12.5    1973   70.8   32.5   0.2    18.5    19.6
1974   44.4   25.6   1.5    11.9    5.3     1974   48.6   28.0   1.1    12.9    6.7     1974   58.0   31.8   0.5    15.1    10.5    1974   67.7   33.5   0.2    17.8    16.2
1975   45.9   27.7   1.6    10.8    5.9     1975   50.4   30.2   1.2    11.6    7.4     1975   60.3   34.1   0.6    13.8    11.8    1975   70.2   35.6   0.2    16.7    17.8
1976   46.1   26.2   1.6    11.5    6.8     1976   50.5   28.4   1.2    12.3    8.6     1976   60.6   31.8   0.6    14.4    13.7    1976   71.3   33.2   0.2    17.5    20.3
1977   46.0   28.3   1.6    11.6    4.5     1977   50.3   31.1   1.2    12.4    5.6     1977   59.2   35.3   0.6    14.5    8.9     1977   68.0   37.0   0.2    17.6    13.2
1978   43.6   26.3   1.6    11.5    4.2     1978   47.6   28.8   1.2    12.4    5.2     1978   56.0   32.5   0.6    14.7    8.2     1978   64.4   34.3   0.2    17.8    12.1
1979   45.6   28.4   1.8    11.0    4.3     1979   48.9   30.3   1.3    12.0    5.4     1979   55.7   32.4   0.6    14.4    8.3     1979   61.5   32.0   0.2    17.4    12.0
1980   44.4   29.3   1.9     9.1    4.1     1980   47.5   31.3   1.4     9.8    5.1     1980   53.7   33.7   0.6    11.6    7.8     1980   59.6   34.7   0.2    13.8    11.0
1981   43.3   29.3   2.3     7.6    4.2     1981   46.0   30.9   1.6     8.3    5.2     1981   51.5   33.0   0.7     9.9    7.9     1981   56.1   32.8   0.2    12.0    11.1
1982   37.6   27.0   2.2     5.5    2.9     1982   39.6   28.4   1.5     6.1    3.6     1982   43.0   29.7   0.6     7.5    5.2     1982   44.9   29.1   0.2     8.9    6.7
1983   36.5   25.4   2.2     6.1    2.8     1983   38.6   27.0   1.5     6.7    3.3     1983   42.5   29.1   0.6     8.0    4.7     1983   45.1   29.8   0.2     9.3    5.8
1984   36.7   25.2   2.3     6.6    2.6     1984   38.6   26.6   1.5     7.3    3.1     1984   42.2   28.7   0.6     8.6    4.2     1984   44.5   29.3   0.2    10.0    5.0
1985   36.1   25.0   2.2     6.4    2.6     1985   38.1   26.5   1.4     7.1    3.1     1985   41.5   28.4   0.6     8.3    4.2     1985   43.2   28.8   0.2     9.1    5.1
1986   34.7   24.0   2.0     6.3    2.4     1986   36.2   25.1   1.3     6.9    2.9     1986   38.8   26.3   0.5     8.1    4.0     1986   39.3   25.7   0.1     8.7    4.7
1987   37.3   26.1   2.2     6.9    2.1     1987   38.9   27.6   1.5     7.4    2.4     1987   41.6   29.5   0.6     8.4    3.1     1987   43.8   29.9   0.2    10.0    3.7
1988   33.5   23.2   1.7     6.8    1.8     1988   34.1   23.7   1.1     7.3    2.0     1988   34.9   23.9   0.4     8.2    2.4     1988   35.4   23.6   0.1     9.2    2.5
1989   34.0   22.9   1.9     6.8    2.3     1989   34.6   23.5   1.2     7.3    2.6     1989   35.8   23.7   0.5     8.4    3.2     1989   36.8   23.6   0.1     9.5    3.6
1990   33.4   22.8   2.0     6.5    2.0     1990   34.0   23.4   1.3     7.0    2.3     1990   35.0   23.7   0.5     7.9    2.8     1990   35.8   23.5   0.1     9.1    3.1
1991   34.7   24.0   2.3     6.1    2.2     1991   35.7   25.0   1.6     6.6    2.5     1991   37.4   26.0   0.6     7.5    3.1     1991   38.5   26.1   0.2     8.7    3.6
1992   35.3   24.7   2.2     6.3    2.2     1992   36.2   25.7   1.4     6.7    2.4     1992   37.4   26.6   0.5     7.4    2.9     1992   38.0   26.8   0.1     8.0    3.1
1993   39.8   27.6   2.3     7.3    2.6     1993   41.6   29.3   1.5     7.9    2.9     1993   44.5   31.3   0.6     8.9    3.6     1993   46.0   31.8   0.2    10.0    4.0
1994   41.4   27.5   3.4     8.0    2.4     1994   43.2   29.0   2.7     8.7    2.7     1994   45.9   30.8   1.6    10.1    3.4     1994   47.1   30.9   1.0    11.5    3.8
1995   42.2   28.2   3.2     8.2    2.6     1995   43.9   29.6   2.6     8.8    2.9     1995   46.3   31.2   1.6    10.1    3.5     1995   47.8   31.6   1.0    11.2    4.0
1996   41.9   28.4   3.0     7.9    2.7     1996   43.3   29.6   2.4     8.4    3.0     1996   45.4   30.8   1.5     9.5    3.6     1996   46.5   31.1   1.0    10.4    4.0
1997   40.1   27.0   2.8     7.5    2.9     1997   41.3   28.0   2.2     7.9    3.2     1997   42.8   28.9   1.4     8.8    3.7     1997   43.6   29.5   1.1     9.1    4.0
1998   39.7   27.3   2.7     6.8    2.9     1998   40.8   28.2   2.2     7.2    3.2     1998   42.2   29.2   1.5     7.8    3.7     1998   42.7   29.8   1.2     7.9    3.9
1999   39.4   27.8   2.6     6.4    2.5     1999   40.3   28.7   2.1     6.7    2.8     1999   41.4   29.7   1.5     7.1    3.1     1999   41.9   30.4   1.3     6.9    3.2
2000   38.6   27.7   2.5     6.1    2.3     2000   39.4   28.6   2.1     6.3    2.4     2000   40.3   29.5   1.5     6.6    2.7     2000   40.7   30.2   1.3     6.4    2.7
2001   38.3   27.9   3.0     5.1    2.2     2001   39.4   29.0   2.4     5.4    2.4     2001   40.7   30.3   1.7     5.9    2.8     2001   41.3   30.9   1.4     6.0    3.0


2004   30.4   20.8   5.1     3.5    1.1     2004   33.1   24.1   2.7     4.3    2.1     2004   33.6   24.8   2.1     4.4    2.2     2004   34.2   25.6   1.5     4.6    2.5
                                                     Table A3. Average Tax Rates by Income Groups, 1960-2004 (continued 3)
                     P0-20                                       P20-40                                      P40-60                                      P60-80
        All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate           All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate           All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate           All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate
1960   14.1   0.8    3.7     9.6    0.0     1960   13.9   4.9    4.1     4.9    0.0     1960   15.9   7.8    4.8     3.4    0.0     1960   16.7   9.4    4.9     2.5    0.0
1962   15.5   0.8    4.0    10.8    0.0     1962   16.9   5.0    4.6     7.3    0.0     1962   17.9   8.1    5.3     4.6    0.0     1962   18.0   9.8    5.0     3.2    0.0
1964   13.9   0.4    4.4     9.1    0.0     1964   16.0   4.1    4.7     7.2    0.0     1964   16.9   7.1    5.6     4.2    0.0     1964   17.2   8.9    5.1     3.2    0.0
1966   15.8   1.0    5.6     9.2    0.0     1966   17.3   4.5    6.0     6.8    0.0     1966   18.8   7.4    6.8     4.6    0.0     1966   19.1   8.9    7.0     3.2    0.0
1967   15.1   1.5    5.8     7.8    0.0     1967   17.2   5.1    6.4     5.7    0.0     1967   18.7   7.6    7.2     3.8    0.0     1967   19.0   9.0    7.1     2.9    0.0
1968   15.1   1.9    5.6     7.6    0.0     1968   18.2   6.1    5.9     6.1    0.0     1968   19.7   8.8    6.8     4.1    0.0     1968   20.6   10.3   7.1     3.2    0.0
1969   16.3   2.4    6.6     7.4    0.0     1969   19.5   6.6    6.9     5.9    0.0     1969   21.1   9.3    7.9     4.0    0.0     1969   21.7   10.9   7.8     3.0    0.0
1970   15.1   2.2    7.1     5.8    0.0     1970   18.5   6.2    7.0     5.3    0.0     1970   20.2   8.9    7.9     3.4    0.0     1970   20.7   10.6   7.7     2.4    0.0
1971   15.0   0.7    7.2     7.1    0.0     1971   16.9   3.9    7.4     5.6    0.0     1971   19.5   7.6    8.5     3.3    0.0     1971   20.1   9.6    8.0     2.6    0.0
1972   14.2   0.6    7.1     6.5    0.0     1972   16.6   3.8    7.4     5.4    0.0     1972   19.7   7.7    8.4     3.6    0.0     1972   20.6   9.6    8.3     2.7    0.0
1973   15.4   0.5    8.1     6.8    0.0     1973   18.0   4.4    8.4     5.3    0.0     1973   21.4   8.2    9.4     3.8    0.0     1973   22.6   10.2   9.6     2.9    0.0
1974   15.1   0.6    8.3     6.2    0.0     1974   18.4   5.0    8.6     4.8    0.0     1974   21.4   8.5    9.4     3.5    0.0     1974   23.0   10.4   9.9     2.7    0.0
1975   13.8   -0.4   8.6     5.5    0.0     1975   15.4   2.0    8.4     5.0    0.0     1975   20.0   7.3    9.3     3.4    0.0     1975   22.4   10.0   9.8     2.7    0.0
1976   15.2   0.5    8.3     6.5    0.0     1976   17.1   3.5    8.3     5.4    0.0     1976   20.6   7.4    9.1     4.1    0.0     1976   22.7   9.9    9.7     3.1    0.0
1977   14.4   -0.3   8.6     6.1    0.0     1977   15.7   1.9    8.3     5.4    0.0     1977   19.7   6.5    9.0     4.2    0.0     1977   22.0   9.1    9.6     3.3    0.0
1978   14.7   -0.2   8.8     6.1    0.0     1978   16.9   2.7    8.7     5.4    0.0     1978   20.8   7.2    9.3     4.4    0.0     1978   22.6   9.3    9.9     3.4    0.0
1979   14.5   -0.2   8.7     5.9    0.0     1979   16.6   3.0    8.9     4.7    0.0     1979   21.3   8.0    9.5     3.8    0.0     1979   24.1   10.9   10.0    3.1    0.0
1980   13.5   -0.3   9.2     4.6    0.0     1980   16.3   3.4    8.9     4.1    0.0     1980   21.4   8.6    9.4     3.5    0.0     1980   24.5   11.7   10.0    2.8    0.0
1981   13.7   -0.2   9.9     4.0    0.0     1981   17.1   4.0    9.6     3.5    0.0     1981   22.2   9.0    10.1    3.0    0.0     1981   25.5   12.3   10.7    2.4    0.0
1982   12.9   -0.2   10.5    2.7    0.0     1982   15.9   3.5    9.7     2.6    0.0     1982   20.6   8.3    10.3    2.0    0.0     1982   23.9   11.4   10.7    1.8    0.0
1983   13.9   0.3    9.5     4.0    0.0     1983   15.6   3.1    9.3     3.2    0.0     1983   20.2   7.6    10.0    2.6    0.0     1983   23.2   10.5   10.6    2.1    0.0
1984   14.2   0.0    9.8     4.3    0.0     1984   16.9   3.7    9.8     3.4    0.0     1984   20.9   7.7    10.4    2.8    0.0     1984   23.8   10.4   11.1    2.3    0.0
1985   14.2   0.2    10.0    4.0    0.0     1985   16.5   3.7    9.8     3.1    0.0     1985   20.7   7.7    10.4    2.7    0.0     1985   23.7   10.5   11.1    2.1    0.0
1986   14.1   0.6    9.2     4.3    0.0     1986   16.3   3.6    9.6     3.1    0.0     1986   20.5   7.7    10.2    2.7    0.0     1986   23.7   10.5   11.1    2.2    0.0
1987   16.0   0.4    10.1    5.5    0.0     1987   16.1   2.4    9.7     4.0    0.0     1987   20.4   6.7    10.5    3.2    0.0     1987   23.5   9.6    11.3    2.6    0.0
1988   16.1   0.9    11.0    4.2    0.0     1988   16.6   2.8    10.2    3.6    0.0     1988   21.1   7.1    11.0    2.9    0.0     1988   24.2   9.9    11.8    2.4    0.0
1989   15.5   0.5    11.2    3.8    0.0     1989   16.5   2.7    10.2    3.5    0.0     1989   21.2   7.3    11.0    2.9    0.0     1989   24.2   10.1   11.6    2.5    0.0
1990   15.9   0.3    11.6    4.0    0.0     1990   16.2   2.1    10.6    3.4    0.0     1990   21.0   7.0    11.2    2.8    0.0     1990   24.3   10.0   11.9    2.4    0.0
1991   15.5   0.1    11.3    4.1    0.0     1991   15.1   1.3    10.6    3.2    0.0     1991   20.5   6.6    11.3    2.6    0.0     1991   24.0   9.8    12.0    2.2    0.0
1992   15.6   -0.4   11.9    4.2    0.0     1992   14.7   0.6    10.7    3.4    0.0     1992   20.0   6.1    11.2    2.7    0.0     1992   24.0   9.7    12.2    2.2    0.0
1993   16.0   -0.3   11.1    5.2    0.0     1993   14.6   0.1    10.7    3.8    0.0     1993   20.2   6.0    11.3    3.0    0.0     1993   24.1   9.6    12.2    2.4    0.0
1994   14.6   -1.9   11.4    5.1    0.0     1994   13.5   -1.1   10.7    4.0    0.0     1994   20.1   5.7    11.4    3.0    0.0     1994   24.5   9.8    12.2    2.6    0.0
1995   13.3   -3.4   11.7    5.0    0.0     1995   13.0   -1.7   10.7    4.0    0.0     1995   20.4   5.9    11.3    3.2    0.0     1995   24.7   9.9    12.0    2.8    0.0
1996   13.7   -2.6   11.3    5.0    0.0     1996   13.1   -1.4   10.6    3.9    0.0     1996   20.2   5.9    11.2    3.1    0.0     1996   24.7   10.1   11.9    2.7    0.0
1997   12.8   -3.0   11.0    4.9    0.0     1997   12.8   -1.4   10.6    3.6    0.0     1997   20.3   6.1    11.1    3.0    0.0     1997   24.6   10.1   11.8    2.7    0.0
1998   12.9   -2.4   10.5    4.9    0.0     1998   12.6   -1.4   10.7    3.3    0.0     1998   19.7   5.8    11.1    2.8    0.0     1998   23.9   9.7    11.7    2.5    0.0
1999   12.7   -2.3   10.5    4.6    0.0     1999   12.8   -1.0   10.6    3.1    0.0     1999   19.7   6.1    11.1    2.6    0.0     1999   23.9   9.9    11.6    2.4    0.0
2000   12.8   -1.9   10.4    4.3    0.0     2000   13.1   -0.4   10.6    2.9    0.0     2000   20.0   6.4    11.2    2.4    0.0     2000   23.9   10.1   11.6    2.2    0.0
2001   11.4   -3.9   12.3    3.1    0.0     2001   10.7   -2.5   10.9    2.4    0.0     2001   17.8   4.3    11.5    1.9    0.0     2001   22.4   8.8    11.9    1.7    0.0


2004   10.5   -2.9   10.4    3.0    0.0     2004   9.4    -3.2   10.6    2.0    0.0     2004   16.1   3.2    11.2    1.7    0.0     2004   20.5   7.3    11.6    1.6    0.0
                                                     Table A3. Average Tax Rates by Income Groups, 1960-2004 (continued 4)
                     P80-90                                      P90-95                                      P95-99                                     P99-99.5
        All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate           All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate           All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate           All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate
1960   17.4   11.2   3.8     2.4    0.0     1960   18.7   12.7   2.9     3.1    0.0     1960   23.5   14.9   1.7     6.3    0.6     1960   34.0   18.6   0.7    11.6    3.1
1962   18.6   11.6   3.8     3.2    0.0     1962   20.1   13.0   2.9     4.1    0.0     1962   25.5   15.3   1.9     7.8    0.6     1962   35.8   19.0   0.8    12.9    3.0
1964   17.6   10.5   3.8     3.2    0.0     1964   19.1   12.0   2.9     4.2    0.0     1964   24.6   14.1   1.7     8.1    0.6     1964   35.1   17.6   0.7    13.3    3.4
1966   19.2   10.4   5.5     3.3    0.0     1966   20.3   11.8   4.3     4.2    0.0     1966   25.4   13.8   2.7     8.3    0.6     1966   36.1   17.8   1.3    13.8    3.2
1967   19.0   10.5   5.5     3.0    0.0     1967   20.0   11.8   4.2     4.0    0.0     1967   24.5   13.9   2.7     7.4    0.6     1967   34.1   17.8   1.2    12.0    3.0
1968   21.0   12.0   5.8     3.3    0.0     1968   22.1   13.5   4.4     4.2    0.0     1968   26.9   15.8   2.6     7.9    0.6     1968   37.6   20.3   1.0    13.1    3.1
1969   21.6   12.6   6.1     3.0    0.0     1969   22.6   14.0   4.7     3.8    0.0     1969   26.9   16.2   3.0     7.1    0.6     1969   37.1   20.3   1.5    12.2    3.1
1970   20.5   12.2   5.8     2.4    0.0     1970   21.4   13.7   4.5     3.2    0.0     1970   25.6   16.1   3.0     5.7    0.7     1970   36.1   20.7   1.5    10.0    3.8
1971   19.9   11.2   6.0     2.7    0.0     1971   20.3   12.5   4.7     3.2    0.0     1971   24.4   14.8   3.1     5.9    0.7     1971   34.3   18.7   1.6     9.9    4.1
1972   20.5   11.6   6.3     2.6    0.0     1972   21.4   13.2   4.9     3.3    0.0     1972   25.5   15.8   3.3     5.8    0.6     1972   35.5   20.6   1.6     9.8    3.5
1973   22.5   11.9   7.8     2.8    0.0     1973   23.4   13.7   6.0     3.6    0.0     1973   27.5   16.5   3.9     6.6    0.5     1973   36.6   21.6   2.1    10.0    3.0
1974   23.4   12.0   8.8     2.6    0.0     1974   24.0   13.6   6.7     3.6    0.0     1974   27.1   16.1   4.5     6.0    0.5     1974   35.3   20.7   2.3     9.5    2.7
1975   23.3   11.9   8.8     2.6    0.0     1975   24.0   14.0   6.9     3.1    0.0     1975   27.5   17.1   4.7     5.3    0.5     1975   36.6   22.5   2.5     8.7    3.0
1976   23.6   11.9   8.8     2.9    0.0     1976   24.1   13.6   6.9     3.6    0.0     1976   27.7   16.6   4.7     5.8    0.6     1976   36.8   21.5   2.5     9.3    3.5
1977   22.7   10.9   8.8     3.0    0.0     1977   23.3   12.8   6.8     3.7    0.0     1977   27.5   16.5   4.6     6.0    0.4     1977   37.0   22.7   2.5     9.5    2.3
1978   22.8   10.8   8.8     3.3    0.0     1978   23.3   12.5   7.0     3.8    0.0     1978   27.0   15.8   4.7     6.2    0.4     1978   35.3   21.2   2.6     9.3    2.1
1979   26.1   13.2   9.9     2.9    0.0     1979   27.0   15.4   8.3     3.4    0.0     1979   30.5   19.0   5.5     5.6    0.4     1979   38.1   24.2   3.0     8.7    2.2
1980   26.7   14.2   10.0    2.6    0.0     1980   27.9   16.5   8.5     2.9    0.0     1980   31.0   20.1   5.7     4.8    0.4     1980   37.6   25.1   3.1     7.2    2.1
1981   27.9   14.8   10.8    2.3    0.0     1981   29.3   17.3   9.4     2.6    0.0     1981   31.6   20.8   6.6     3.9    0.4     1981   37.4   25.6   3.7     5.9    2.2
1982   26.1   13.5   11.0    1.6    0.0     1982   26.9   15.3   9.8     1.7    0.0     1982   28.5   18.7   6.9     2.6    0.3     1982   33.0   23.5   3.9     4.0    1.6
1983   25.3   12.5   10.9    1.9    0.0     1983   26.5   14.3   10.2    2.0    0.0     1983   27.5   17.2   7.2     2.9    0.3     1983   31.2   21.2   4.0     4.5    1.5
1984   25.8   12.4   11.3    2.1    0.0     1984   27.0   14.2   10.5    2.3    0.0     1984   28.0   17.1   7.4     3.2    0.3     1984   31.6   21.2   4.2     4.8    1.5
1985   25.7   12.4   11.4    2.0    0.0     1985   27.0   14.3   10.5    2.1    0.0     1985   27.8   17.2   7.4     3.0    0.3     1985   30.9   20.8   4.1     4.6    1.5
1986   25.8   12.4   11.3    2.0    0.0     1986   27.0   14.2   10.7    2.1    0.0     1986   27.6   17.0   7.3     3.1    0.2     1986   30.8   20.8   3.9     4.7    1.4
1987   25.5   11.5   11.6    2.4    0.0     1987   27.4   14.0   10.9    2.5    0.0     1987   29.1   17.7   7.5     3.6    0.2     1987   33.0   22.1   4.1     5.5    1.3
1988   26.0   11.7   12.2    2.2    0.0     1988   27.4   13.9   11.2    2.3    0.0     1988   28.5   17.3   7.5     3.5    0.3     1988   31.8   21.5   3.8     5.3    1.3
1989   26.2   11.8   12.1    2.3    0.0     1989   27.7   14.1   11.3    2.4    0.0     1989   28.7   17.4   7.5     3.5    0.3     1989   32.0   21.4   3.9     5.2    1.6
1990   26.2   11.7   12.4    2.2    0.0     1990   27.9   13.8   11.8    2.3    0.0     1990   28.6   17.0   8.1     3.3    0.3     1990   31.5   21.1   4.2     4.9    1.4
1991   25.8   11.4   12.4    2.0    0.0     1991   27.5   13.5   11.9    2.1    0.0     1991   28.4   16.8   8.2     3.1    0.3     1991   31.6   21.2   4.5     4.5    1.4
1992   25.7   11.3   12.4    2.0    0.0     1992   27.6   13.5   12.0    2.1    0.0     1992   28.8   17.1   8.3     3.1    0.3     1992   32.6   21.8   4.4     4.8    1.5
1993   26.1   11.4   12.4    2.3    0.0     1993   28.0   13.6   12.0    2.5    0.0     1993   29.5   17.3   8.4     3.5    0.3     1993   34.3   22.6   4.5     5.5    1.7
1994   26.5   11.6   12.5    2.5    0.0     1994   28.7   13.8   12.2    2.6    0.0     1994   30.7   17.5   9.0     3.8    0.3     1994   36.0   23.0   5.6     5.9    1.5
1995   26.7   11.7   12.3    2.6    0.0     1995   28.9   14.2   11.9    2.8    0.0     1995   31.2   18.1   8.6     4.1    0.3     1995   37.3   24.0   5.2     6.4    1.7
1996   26.8   12.0   12.2    2.6    0.0     1996   29.0   14.5   11.6    2.9    0.0     1996   31.4   18.6   8.2     4.1    0.4     1996   37.5   24.7   4.9     6.1    1.8
1997   26.7   12.1   12.0    2.6    0.0     1997   28.8   14.6   11.4    2.8    0.0     1997   30.9   18.4   8.0     4.1    0.4     1997   36.2   23.6   4.7     5.9    2.0
1998   26.2   11.8   12.0    2.4    0.0     1998   28.5   14.6   11.3    2.6    0.0     1998   30.9   18.8   7.8     3.9    0.4     1998   36.2   23.9   4.6     5.6    2.1
1999   26.4   12.2   11.9    2.4    0.0     1999   28.8   14.9   11.2    2.6    0.0     1999   31.2   19.4   7.6     3.8    0.4     1999   36.3   24.5   4.5     5.4    1.9
2000   26.4   12.2   11.9    2.3    0.0     2000   28.7   15.1   11.1    2.5    0.0     2000   31.1   19.6   7.5     3.6    0.4     2000   35.7   24.4   4.3     5.2    1.7
2001   25.1   11.1   12.3    1.7    0.0     2001   27.7   14.2   11.7    1.8    0.0     2001   29.8   18.5   8.3     2.7    0.3     2001   34.8   24.2   5.1     3.9    1.6


2004   22.7   9.2    11.9    1.6    0.0     2004   24.9   11.6   11.5    1.8    0.0     2004   27.2   16.4   8.1     2.5    0.1     2004   31.3   21.4   4.6     3.7    1.6
                                                     Table A3. Average Tax Rates by Income Groups, 1960-2004 (continued 5)
                   P99.5-99.9                                 P99.9-99.99                                  P99.99-100
        All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate           All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate           All   Indiv. Payroll Corp. Estate
1960   41.4   22.9   0.4    13.4    4.7     1960   55.3   28.7   0.2    16.7    9.7     1960   71.4   31.5   0.0    22.3    17.6
1962   43.4   23.4   0.5    14.9    4.6     1962   56.1   28.3   0.2    17.9    9.8     1962   70.7   29.4   0.1    23.0    18.2
1964   43.6   22.2   0.4    15.7    5.2     1964   56.9   26.8   0.2    18.8    11.1    1964   71.8   27.8   0.0    23.6    20.3
1966   43.4   22.4   0.8    15.3    4.9     1966   56.3   27.3   0.3    18.5    10.1    1966   69.6   28.8   0.1    22.7    18.1
1967   41.4   22.0   0.7    14.1    4.5     1967   52.7   26.3   0.3    16.8    9.3     1967   64.4   27.5   0.1    19.8    17.0
1968   45.7   24.8   0.6    15.6    4.8     1968   57.7   29.2   0.2    18.4    9.8     1968   69.0   29.4   0.1    21.1    18.4
1969   44.7   24.6   0.9    14.5    4.8     1969   56.7   28.5   0.4    17.7    10.2    1969   67.6   27.3   0.1    21.4    18.9
1970   44.6   25.8   0.9    12.0    5.8     1970   59.1   31.5   0.4    14.7    12.5    1970   74.6   32.2   0.1    19.0    23.4
1971   42.8   23.4   1.0    12.1    6.4     1971   57.7   28.7   0.4    14.9    13.7    1971   73.6   29.1   0.1    18.6    25.8
1972   42.9   25.3   1.1    11.0    5.5     1972   56.3   30.6   0.5    13.5    11.7    1972   70.4   31.5   0.1    16.9    21.8
1973   43.5   26.1   1.3    11.5    4.7     1973   55.9   31.2   0.6    14.0    10.0    1973   70.2   32.9   0.2    17.5    19.6
1974   42.0   25.5   1.5    10.8    4.2     1974   53.7   31.4   0.7    13.2    8.5     1974   67.0   34.0   0.2    16.6    16.2
1975   43.6   27.7   1.6     9.7    4.6     1975   56.0   33.8   0.7    11.8    9.6     1975   69.6   36.0   0.2    15.7    17.8
1976   43.7   26.2   1.6    10.4    5.4     1976   55.9   31.4   0.7    12.6    11.2    1976   70.7   33.6   0.2    16.6    20.3
1977   44.0   28.3   1.6    10.6    3.5     1977   55.4   34.7   0.7    12.7    7.2     1977   67.5   37.4   0.2    16.7    13.2
1978   41.7   26.3   1.7    10.4    3.3     1978   52.3   31.9   0.7    12.9    6.7     1978   63.9   34.8   0.2    16.8    12.1
1979   43.7   28.6   1.9     9.8    3.5     1979   53.0   32.7   0.8    12.7    6.8     1979   61.3   32.2   0.2    17.0    12.0
1980   43.0   29.4   1.9     8.3    3.3     1980   51.0   33.4   0.8    10.4    6.5     1980   59.3   34.9   0.2    13.3    11.0
1981   41.9   29.4   2.3     6.9    3.4     1981   49.5   33.1   1.0     8.8    6.6     1981   55.9   33.0   0.2    11.7    11.1
1982   36.8   27.2   2.4     4.8    2.4     1982   42.0   30.1   0.9     6.6    4.4     1982   44.7   29.2   0.2     8.7    6.7
1983   35.2   25.0   2.4     5.5    2.3     1983   41.1   28.7   0.9     7.3    4.2     1983   45.0   29.9   0.2     9.2    5.8
1984   35.2   24.5   2.5     6.0    2.2     1984   40.9   28.4   0.9     7.8    3.8     1984   44.5   29.3   0.2    10.1    5.0
1985   34.9   24.6   2.3     5.9    2.2     1985   40.6   28.2   0.8     7.9    3.7     1985   43.3   28.8   0.2     9.2    5.1
1986   33.8   23.8   2.2     5.8    2.0     1986   38.7   26.6   0.7     7.8    3.6     1986   39.7   25.6   0.1     9.3    4.7
1987   36.3   25.7   2.3     6.4    1.8     1987   40.4   29.2   0.9     7.5    2.8     1987   43.6   30.0   0.2     9.8    3.7
1988   33.2   23.4   2.0     6.2    1.6     1988   34.5   24.1   0.6     7.5    2.2     1988   35.3   23.6   0.1     9.0    2.5
1989   33.4   23.1   2.1     6.1    2.0     1989   35.0   23.9   0.7     7.5    3.0     1989   36.7   23.7   0.1     9.3    3.6
1990   33.0   23.1   2.2     5.8    1.8     1990   34.3   24.0   0.8     6.9    2.6     1990   35.4   23.6   0.1     8.7    3.1
1991   34.0   24.1   2.5     5.5    1.9     1991   36.5   26.1   0.9     6.6    2.9     1991   38.1   26.2   0.2     8.2    3.6
1992   34.8   24.7   2.4     5.8    1.9     1992   36.9   26.5   0.8     6.9    2.8     1992   37.9   26.9   0.1     7.8    3.1
1993   38.6   27.2   2.5     6.6    2.2     1993   43.5   31.0   0.8     8.2    3.4     1993   45.9   31.9   0.2     9.8    4.0
1994   40.4   27.2   3.8     7.2    2.1     1994   45.0   30.8   2.0     9.1    3.2     1994   46.9   31.1   1.0    11.1    3.8
1995   41.2   28.0   3.6     7.5    2.2     1995   45.5   31.0   1.9     9.3    3.3     1995   47.5   31.7   1.0    10.8    4.0
1996   41.1   28.1   3.3     7.3    2.3     1996   44.8   30.6   1.8     9.1    3.4     1996   46.5   31.1   1.0    10.5    4.0
1997   39.6   26.9   3.2     7.0    2.6     1997   42.5   28.5   1.6     8.9    3.5     1997   43.8   29.4   1.1     9.3    4.0
1998   39.2   26.9   3.0     6.6    2.7     1998   42.0   28.8   1.6     8.0    3.5     1998   42.9   29.7   1.2     8.1    3.9
1999   39.0   27.3   2.9     6.5    2.4     1999   41.4   29.2   1.6     7.5    3.0     1999   42.0   30.4   1.3     7.1    3.2
2000   38.4   27.3   2.8     6.1    2.1     2000   40.2   29.0   1.6     7.1    2.6     2000   40.8   30.1   1.3     6.6    2.7
2001   37.7   27.4   3.3     4.9    2.0     2001   40.4   30.0   1.9     5.9    2.7     2001   41.3   30.9   1.4     6.0    3.0


2004   33.0   23.8   3.0     4.3    1.9     2004   34.1   25.1   1.6     4.9    2.4     2004   34.7   26.2   1.4     4.6    2.5
                                           Table A4. Aggregate Income and Tax Rates for International Comparisons

                                                                                United States                                 United Kingdom                                France
                                                                               1970               2004                        1970                2000              1970             2005



A. Aggregates Estimates used in the study

Tax unit type                                                                Family              Family                      Family             Individual         Family            Family
Total number of units ('000s)                                                79,924             143,982                      28,206              47,652            21,033            36,793

Total nominal personal income                                                706,353           7,202,824                     36,104             701,771            76,708        1,200,050
Pre-tax real income per tax unit                                              43,021             50,026                      13,926              14,727            22,103          32,616
Post-tax real income per tax unit

Individual income tax rate                                                   12.52%             11.47%                       17.06%             15.04%             5.33%          3.80%
Payroll tax rate                                                             5.80%              9.26%                        7.00%              8.31%              20.85%         33.35%
Corporate tax rate                                                           4.33%              2.27%
Estate and wealth tax rate                                                   0.65%              0.36%                        1.06%               0.34%             0.26%             0.70%

Total tax rate (included in the study)                                       23.30%             23.36%                       25.12%             23.69%             26.44%         37.85%

B. Average tax rates from OECD statistics

Year                                                                           1970               2003                        1970                2000              1970             2003


Individual income tax rate                                                   14.34%             13.72%                       16.66%             14.88%             5.93%          4.01%
Payroll tax rate                                                              6.30%             10.26%                        9.71%              8.59%             20.73%         29.14%
Estate and wealth tax rate                                                    0.66%              0.39%                        1.06%              0.32%             0.40%          0.81%
Corporate tax rate                                                            5.18%              3.13%                        4.68%              4.94%             3.53%          3.30%

Consumption tax rate (excise, sales, and value added ta                       7.82%              7.07%                       15.21%             16.26%             21.09%         14.65%
Property tax rate (excluding estate and individual wealth                     4.89%              4.31%                       5.53%              5.51%              2.25%          3.39%
Other taxes                                                                   0.00%              0.00%                       0.00%              0.00%              1.38%          2.05%

Total tax rate (including all taxes)                                         39.18%             38.89%                       52.85%             50.50%             55.30%         57.35%

Fraction of all taxes included in the study                                  59.48%             60.07%                       47.53%             46.91%             47.80%         66.00%



Notes: Computations are based on tax statistics and author's computations.
OECD tax statistics are based on OECD (2005), Revenue Statistics, 1965-2004.
Nominal taxes reported in the OECD publication are divided by total nominal personal income estimated in the study.
Tax units in the United States and France are based on families. Tax units in the United Kingdom are based on families in 1970 and on individual adults in 2000.
Nominal incomes are reported in Millions of dollars for the US, Millions of pounds for the UK, and Millions of Euros for France.
Individual income in all three countries includes all payroll taxes. Realized capital gains are included in France and the US but not the UK.
Corporate income taxes are not included in income or tax computations in France and the United Kingdom.
In the United States, OECD tax statistics include federal, state, and local taxes while study includes only federal taxes.
In France, individual income tax includes only the progressive individual income tax. The flat income tax (CSG and RDS) is included in payroll taxes.
                                      Table A5. Income and Tax Rate Statistics for France

                                                                        Average tax rates (percent)                  Income shares


                                Average
                              Income (pre-           Individual                                            Total    Pre-tax   Post-tax
                               tax) in real           Income         Payroll      Estate     Progressive   Direct   income    income
    Income Groups              2005 Euros               Tax          Taxes         Tax       Wealth Tax    Taxes     share     share
         (1)                       (2)                   (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)        (7)       (8)       (9)

A. Year 1970
     Full Population            € 22,103                 5.3           20.8         0.3             0.0    26.4      100.0     100.0
 (21.0 million families)
          P0-90                 € 17,020                 2.3           24.0         0.0             0.0    26.3      69.30     69.39
        P90-95                  € 47,073                6.4            17.6         0.2             0.0    24.2      10.65     10.97
        P95-99                  € 69,144                10.6           14.1         0.4             0.0    25.1      12.51     12.74
       P99-99.5                 € 114,374               16.8           10.6         0.8             0.0    28.2      2.59      2.52
      P99.5-99.9                € 170,477               21.9           7.4          1.9             0.0    31.2      3.09      2.88
      P99.9-99.99               € 335,622               30.2           4.2          4.2             0.0    38.6      1.37      1.14
       P99.99-100             € 1,095,678               40.1            1.7         6.9             0.0    48.8      0.50       0.35


B. Year 2005
     Full Population            € 38,665                 3.8           33.3         0.5             0.2    37.8      100.0     100.0
 (36.8 million families)
          P0-90                 € 29,612                 1.8           34.8         0.1             0.0    36.7      68.93     70.19
        P90-95                  € 89,486                4.5            33.7         0.6             0.0    38.8      11.57     11.39
        P95-99                  € 124,156               7.0            31.4         1.4             0.0    39.8      12.84     12.44
       P99-99.5                 € 182,681               11.6           26.5         2.1             0.1    40.3      2.36      2.27
      P99.5-99.9                € 258,371               16.4           21.4         3.0             2.1    43.0      2.67      2.45
      P99.9-99.99               € 512,979               22.3           16.5         4.8             4.1    47.8      1.19      1.00
       P99.99-100             € 1,645,885               28.8            8.5         7.6             16.6   61.5      0.43       0.26




Notes: Computations are based on income tax return statistics analyzed in Piketty (2001).
Year 2005 computations are based on incomes from 1998 adjusted for growth and using 2005 tax law.
Families are ranked based on market income excluding realized capital gains.
Average income includes realized capital gains and imputed payroll taxes. Tax rates are estimated
relative to income including realized capital gains and imputed payroll taxes.
    30%


    25%


    20%


    15%


    10%


     5%                               Individual Tax                 Payroll Tax                     Corporate Tax                      Estate Tax


     0%
          1960
                 1962
                        1964
                               1966
                                      1968
                                             1970
                                                    1972
                                                           1974
                                                                  1976
                                                                         1978
                                                                                1980
                                                                                       1982
                                                                                              1984
                                                                                                     1986
                                                                                                            1988
                                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                          1992
                                                                                                                                 1994
                                                                                                                                        1996
                                                                                                                                               1998
                                                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                                                                                    2004
                                                            FIGURE A1
                                                    Average tax rates, 1960-2004
Figure displays the average tax rate for each of the 4 federal taxes for the full population.
Realized capital gains and corporate tax are added back to income when computing tax rates
Payroll taxes include employer+employee Social Security and Medicare taxes
    50%

    45%

    40%

    35%

    30%

    25%

    20%

    15%

    10%
                                  Individual Tax                   Payroll Tax                Corporate Tax                      Estate Tax
     5%

     0%
          1960
                 1962
                        1964
                               1966
                                      1968
                                             1970
                                                    1972
                                                           1974
                                                                  1976
                                                                         1978
                                                                                1980
                                                                                       1982
                                                                                              1984
                                                                                                     1986
                                                                                                            1988
                                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                          1992
                                                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                                                         1996
                                                                                                                                                1998
                                                                                                                                                       2000
                                                      FIGURE A2
                                             The Top 1% tax rates, 1960-2001
Source: Table A3
   40%

   35%

   30%

   25%

   20%

   15%

   10%
                         Individual Tax      Payroll Tax      Corporate Tax       excise
     5%

     0%
          1979

                 1981

                        1983

                               1985

                                      1987

                                             1989

                                                    1991

                                                           1993

                                                                  1995

                                                                         1997

                                                                                1999

                                                                                       2001

                                                                                              2003
                                      FIGURE A3
                    The Top 1% tax rates, CBO estimates, 1979-2003
Source: CBO (2001) updated to 2003
