                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE CHILEAN PENSION REFORM TURNS 25:
                     LESSONS FROM THE SOCIAL PROTECTION SURVEY

                                         Alberto Arenas de Mesa
                                              David Bravo
                                            Jere R. Behrman
                                            Olivia S. Mitchell
                                             Petra E. Todd

                                          Working Paper 12401
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12401


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006



With assistance from Andres Otero, Jeremy Skog, Javiera Vasquez, and Viviana Velez-Grajales. Lead
authors are listed alphabetically. Arenas is in the Ministry of Finance of Chile. Bravo is Professor of
Economics and Head of the Center for Microdata at the University of Chile; Otero and Vasquez are Research
Associates at the Center. Behrman, Mitchell, and Todd are Professors and Skog and Velez are graduate
students at the University of Pennsylvania. This paper was presented at a conference co-sponsored in March
of 2006 by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México, and the
Pension Research Council, entitled “Lessons from Pension Reform in the Americas”. The authors
acknowledge research support from NIA grant AG023774-01; a grant from the Mellon Foundation to the
Population Studies Center on Latin American demographic issues; awards from the Population Aging
Research Center (PARC) of the University of Pennsylvania Population Studies Center, and the Boettner
Center for Pensions and Retirement Security and Pension Research Council at the University of
Pennsylvania. Opinions and errors are solely those of the authors and do not reflect views of the institutions
supporting the research nor with whom the authors are affiliated. @Arenas, Behrman, Bravo, Mitchell, and
Todd. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Alberto Arenas de Mesa, David Bravo, Jere R. Behrman, Olivia S. Mitchell and Petra E. Todd.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Chilean Pension Reform Turns 25: Lessons From the Social Protection Survey
Alberto Arenas de Mesa, David Bravo, Jere R. Behrman, Olivia S. Mitchell and Petra E. Todd
NBER Working Paper No. 12401
July 2006
JEL No. G23, H55, J14

                                          ABSTRACT


In 1980, Chile dramatically reformed its retirement system, replacing what was an old insolvent
PAYGO program with a new structure that relies heavily on funded defined contribution individual
accounts. In addition, eligibility and benefit requirements were standardized, and a safety net for
old-age poverty was strengthened. Twenty-five years after this reform, the Chilean model is being
re-assessed, in terms of coverage, contribution, investment, and retirement benefit outcomes. This
paper introduces a recently-developed longitudinal survey of individual respondents in Chile, the
Social Protection Survey (or Encuesta de Previsión Social, EPS), and illustrates some uses of this
survey for microeconomic analysis of key aspects of the Chilean system.


Alberto Arenas de Mesa                               Olivia S. Mitchell
Centro de Microdatos, Universidad de Chile           Department of Insurance & Risk
Diag Paraguay #257, Torre 26, Of 1503                Management
Santiago                                             University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
CHILE                                                3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
                                                     Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
David Bravo                                          and NBER
Centro de Microdatos, Universidad de Chile           mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu
Diag Paraguay #257, Torre 26, Of 1503
Santiago                                             Petra E. Todd
CHILE                                                Department of Economics
dbravo@econ.facea.uchile.cl                          University of Pennsylvania
                                                     3718 Locust Walk
Jere R. Behrman                                      Philadelphia, PA 19104
Department of Economics                              and NBER
University of Pennsylvania                           petra@athena.sas.upenn.edu
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
jbehrman@pop.upenn.edu
                                                                                                                  1




                           The Chilean Pension Reform Turns 25:
                          Lessons from the Social Protection Survey



        Global aging trends pose bankruptcy threats to many conventional pay-as-you-go
(PAYGO) social security systems around the world. Accordingly, analysts are looking with keen
interest at Chile’s funded individual-account defined contribution pension plan, a system that
was adopted in 1981 and remains in place after 25 years. Numerous other Latin American
countries followed Chile in embracing funded individual-account pensions, and the Chilean
model has received substantial attention in the United States and in other countries as well.1
Commentators have showered the Chilean pension reform with both praise and criticism, and
numerous studies have analyzed dimensions of the reform including its impact on the
macroeconomy, capital markets, and aggregate savings.2 Despite the prominence of the Chilean
approach to old-age security and continued debate about the pension system’s impacts, however,
there has been little attention to microeconomic aspects of the new retirement program. In part,
this lack of research is attributable to the lack of longitudinal microeconomic data with which to
conduct such analyses.
        Our goal in this paper is to introduce a recently-developed longitudinal survey of
individual respondents -- the Social Protection Survey (Encuesta de Previsión Social or EPS),
which provides invaluable new information for microeconomic analyses of key aspects of the
Chilean pension system, and to illustrate some of the analyses possible with these data. Initiated

1
  Other Latin American countries who reformed their pension systems along similar lines include Perú (1993),
Colombia (1994), Argentina (1994), Uruguay (1996), Bolivia (1997), México (1997), El Salvador (1998), Costa
Rica (2001), the Dominican Republic (2003), Nicaragua (2004) and Ecuador (2004). Cogan and Mitchell (2003)
discuss prospects for funded individual defined contribution account pensions in the United States.
2
   Many have written on Chilean pensions system (c.f. Cheyre, 1988; Iglesias and Acuña, 1991; Baeza and
Margozzini, 1995 and SAFP, 1998). Implementati and operational aspects have been explored by Diamond (1994),
Diamond and Valdés-Prieto (1994), Arenas de Mesa (1997) and Mesa-Lago and Arenas de Mesa (1998). Fiscal
aspects of the reform are the focus of other work (c.f. Ortúzar, 1988; Marcel and Arenas de Mesa, 1992; Arenas de
Mesa, 1999). Arenas de Mesa and Marcel (1999) have estimated the financing costs associated with the transition
(from the old PAYGO to the new funded system) and minimum basic pension guarantees. Yet a common
characteristic of these studies (and most studies on the Chilean pension reform) is the use of aggregate and macro-
economic information. In fact, the implications of the pension reform on aspects such as private savings are usually
deduced from simple aggregate correlations of macro-economic indicators (even though Chile experienced a
significant number of concurrent economic reforms) or from simulations carried out on general equilibrium models
(the pioneering application in this respect was Arrau, 1991). Even when specific aspects such as the minimum basic
pension were analyzed, analysts have simulated representative individuals as they lacked microeconomic data;
accordingly they did not consider individual heterogeneities critical for questions of equity (c.f. Wagner, 1991;
Zurita, 1994).
                                                                                                        2



in 2002, the EPS fielded a follow-up round in 2004; additional survey waves are scheduled for
2006 and every two years thereafter (funding permitting). In addition, the research team has
worked to link respondent records to a wide range of historical administrative files on
contribution patterns, benefit payments, and other program features. Accordingly, the EPS
represents a substantial advance for analysts interested in important micro questions related to
the operation of the new Chilean retirement system. To illustrate some of the richness of the new
information available, this paper presents new analyses regarding three key policy questions:
            1. Who participates in the Chilean retirement system, and what do lifetime contribution
            patterns look like?
            2. What have people accumulated in the Chilean retirement system, and what benefits
            may be anticipated?
            3. How financially knowledgeable are Chileans about their retirement system?
            These three interlinked questions are of interest as they pertain to the central purpose of a
retirement system, namely to provide adequate resources for a secure retirement. The subject of
pension coverage and who contributes to their pensions over their work lives is important in the
Latin American context as well in many other nations where pension system non-participation is
currently a topic of active debate.3 Whether and how individual workers and their families
participate in the system can only be studied with micro data of the sort we are developing.
Anticipated retirement benefits from the system are also of key policy interest, as these will vary
with lifetime contribution patterns as well as socioeconomic status, retirement ages, and other
factors. In the Chilean context, it is also worth recognizing that the funded individual-account
program is backstopped by safety net components, to protect those who accumulate little in their
personal accounts. Improved projections of future financing burdens will require detailed data
on patterns of contributions and assets accumulated over the lifetime. And finally, learning more
about workers’ financial literacy regarding their pension system is of interest in the Chilean case,
as lack of knowledge may possibly explain participation and other choices related to the system,
as well as whether the system favors certain types of people over others (e.g., those with more
vs. less schooling).
            To preview our results, we show:



3
    See for instance Gill et al. (2005).
                                                                                         3




•   Over their worklives, men self-report contributing to the pension system about
    half the time since age 18, with lower levels for women. Thus men in their 40’s
    report contributing for a total of about 14 years since age 18, and women about 10
    years.
•   Self-reports of payments into the new Chilean pension system indicate higher
    contribution levels than do administrative records for the same people over the
    same time period. For instance, administrative records for men currently in their
    40’s indicate about 13 years of contribution since age 18, and for women about 6
    years.
•   Spells of non-contribution appear mainly to be periods when people held no jobs,
    were unemployed, or were self-employed (self-employed persons are not required
    to contribute to the system). In other words, contribution patterns during periods
    of work as employees (particularly wage employment) are very high.
•   Account balances reported by respondents who claim to know their AFP
    accumulations are remarkably similar to those derived from administrative
    records, averaging around $3 million Chilean pesos (~US$5,600). Yet only 40%
    of the respondents are able to provide an estimated balance, and administrative
    data for the entire sample suggests that those who offer estimates have larger
    accounts than respondents who cannot estimate their AFP assets.
•   Retirement payments for those currently reaching retirement age also depend on
    Recognition Bonds from the old PAYGO system. Those Recognition Bonds are
    worth as much as the AFP system assets for respondents entitled to them.
    Accordingly, any analysis of retirement assets and eventual benefits must
    recognize both sources of retirement support.
•   Knowledge of the new Chilean pension system is far from perfect. For instance,
    most workers cannot accurately report contribution requirements under the new
    system, how much they pay in commissions, what the rules are for minimum
    pensions, and how they have their funds invested. Lack of knowledge is
    concentrated among those employees with poorer backgrounds, less education,
    and women.
                                                                                                       4




               •   Among retirees, knowledge is more satisfactory. Most people who are retired
                   according to administrative records also self-report they are retired (84%). Some
                   two thirds of the retirees know what kind of pension they are receiving, and about
                   64% knows the benefit amount (+-20%), though the retired tend to report smaller
                   amounts than are indicated by the administrative data. In general, people who
                   know their pension amounts also are those receiving larger benefits than the
                   median.
Some of these findings appear to be matters of concern to the newly elected Chilean president
who confirms that pension reform is high on her policy agenda.


I. The Evolution of Chile’s Retirement System4
           Chile pioneered the development of social security in Latin America, establishing its first
national social insurance fund in 1924. The subsequent evolution of Chile’s social security
system had three stages. The first, between 1924 and the 1970s, was based on the Bismarkian
model of occupationally segmented social insurance schemes. The second, from the 1970s to
1980, reflected the Beveridge plan’s proposal for universal social security coverage. The
hallmark of the third, which began in 1980, was the development of a funded system with
privately managed individual accounts, supplemented with a social safety net to be described
below.
A.. The Chilean Retirement System Before 1980
           The Chilean old-age system began in the 1920s, and by the mid-1950s, three main
pension funds (or “cajas”) provided benefits for most salaried workers and two separate funds
covered the police and armed forces. As time went on, other funds were created and the menu of
regimes also expanded within the three main pension programs. As of the end of the 1970’s, the
Chilean retirement system included many individual regimes (150) and substantial institutional
fragmentation (35 different funds; see Castañeda, 1990). Consequently coverage was stratified,
only moderately progressive, and threatened the nation with a rising fiscal burden. Several
different governments tried unsuccessfully to reform the structure over the years, but their
attempts were repeatedly blocked by powerful interest groups (Arellano 1985; Mesa-Lago 1994).
Benefit eligibility varied across sectors and depended on a minimum number of work years in

4
    This section draws heavily on Arenas de Mesa (2005).
                                                                                                       5



that sector. Retirement payouts were set according to defined benefit formulas that granted
higher payouts for more years of work and higher pay in that sector. Many workers were not
covered at all by any retirement plan, and those who were faced very uncertain benefits due to
the programs’ increasing insolvencies.
Issues regarding Coverage: The core objective of an old-age system is to ensure an adequate
income for retirees, with most modern systems also providing social insurance for disabled
persons, surviving spouses, and orphans. Effectiveness in fulfilling these objectives therefore
relies heavily on the system’s ability to collect contributions or taxes when individuals are in the
economically active population (EAP). Accordingly, assessing a pension system’s success is at
least partly measurable by inquiring what percent of active workers pays into the program. Table
1 summarizes the fraction of the labor force and the fraction of the employed population that has
paid into the Chilean retirement system over time, and it shows that the highest ratio of
contributors was seen mid-1970s with a downward pattern thereafter. When the new system was
introduced in 1980, the fraction of workers and the overall labor force that contributed to the INP
system fell precipitously, while the contribution rate to the AFP system rose steadily. Other
authors report similar patterns over the period, although levels of coverage differ from one study
to the next (Cheyre 1988; Arellano 1985).
[Table 1 here]
       The downward trend in effective coverage that began in the early 1970s can be accounted
for in part by rising unemployment, since jobless workers are not expected to pay into the
system. But increasing unemployment was not the only reason since coverage within
occupations (among workers with jobs) also declined in the mid-1970s, falling from 86 percent
to 71 percent over the period 1975 to 1980 (Cheyre, 1988) or from 71 percent to 53 percent
(Arellano, 1985). Some writers contend that much of the coverage decline during the 1970s was
attributable to increased evasion (Cheyre, 1988). Other writers emphasize the complex
interaction of higher unemployment, greater incentives for evasion, and more precarious labor
relations (Marcel and Arenas de Mesa 1992).
Financing the Old PAYGO System: Another measure of a retirement system’s effectiveness has
to do with its ability to provide benefits to those eligible to receive benefits. In Chile, the
number of retirees and others eligible to receive benefits climbed from approximately 500,000
                                                                                                     6



people in the late 1960s to more than 1 million people by the end of the 1970s, for an average
annual growth rate during that decade of 5.7 percent (Arenas de Mesa 2000).
       Prior to 1980, the system was for all intents and purposes, a PAYGO system (returns on
the few invested assets amounted to only 2.5 percent of the system’s total annual revenues). As a
result, the system’s financial equilibrium depended on economic growth, since in a PAYGO
program, that determines wage levels and hence revenues from contributions (along with trends
in the ratio of contributing members to noncontributing members).
       Assuming constant conditions in terms of replacement ratios and contribution rates, the
contribution ratio is in turn determined by demographic factors such as the age composition of
the population, economic factors such as unemployment, the relative size of the informal sector
in the economy, evasion rates, regulatory and policy-related factors such as the established
retirement age, and pension eligibility requirements in such cases as early retirement options. In
Chile, the ratio of contributing to noncontributing members had trended downward between
1965 and 1980, falling from 3.6 to 2 contributing members for every pensioner. At the time of
the reform, government revenues averaging 2 per cent of GDP per annum had already been
required to finance the system (see Table 2); further, it seemed clear that maintaining pension
promises would have required further infusion of large amounts of government revenues to the
old-age system.
[Table 2 here]
B. The 1980 Chilean Pension Reform
       Chile’s pension system, thus, like those of many other Latin American countries that
undertook reforms later, was institutionally fragmented, included a vast number of different
regimes, and faced problems regarding finances, coverage, equity, and administrative efficiency
(Arenas de Mesa 2000). Both the Frei and Allende administrations attempted to standardize the
pension regimes and to do away with privileges enjoyed by limited groups, but both failed to
achieve the necessary consensus.
       Several years after the military government of General Pinochet took power, it launched
national retirement system reform. The first phase sought to stabilize the PAYGO system by
raising retirement ages, increasing contribution rates, and eliminating some special schemes.
Subsequently in 1980, the government moved to dramatically reform the system by closing the
old system to new workers, replacing it with a new system which places at center stage a system
                                                                                                                  7



of funded defined contribution individual accounts. In addition, eligibility and benefit
requirements were standardized.
        While many nonChileans focus primarily on the individual account element of the
pension system, it must be recognized that the resulting structure is a “three-pillar public/private”
system, in the terminology of the World Bank (1994). The first pillar has three key components:
        (1) A noncontributory public system provides welfare-based pensions (pensiones
        asistenciales, or PASIS) for the indigent. The system is means tested and is operated
        centrally, for both the determination and payment of PASIS benefits.
        (2) A state-guaranteed minimum pension (MPG) for participants in the Administradoras
        de Fondos de Pensiones (AFPs, or pension fund managers) who have 20 years of
        contributions. The purpose of the MPG is to ensure that all eligible participants will
        receive a basic level of minimum old-age income, and it is a key element of Chile’s
        social protection policy. In practice, the federal government makes transfer payments to
        the AFP accounts of retirees who have insufficient balances to pay the minimum pension.
        (3) A public defined benefit system known as the Instituto de Normalización Provisional
        (INP, or National Pension Fund) which administers the old PAYGO defined benefit
        program closed to new entrants by the 1980 reform.5
        The second pillar of the Chilean pension system consists of the mandatory contributory
defined contribution program known as the AFP system. This is a national savings program
aimed at all wage and salary workers, intended to provide participants with old-age benefits (it
also provides life insurance and disability benefits as part of the mandatory program). When the
new program was announced, existing workers were required to decide whether to remain in the
old INP system or to move to the new system. Those who moved to the new system received
credit for INP contributions known as a transferable Recognition Bond (RB).6 The new AFP
system is mandatory for all new wage and salary workers joining the labor force as of 1981, but
affiliation remains optional for self-employed workers.



5
  This institution also manages the retirement systems of the armed forces (the National Defense Pension Fund or
Caja de Previsión de la Defensa Nacional -CAPREDENA) and the police force (Chilean Police Force Pension
Division or Dirección de Previsión de Carabineros de Chile - DIPRECA).
6
  This is a lump-sum paid by to workers by the government at retirement, based on the last 12 monthly contributions
before June 1979 and adjusted by the proportion of total years under the public system and an annuity factor. RBs
are expected to cost around 1% of GDP per year for the period 2000-2020 (Arenas de Mesa and Marcel, 1999).
                                                                                                                     8



         Wage workers in the AFP system establish individual pension accounts by affiliating
with one of the privately managed pension funds. By law, workers must contribute 10% of their
monthly earnings, plus an additional contribution (currently between 2% and 3% of monthly
wages) to cover administrative costs as well as disability and survivor insurance.7 Workers may
only participate in one AFP at any given time, but they may periodically switch between AFPs
by providing proper notice.8 Initially all AFP monies were invested in government bonds,
though more recently pension fund managers have been permitted to offer a broader (though
regulated) array of investment choices. They also offer a life-cycle investment strategy that
automatically moves assets into more conservative investments as workers age. At retirement,
retirees may use their accumulated funds (including the RBs) to purchase a lifetime income
stream.9
         Affiliates having contributed at least 20 years but who have accumulated funds
insufficient to provide the minimum pension guarantee level are entitled to receive a government
subsidy financed from general tax revenues.10 Workers cannot receive their pensions until the
legal retirement age (currently age 60 for women and 65 for men), but early retirement is
allowed under some conditions.11 Naturally, as with any defined contribution plan, retiree
benefits depend directly on AFP balances at retirement, and hence benefits are a function of
workers’ lifetime earnings, contribution histories, and AFP investment choices. For this reason,
retirees’ benefits depend more closely on individuals’ risk preferences and behavior, whereas in
a defined benefit PAYGO plan, solvency risks are more prominent.
         The third pillar of the Chilean system, like the second, operates on the basis of
individually funded defined-contribution accounts, but in keeping with the World Bank model

7
  Mandatory system contributions are capped at a ceiling earnings level of approximately US$1,500/ month; fewer
than 5% of AFP contributors earn over that ceiling.
8
  In response to high levels of churning across AFPs, the Superintendency of the AFP system in 1997 required
participants to file paperwork in person at their AFP, a move that greatly diminished the rate of fund switching.
9
  Additional factors influencing pension amounts are the worker’s life expectancy (derived from age and sex-
specific official life tables) and the worker’s number of survivors at the time of retirement. Retirees have three
withdrawal options: (i) Programmed Retirement (Retiro Programado), which allows a system of phased
withdrawals from the accumulated funds, and where the pension amount is recalculated every year; in this case the
pension is paid by the AFP; (ii) a real lifetime annuity from an insurance company (Renta Vitalicia); in this case the
AFP will transfer funds to the insurer which in turn makes monthly payments; and (iii) some mix of phased
withdrawals for a determined period and a deferred lifetime annuity.
10
   The current minimum monthly pension is US$105 while the minimum wage is about US$150 a month.
11
   Early retirement may be permitted if the worker can demonstrate that his early retirement benefit would be at least
110% of the minimum pension benefit level and 50% of his average monthly contributions over the last 10 years
(currently 60% of pension benefits paid by AFPs are for early retirement).
                                                                                                                   9



that gained in popularity during the 1990s, it is a voluntary program. Affiliates who wish to pay
more than the mandated pension contribution may do so, and such contributions receive some
tax benefits.
        The new AFP system and the old PAYGO system differ in key ways. Most importantly,
workers’ AFP accumulations represent funded individually-owned accounts, over which
affiliates have some investment and bequest decision-making power. The old system, by
contrast, faced bankruptcy due to its PAYGO structure. In moving to the new plan, the hope was
that workers would become more aware of the value of participating in the system, the size of
their own accumulations, the opportunity to make investment choices, and the options regarding
retirement payouts. Further, under the AFPs, workers have a chance to save more than the 10%
required contribution, which might be attractive to those who truly value access to funded
individual investment-based accounts. Also, AFP savings and pension payouts are inflation-
adjusted, addressing a well-known deficiency of the old PAYGO plan.12 And finally, the fact
that AFP affiliates are guaranteed a minimum wage-indexed retirement benefit – worth twice the
welfare benefit – if they pay into the new system for 20 years was anticipated to draw more
workers into formal sector jobs.
C. Transition Issues
        Twenty-five years of experience with the new reform finds the Chilean transition process
in full swing. Both the old and the new systems continue in operation, with the old one being
gradually wound down over time, and the new one growing at a steady pace. Contributors to the
old Chilean system will cease being active workers in about 2025, and retirement pensions will
stop being paid in approximately 2050.13
        It is interesting that the reform was intended to confine the government’s role to that of
pension system regulator, inspector, supervisor, and guarantor of the AFP system. In particular,
via the Superintendencia de Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones (SAFP, or
Superintendency of Pension Fund Managers), the government is charged with regulating,


12
   All pension system variables (pension funds, yields, benefits) are measured in "unidades de fomento" (UF), an
accounting unit indexed to inflation. Thus, pensions are automatically inflation-adjusted, therefore, solving a long-
standing and serious problem of Chilean social insurance. Unlike regular pensions, however, the minimum pension
is not indexed against inflation but is instead periodically adjusted by the government..
13
   The AFP system currently covers nearly half as many pensioners as the INP system, has more beneficiaries than
the welfare PASIS pension, and includes three times as many beneficiaries as the public pension system for the
armed forces (Arenas de Mesa 2004).
                                                                                                   10



inspecting, and supervising the management of the AFP system (SAFP 2002.) In addition, the
government plays a significant role in several key areas:
   (i) Administration and payment of benefits under the old INP system;
   (ii) Administration, calculation, and payment of “recognition bonds”, for those who
          transferred to the AFPs;
   (iii)Administration and payment of pension benefits under the public plans for the armed
          forces and the police;
   (iv) Administration and payment of the minimum pension guarantee under the AFP system;
          and
   (v) Administration of the PASIS welfare benefit system for indigents and those lacking
          pension coverage.

       The first two of these governmental duties is time-limited, but the others are ongoing.
Furthermore the government also serves as the guarantor of last resort in the event of the
bankruptcy or default of any AFP or insurance provider, and also by ensuring that the yields for
plan members remain above an established floor rate. Each of these responsibilities imposes an
actual and potential financial burden on government coffers, the amount of which is an area of
continuing research (Arenas de Mesa and Gumucio 2000).
Economic Impacts of the Funded Individual Accounts: The accumulating pension funds have
played a growing role in the Chilean economy since 1980. The assets have grown to around 60
per cent of GDP (see Table 3; as of 2003). The pension funds have acted as an engine of growth
for various sectors of the economy and for the capital and life-insurance markets, among others.
The AFPs are now the largest institutional investors in the financial market. They finance five
out of nine new mortgages (SAFP 2002).
[Table 3 here]
       The asset mix of these funds has changed considerably and has tended to become more
diversified (see Table 4). In 1981, the bulk of these investments were in financial paper (71.3
percent), but in 1989 the share of such instruments began to shrink, falling to 26 percent by 2003.
Meanwhile, the share of corporate bonds (bonds issued by nonfinancial institutions) and equities
expanded, rising to 7.7 percent and 14.5 percent (13.5 percent in business enterprises and 1
percent in financial institutions), respectively, by 2003 (about 13 percent of GDP). Investment in
foreign assets began in 1993 (although the law making this an option was passed in 1990). In that
year, such investments amounted to 0.6 percent of the funds’ total value; by 2003, their share had
grown to 23.8 percent. These changes in AFP portfolios have been made possible by the pension
                                                                                                               11



funds’ growth, the development of the capital market and the relaxing of regulations that place
limits on investments (SAFP 2002).
[Table 4 here]




II. The Social Protection Survey and Linked Administrative Data
        In 2002, the Micro-data Center of the Department of Economics of the Universidad de
Chile under the Directorship of David Bravo conducted a new household survey (2002 EPS,
Encuesta de Previsión Social, or Social Protection Survey). This is an invaluable research tool
providing researchers a host of useful new individual-level information for addressing numerous
research questions including the main issues of this chapter – information that previously was
unavailable.14 The interview sample was drawn from a sampling frame of approximately 8.1
million current and former affiliates of the Chilean old-age systems compiled from official
databases obtained from the Chilean Ministry of Labor and Social Security; the frame included
about three-quarters of the population age 15+ in 2001. The survey was fielded between April
and December of 2002, collecting data from individuals who were working, unemployed, out of
the labor force, receiving pensions, or deceased (in the latter case, information was collected
from surviving relatives).
        The 2002 EPS survey included socio-demographic information and current labor market
data for each member of the household, detailed information about receipt of pensions and types
of pension plan participation and retrospective labor market history going back to 1980.
Ultimately, the 2002 survey contains data on 17,246 individuals (937 of them were reports by
surviving relatives) affiliated with the old or the new retirement system for at least one month at
any time during the 1981-2001 time span.15
        Another round of the survey was administered in 2004, which included a second wave for


14
   The 2002 survey was initially called the 2002 History of Labor and Social Security (HLSS, Historia Laboral y
Seguridad Social) survey. But the follow-up 2004 and 2006 longitudinal surveys are called Social Protection
Surveys (SPS, Encuesta de Previsión Social). To avoid awkward terminology therefore we refer in this chapter to
the 2002 data, as well as the subsequent rounds of data, as Social Protection Surveys. The interested reader is
referred to http://www.proteccionsocial.cl/english/presentacion2002.htm for access to the public use data,
codebooks, and documentation of the survey.
15
   Information on the methodology and extent of the survey can be found in Bravo (2004). Members of the Armed
Forces or police covered by separate government pension systems were excluded, as well as a very small percentage
of the Chilean population residing in inaccessible or sparsely populated areas (e.g. islands).
                                                                                                                   12



previously surveyed respondents, plus new surveys for a subsample of individuals not affiliated
with the social security system (individuals never employed in the formal sector) and also a
subsample of new entrants into the AFP system between 2002 and 2004. In addition a host of
new health and wealth questions were introduced for the first time.16 Accordingly, the 2004
survey is representative of the entire Chilean population.17 Furthermore in 2004, the research
project received permission to merge responses to the sampled respondents with administrative
records on pension contributions and earnings in the PAYGO and AFP systems since 1980, data
on the amounts of recognition bonds; and monthly data on account changes in the individual
investment accounts, switches between AFPs, AFP commissions charged, and investment returns
earned on all accounts in the AFP system. The survey data has also been merged with monthly
Social Security records, available since 1981.18 In what follows, we provide details about the
specific variables central for each analysis.


III. Informing the Policy Debate Using the Social Protection Survey
         As noted above, the 2002 and 2004 Social Protection Surveys linked to administrative
records provide the essential data base for answering the critical micro questions about the
current Chilean pension system posed in the introduction of this chapter. Next we turn to the
evidence.
A. Contribution Patterns under the Chilean Retirement System
         In this section, we characterize retirement system contributions made by EPS
respondents. The information used to track contributions is derived from two sources. First, EPS
interviewees were asked about their employment and old-age system work histories and
contribution patterns from 1980 on. Specifically, Module II of the 2002 EPS survey asks, for
each job held since age 15, whether the respondent contributed to the some retirement system,
and if so, which system. In addition it asks respondents to report earnings, hours of work, labor
force status, occupation and industry for each job. We use this survey information to derive the
so-called respondent self-reported months of contribution over time. These may be further
classified according to the workers’ labor market status at the time, which we identify as either

16
   A number of the questions were adapted from the US Health and Retirement Study (HRS) with the intention of
providing cross-national comparisons.
17
   Weights are available to reweight to random sampling proportions.
18
   An additional round of the survey is being administered in 2006 and there are plans to undertake further rounds in
2008 and 2010.
                                                                                                                  13



working, unemployed, or not in the labor force. To derive the self-report months of contributions
to various retirement systems, we first turn to the labor history section of the 2002 EPS. Here we
only count months of contributions reported for respondents between the ages of 18 and 60,
inasmuch as there is little formal work prior to the younger age, and some groups, particularly
women, retire at age 60.
        The results of this tabulation may be seen in Table 5. Panel A contains both self-reports
and administrative records on months of contributions to the AFP system, for those for whom we
have both sets of records.19 Panel B indicates total months of contributions to all retirement
systems, including the old INP as well as the AFP programs. Turning first to the self reports on
AFP contributions, we find that men report more months of AFP contributions, on average, than
do women. This is not surprising, given that many Chilean women leave the paid labor force for
childrearing. Also clear is the rising pattern of contributions by age, such that workers in their
late 20s report 64 months of contributions to the AFP system (5.3 years on average) since
1/1981, while workers in their 50’s report more than double this level (14.1 years). It is worth
recalling that workers older than 39 in 2002 would have been exposed to the old INP system
prior to the 1980 reform, and hence they are likely to have had periods of contributions under the
old system as well (more on this below). 20 Somewhat surprising is the result that months of
contributions do not vary much by education, at least for the self-reported tallies.
[Table 5 here]
        The second column in Panel A, Table 5, indicates mean months of contributions to the
AFP system derived from administrative records over the same calendar period, while the third
column displays the ratio of self-reported months to administrative data.21 Overall, self-reported
contribution months exceed the administrative data counts by 20%, no doubt in part due to recall
error.22 Those in the 30-50 age range seem to be most optimistic regarding their self-reported
months of contribution, with lesser differences for younger and older individuals. The third

19
   The sample size for which we can currently link self-reports and administrative AFP records for the EPS 2002 is
11,305.
20
   The reader should be reminded that as the AFP system has been in place only since the early 1980s and our
tabulations run to mid-2002, the maximum possible number of months in the chart can total only about 260.
21
   Data on AFP contributions are available only from 1/1981. INP contribution patterns may become available in the
future but to date these are unavailable for analysis.
22
   Another reason that the self-reports of contribution months are higher is that the EPS labor history asks for job
beginning and end dates; our calculation assumes that contributions were made without interruption on each job,
which may produce an overstatement of contributions if layoffs or other interruptions occurred but are not accounted
for in the reported beginning and end dates.
                                                                                                  14



column shows that men are less likely to over-report than women, compared to administrative
records; younger workers less than middle aged workers; and educated workers less than the
low-educated. Figure 1 plots the months of contribution patterns and differences by more
detailed age groups, for the AFP system alone, and for (self reports) of contributions to all
retirement systems. Overall the patterns appear similar to those depicted in Table 5.
[Figure 1 here]
       For purposes of comparison, Panel B of Table 5 provides self-reported months of
contribution data for all retirement systems including the old INP, various public sector “cajas”,
and the new AFP system. The first two columns focus on respondents with linked records only,
while the third column focuses on all EPS 2002 respondents (whether or not they had linked
records). Not surprisingly, overall patterns are similar to those previously described by age, sex,
and education. One difference is that self-reported months of contributions to all systems are
higher than those to the AFP system alone, mainly due to the fact that older (age 40+) workers
report more contribution months. This is probably accurate, inasmuch as the older workers could
have been contributors to the old INP system (and we lack accurate contribution history data
from that system).
       Table 6 breaks down the pattern of workers months of contributions in the retirement
system by labor market categories, specifically working, unemployed, and not in the labor force.
The data reveal that the majority of contribution months coincide precisely with those months
when respondents were working (particularly in the wage labor force). And contribution patterns
during period of work (particularly wage employment) are very high. Put differently, lapses in
contributions appear mainly associated with periods of nonemployment, rather than outright
nonpayment of retirement contributions during employed periods. This suggests that analysts
concerned with low levels of retirement accumulations would do well to focus on non- or un-
employment. Furthermore, contribution months are very high for periods of wage work, in the
80-90 percentile range. This implies that the problems of low contribution months are not
concentrated among the self-employed; though self-employed persons are not required to
contribute to the system this does not seem to be a major source of nonpayment.
[Table 6 here]


B. Retirement Accumulations in the Chilean Retirement System
                                                                                                              15



        Previous research has focused on whether workers are contributing ‘enough’ to the
Chilean retirement system to obtain adequate benefit levels in retirement. Thus analysts have
calculated projected replacement ratios for AFP participants on the assumption that workers
would contribute 70-90 percent of their worklives (c.f. Arenas de Mesa and Gana 2003). The
replacement rate is defined here as the percentage of the worker’s last pay divided by his
monthly pension (assuming the partnered retiree takes a joint and survivor benefit). But in a
more recent study, Arenas de Mesa, Llanés, and Miranda (2004) re-computed projected
replacement ratios using the self-reports of contribution patterns taken from the 2002 EPS.
These new findings are important as they rely on actual patterns of contributions reported over
workers’ lifetimes, rather than assumed contribution patterns on average. In addition they
provide evidence at the individual worker level so one can project patterns by earnings, sex, and
age. These studies project likely AFP balances at retirement, and replacement rates implied by
these projections for a male age-65 retiree with female partner 5 years younger, and a lifetime
contribution pattern of 80% of the worklife (aka “density of contributions”) of 60%; and a
female age-60 retiree with a density of contributions of 80% or 43%.23 At 65, the man having
contributed 80% of his worklife would be expected to accumulate an AFP balance of $37
million, which those authors expect would finance a (joint and survivor) annuity amounting to
about 60% of pre-retirement pay. A single woman who retires earlier after the same contribution
pattern would accumulate an AFP balance of $29 million implying a replacement ratio of 43%.
But having lower lifetime contributions reduces projections substantially: for instance, if men
contributed only 60% of the time and women 43%, estimated AFP balances would be projected
to be lower by 25 to 46%, and the pension annuity drops from to 60% to 44% for men, and from
43% to 23% for women (see Figures 2 and 3).
[Figures 2 and 3 here]
        In the present paper, we do not develop new projections of accumulations and
replacement rates using the administrative data, though this will be undertaken in future work.
But we inform that analysis by reporting on retirement system assets accumulated by participants
to date. Panel A of Table 7, for instance, shows that AFP account balances reported by
respondents who state that they know their accumulations are quite accurately measured

23
  That analysis assumes that workers’ initial taxable earnings were CP$200,000 (somewhat below twice the current
minimum wage); that real earnings would grows at 2% per year to 50 years of age; that pension investments would
earn 4% real per year; and that the worker would pay fixed monthly commissions of $500.
                                                                                                        16



compared to AFP balances from administrative records, with the median at around $3 million
Chilean pesos (~US$5,600). On the other hand, only 40% of the EPS respondents could provide
an estimated AFP balance, and one might anticipate that these individuals would likely have
more assets than those unable to provide an estimate. Indeed, over the entire EPS sample, the
median respondent offering a balance estimate appears to have four times the accumulation
compared to the median respondent unable to estimate his AFP assets, according to
administrative records. Across the entire sample, the median AFP accumulation derived from
administrative records totals about $1.5 million Chilean pesos (or about US$2,800).
[Table 7 here]
           Retirement payments for those currently reaching retirement age also depend on
Recognition Bonds from the old PAYGO system. Panel B of Table 7 shows that these
Recognition Bonds are worth as much as the AFP system assets for respondents entitled to them,
with the median account worth about $4 million Chilean pesos (~US$8,000). Accordingly, it is
clear that analyses of projected retirement benefits under the Chilean retirement system must
recognize both sources of retirement support. Panel C indicates that AFP accruals for those
without a Recognition Bond are lower, in part because this group is much younger than those
who accumulated substantial benefits under the system that was closed to new entrants in 1980.
C. Financial Literacy Regarding the Chilean Pension System
           What workers know about their old-age benefit system can have a major impact on how
effectively they prepare for retirement, and how they determine their retirement plans. For
example, if people believe their benefits rise with deferred retirement, they may be more likely to
respond to incentives to continue work. On the other hand, if they systematically misperceive the
costs and benefits of the system, their misinformation can shape the system’s popularity as well
as the perceived effectiveness of specific reforms (e.g. number of years required for eligibility).
Yet very little is known about how people develop the necessary level of financial literacy to
understand their pension systems, particularly when workers have personal defined contribution
pension accounts. Studies based on the United States’ experience suggest that many workers
arrive at retirement with little knowledge of their retirement system.24 As a result, they often fail
to plan well for their retirement and may be ineffective advocates for retirement system changes.
Little is known about whether similar problems arise for workers in a national defined

24
     See for instance Mitchell (1988), Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) and Lusardi and Mitchell (2006).
                                                                                                      17



contribution system. As they bear greater responsibility for their own retirement and pension
options through personal accounts, workers may be better informed about retirement risks and
rewards.
       In this section, we investigate to what extent Chilean workers understand and make sense
of the pension institutions covering the workforce. We posit that those better informed about
their pensions are more likely to make sensible provision for old age, possibly by contributing
more, paying more attention to plan investments, and making appropriate payout options.
Accordingly, we investigate the factors associated with being informed about the pension
system’s characteristics, focusing on, for example, the association with age, schooling,
occupation, sex, one’s birth cohort, and socioeconomic class. Answers to these questions are
important for understanding how people perceive their pension system and whether they value
the future benefits it will provide. This was an important issue in the recent national elections in
Chile, and is a key source of discussion throughout all the Latin American nations which have
moved toward systems similar to Chile’s (Gill et al. 2004). Our results help identify which
workers can most efficiently understand and maneuver under such plans, how the plans might be
made more effective, and what are the distributional implications of such plans.
       Our results on knowledge of key aspects of the Chilean pension system are summarized
in Table 8. Across the top of the chart we indicate the data source, sample, and number of
included observations in each cell. Columns (a) and (c) refer, respectively, to the responses for
the 2002 survey, first for the entire 2002 sample, and second for just those who were
reinterviewed in the panel in 2004. Column (e) refers to all EPS interviewees in 2004, while
Columns (g), (i), and (k) breaks the total down into the panel subset, new entrants (affiliates) to
the pension system, and non-affiliates.
[Table 8 here]
       Row A in Table 8 reports respondents answers to whether they received a statement from
the AFP system (the quarterly “cartola” which reports past contributions and projects future
benefit amounts). It must be noted that the questions differed slightly across the two years: 2002
respondents were asked whether they had received their AFP quarterly report, whereas 2004
respondents were asked whether they had received an AFP cartola in the past 12 months. In any
case, the results are comparable: in the earlier year, 60% of respondents said they received the
statement, whereas in 2004 the fraction stood at 69%, with a similar change for the subset of
                                                                                                      18



panel members. Three-quarters of new affiliates, who are likely to be younger than the average
respondent, affirm they received it.
       Whether the effort to provide pension information translates into useful knowledge about
the pension system is quite another matter. Row B.1 of Table 8 shows whether respondents knew
the contribution (or payroll tax) rates required for AFP accounts; Row B.2 then indicates whether
the responses are correct. In 2002, slightly more than half (53%) of the respondents claimed that
they knew what the payroll tax rate is, but just over one-quarter (28%) got the answer correct. In
2004, fewer of the panel members (46%) claimed to know the rate, though more of them (34%)
now got the tax rate correct. Not surprisingly, new affiliates are less well-informed, and non
affiliates know little to nothing about required contributions.
       Another topic of recent policy interest has to do with the commissions charged by the
AFPs. If AFP participants pay little attention to investment costs, it is likely that AFPs will not
need to compete amongst themselves to drive down prices and enhance service (Berenstein and
Ruiz, nd; Valdes Prieto, 2005). The results from our analysis show, in Row C, that fewer than
2% of the respondents (including panel members as well as new affiliates), know either the fixed
or variable commissions in either year. Only half of one percent of all respondents claim to know
both the fixed and variable commissions. The fact that workers and savers know virtually
nothing about the costs of investing their funds suggests that there is much work to be done to
educate Chileans about this key aspect of their retirement system.
       Financial information regarding amounts accumulated in workers’ retirement accounts,
and how the funds are invested, is reported in Rows D and E of the same Table. Line D.1
indicates that 45% claim they know their AFP balances in the 2002 survey, with the fraction thus
knowledgeable rising to over 50% two years later. Among panel members interviewed both
waves, 20% of the respondents had more information in the second period than in the first. It is
also of interest that new affiliates also are relatively well informed, with 42% saying they knew
their balances. Line D.2 indicates how accurately respondents in 2004 reported AFP their
balances, compared to administrative records. Estimated balances are within 20% of
administrative amounts for 21% of the sample. Overall, it would appear that AFP plan
participants in Chile are about as well (or poorly) informed as compared to their US counterparts
in corporate pensions. For instance, Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) find that US workers tend to
understate their defined contribution assets by about 30%, at the median, as compared to
                                                                                                   19



administrative records, and by half in the middle and upper tails. Furthermore, the low fraction
of those who can offer accumulation estimates suggests that many workers are not well apprised
of a key retirement asset.
       For the first two decades of life of the Chilean AFP system, affiliates could only decide
which AFP they wanted to invest with, but they were not permitted to diversity their holdings
across AFPs, nor were they permitted to make asset allocations. In 2000, the government
permitted the AFPs to open a more conservative account for retirees or near-retirees (with 10
years of the legal retirement age; and then in 2002, each fund administrator was permitted to
expand the number of investment offerings from two to five in order to allow participants to
diversify their asset allocations. Under this new “multifund” structure, each AFP must offer a so-
called Fund A which invests 80% of the portfolio in equities, Fund E which holds 100% fixed
income; and Funds B-D which hold intermediate fractions of equities. Workers may elect to
hold up to two funds in a single AFP at a time.
       What Chileans indicate that they know about their pension investments is summarized
Section E of Table 8. Line 1 finds that respondents in 2002 did not know much about their
pension investments (10% claimed to know), but this is not surprising given that they had not yet
been granted access to a variety of fund choices. By 2004, almost half of the respondents claim
that they know about the multifund setup, though only one-third would admit to knowing how
many funds there are, and only around one-fifth can give the correct total number of funds.
Further, in 2004, only one-third of the respondents said they knew which funds they held, but
only 16% was accurate and 38% was aware of which fund is the riskiest.
       Turning finally to retirement system payouts, Section F of Table 8 breaks the results into
three topic areas. First, we summarize what people know regarding the AFP system payouts.
Second, we review what they know about the minimum pension guarantee payable to those who
have made 20 years of contributions. And last, we outline what people know about the minimum
welfare (PASIS) benefits.
       Several key questions arise regarding the rules pertaining to eligibility and access to
benefits under the Chilean retirement system. For instance, the legal minimum retirement
age refers to the age at which eligible retirees may claim benefits. When asked what the legal age
is for women and men, knowledge here seems quite widespread – around 83-86% report these
ages accurately in 2002 (Lines F1.1-1.2). The percentages fall a bit by 2004, mainly due to the
                                                                                                     20



inclusion of non-affiliates in the overall sample, though panel members also show a decline in
knowledge. Line 1.3 shows that very few people feel they know how AFP benefits are
calculated, with 14% of the panel in 2002 falling to 11% two years later. Almost two-thirds of
respondents claim to know the rules for spouse and dependent benefits, but again the percentages
fall between years for the same panel sample. It must be acknowledged that many are simply
unaware of the social insurance coverage that their spouses and children receive when the worker
contributes to the AFP system.
       Also of interest is the question of whether respondents know about requirements for the
minimum pension guarantee as well as the benefit level. Some pundits have suggested that
requiring 20 years of contributions for eligibility might induce workers to drop out of formal
sector jobs, and recently some analysts have opined that that the minimum benefit might need to
be raised (Rother 2006). Our EPS research shows (lines F2) that very few respondents in 2002
knew the requirements for the minimum pension benefit, and only a very tiny minority can
accurately report the requirements for the minimum pension guarantee (0.2% or fewer). One ray
of hope regarding financial literacy is the increase in the panel’s awareness of the minimum
pension between 2002 and 2004, rising from 7 to 34% , but the accuracy of their knowledge
declined.
       The final section of Table 8 focuses on what respondents know regarding the welfare
(PASIS) benefit, which is a means-tested payment to the indigent. It is interesting that about
20% of the respondents in both years claim they know the eligibility requirements, with no
important difference between affiliates and nonaffiliates in 2004 (new affiliates know the least).
Further, only 3-4% of the respondents actually know what the correct eligibility requirements are
for these payments. Similarly, a relatively large percent (~17%) claims to know the value of the
welfare payment, but only about 11% actually knows. While those most likely to need the PASIS
benefit, namely the nonaffiliates, are no more likely to be aware of this safety net than others,
they are better informed about the welfare benefit level than their affiliated counterparts. This
may suggest that those most likely to need this program are somewhat more cognizant of it.
       Among retirees, knowledge is generally more accurate than among workers. Most people
who are retired according to administrative records also self-report they are retired (84%). Some
two-thirds of the retirees know what kind of pension they are receiving, and about 64% know the
benefit amount (+-20%), though the retired tend to report smaller amounts than are indicated by
                                                                                                        21



the administrative data. Using the EPS, we can compare respondent questions about payouts
with the administrative records. Comparing those having both self-reports and administrative
data linkage, and focusing first on those who say they took the programmed withdrawal payout
option, Panel A indicates that beneficiaries understate the value of their payouts by about 7%.
That is, at the median, retirees self-reported benefits of only $69,000 pesos, compared to $74,000
from the administrative records. For those receiving life annuities, the degree of understatement
was even more substantial, with retirees reporting benefits about 10% lower than actually paid.
The degree of overstatement was less at the low end. Panel B shows that retires who said they
knew what type of income they received generally had lower actual benefits than the
uninformed. Official data in Panel C show that, as of December 2005, the Chilean pension
system had some 377,000 old-age retirees, of whom almost 70% were receiving benefits in the
form of a life annuity.25


IV. Implications and Conclusions
           It is fitting that the Chilean pension reform is receiving much attention as it celebrates its
Silver Anniversary. But despite this attention and continued debate about the system’s impacts,
there has been little attention to microeconomic aspects of the new retirement program. We have
introduced a recently-developed longitudinal survey of about 20,000 individual respondents that
we have undertaken, the Social Protection Survey (Encuesta de Previsión Social or EPS),
initiated in 2002 with subsequent biennial survey waves. This data set provides valuable new
information for microeconomic analyses of key aspects of the Chilean pension system, that is
strengthened further by the links that we have made between respondent records and a wide
range of historical administrative files on contribution patterns, benefit payments, and other
program features. Accordingly, the EPS represents a substantial advance for analysts interested
in important micro questions related to the operation of the new Chilean retirement system.
           To illustrate some of the richness of the new information available, this paper presents
new analyses regarding three key policy questions:
1. Who participates in the Chilean retirement system, and what do lifetime contribution patterns
look like? We find that on average, men report almost 40% higher months of AFP contributions
than women, which is not surprising given that many women interrupt their labor force careers to

25
     Ths confirms recent findings by James et al. (2006) on payouts under the Chilean pension system.
                                                                                                      22



rear children. Men report about a fifth and women report about a quarter higher months of
contributions than indicated in the administrative records, which suggests that self-reports
underestimate the extent of shortfall in coverage for sufficient months to satisfy the 20 year
minimum contribution requirement for the state-guaranteed minimum pension (MPG) for
participants in the AFPs, somewhat more so for women. The probable extent of dependence on
the PASIS, thus, is greater than would be indicated by self reports. Also not surprising, there is a
positive relation between reported months of AFP contributions and age, with on average an
increase in reported months of contribution of a third of a month for every additional month of
age over the prime working years between 26-30 and 51-55 years of age. Somewhat
surprisingly, self-reports do not differ with schooling attainment; in contrast, the administrative
records indicate a positive association with schooling attainment, at least for those who have
completed high school or higher levels. Thus self reports are likely to somewhat overstate the
relative extent to which those with less schooling are likely to satisfy the 20 year minimum
contribution requirement. Spells of reported noncontributions, finally, are strongly associated
with nonemployment – which suggests that to increase coverage, efforts might best be directed
towards reducing these nonemployment spells.
2. What have people accumulated in the Chilean retirement system, and what benefits may be
anticipated? Earlier analysis of the 2002 EPS show that reported contributions must cover fairly
high percentages of the work life to have replacement rates of over half (e.g., 80% of 65 year old
man’s work life in order to have a replacement rate of 60%). With drops in the percentage of the
work life in which contributions are made, the replacement rate falls on average by as many or
more percentage points. Our findings in this paper show that the EPS respondents who claim to
know their AFP accumulations report balances that are close to those in the administrative
records. But those who do not claim to know their AFP balances according to the administrative
records have much lower balances on average than those who claim to know. Our findings also
indicate that for respondents entitled to Recognition Bonds from when they transitioned into the
new system, such bonds are worth on average about as much as their AFP assets. Therefore it is
important that assessments of their probable financial position upon retirement include the
Recognition Bonds in addition to their AFP balances.
3. How financially knowledgeable are Chileans about their retirement system?
                                                                                                        23



       While about two thirds of AFP member respondents affirm that they receive periodic
reports on past contributions and projected future benefits, much smaller proportions know
critical details such as payroll tax rates and commission rates. That such a small percentage of
AFP contributors know the latter suggests that work is needed to increase the effective
competition among AFP providers. The majority of AFP plan participants also do not know
their AFP balances or details on the multifund system.or the details of the eligibility
requirements for minimum pensions. On the other hand, among those who claimed to know
their AFP balances, they appear better informed about their accumulations than their US
counterparts in corporate pensions, and the fraction of respondents who claimed to know their
AFP balances increased between 2002 and 2004. We also know that knowledge about
retirement benefits is far from perfect. Most of the retirees according to administrative records
also report they are self-retired. Only two-thirds of the pensioners know what kind benefit they
receive, and 64% know the amount of the benefit (+-20%). In other words, it appears that
information gaps are considerable, which must limit the effectiveness of the system.
       Ultimately, to build a more resilient pension system, it is likely that people will need a
better appreciation of exactly what is required for eligibility to each of the pillars. Also, greater
financial literacy will be essential in enhancing the contribution and investment patterns.
Moreover, much greater knowledge of commissions and related matters is essential for making
the AFP system more competitive. Further, in order for the government to make useful
budgetary projections better data are needed on who is in the system, who is contributing and
who is likely to try to obtain MPG and/or PASIS.
       If the system is to survive to its Golden Anniversary or longer, it will also have to be
politically resilient. This will be difficult if relatively few Chileans obtain AFP benefits or if
replacement ratios prove low. There probably will be pressure to raise MPGs and PASIS
pensions, with negative fiscal implications. If people do not accumulate much, there probably
will be pressure to allow phased withdrawals instead of annutizing the payoffs, which also poses
risks for the government.
       It is essential, of course, in this stock-taking at the Silver Anniversary of the new Chilean
pension system to recognize that the system is still very young, and in transition. Most people
retiring now were actually not covered by the new system over their entire worklives; rather,
today’s retirees continue to rely heavily on Recognition Bonds, and relatively less on AFP
                                                                                                24



accumulations. What is unknown is how well future retirees will do who spend their entire lives
under the new system. Our initial analysis of the Encuesta de Proteccion Social suggests both
the value of further analysis and some concerns noted above that should be addressed to help the
system to become more effective and efficient.
                                                                                                          25



References

Arrau, Patricio. 1991. "La reforma previsional chilena y su financiamiento durante la transición"
        Santiago: CIEPLAN, Colección Estudios, Vol. 32, (June): 5-44.
Arellano, José Pablo. 1985. Políticas sociales y desarrollo. Chile 1924-1984. Santiago, CIEPLAN.
Arenas de Mesa, A. (2000): “Cobertura Previsional en Chile: Lecciones y Desafíos del Sistema de
       Pensiones Administrado por el Sector Privado”. Serie de Financiamiento del Desarrollo, CEPAL,
       Santiago, Chile.
Arenas de Mesa, A. (1999): “Efectos Fiscales del Sistema de Pensiones en Chile: Proyecciones del
       Déficit Previsional 1999-2037,” Artículo presentado en el Seminario “Responsabilidades
       Fiscales de los Sistemas de Pensiones”, Ministerio de Hacienda y CEPAL, Santiago, Chile.
       Septiembre 2-3.
Arenas de Mesa, Alberto. 2005. “Fiscal and Institutional Considerations and the Chilean Prescription.” In
       Carolin A. Crabbe, ed. A Quarter Century of Pension Reform in Latin America and the
       Caribbean: Lessons Learned and the Next Steps. Washington, DC: Inter-American Development
       Bank, 83-126.
Arenas de Mesa, Alberto. 1997. “Learning from the privatization of the social security pension system in
       Chile: Macroeconomic Effects, Lessons and Challenges.” Ph.D. diss. University of Pittsburgh.
       Pittsburgh.
Arenas de Mesa, Alberto. 1999. "Proyecciones del déficit previsional chileno : Gasto público en
       pensiones asistenciales 1999-2010.” XI Seminario Regional de Política Fiscal, CEPAL, Brasilia,
       January 26-28.
Arenas de Mesa, Alberto, Jere Behrman and David Bravo, 2004, “Characteristics of and Determinants of
       the Density of Contributions in a Private Social Security System.” Michigan Retirement Research
       Center Working Paper. www.mrrc.isr.umich.edu/publications/papers/pdf/wp077.pdf.
Arenas de Mesa, Alberto and Fabio Bertranou. 1997. "Learning from Social Security Reforms: Two
       Different Cases, Chile and Argentina." World Development, Vol. 25, No. 3 (March).
Arenas de Mesa, A. and M. Marcel. (1999): “Fiscal Effects of Social Security Reform in Chile: The Case
       of the Minimum Pension”. Proceedings of the Second APEC Regional Forum on Pension Fund
       Reforms, Viña del Mar, Chile, 26-27 April, Ministerio de Hacienda de Chile and Asian
       Development Bank.
Arenas de Mesa, Alberto and Mario Marcel C. 1993. "Proyecciones de gasto previsional 1992 -2038: Un
       model de simulación para los bonos de reconocimiento." Santiago: Dirección de Presupuestos,
       Ministerio de Hacienda, Documento de Trabajo (February).
Arenas de Mesa, Alberto and Verónica Montecinos. 1999 "The Privatization of Social Security and
       Women'  s Welfare: Gender Effects of the Chilean Reform." Latin American Research Review,
       Vol 34. Nº 3.
Arellano, J.P. (1985). Políticas Sociales y Desarrollo. Chile 1924-1984. Santiago, CIEPLAN.
Arrau, P. (1991): “La reforma previsional chilena y su financiamiento durante la transición”. Santiago:
        CIEPLAN, Colección Estudios, Vol. 32, (Junio): 5-44.
Baeza, Sergio and Francisco Margozzini, eds. 1995. Quince años después. Una mirada al sistema privado
        de pensiones. Santiago: CEP.
                                                                                                          26



Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1988. “Social Security Benefits: An Empirical Study of Expectations and
       Realizations”. In R.R. Campbell and E. Lazear, editors, Issues in Contemporary Retirement.
       Stanford, California Hoover Institution, 312-335.
Bernstein, Solange, Guillermo Larrain, and Francisco Pino. 2002. “Cobertura, Densidad, y Pensiones en
        Chile. Presented at the Joint CEP-SAFP Conference Desafios del Sistema Chileno de Pensiones:
        Competencia y Cobertura. November.
Bernstein, Solange and Jose Luis Ruiz. (no date). “Sensibilidad de la Demanda Con Consumidores
        Desinformados: El Caso de Las AFP in Chile. Working Paper. www.sbs.gob.pe/Journal/Bernstein.pdf
Bonilla, A. and A.Conte-Grand, editores, (1998), Pensiones en América Latina. Lima: Oficina
        Internacional del Trabajo.
Bravo, David. (2004), “Evaluación de los resultados del sistema de pensiones. Informe Final”. January.
       Departamento de Economía, Universidad de Chile.
Bravo, David and Alberto .Arenas de Mesa (2002): “Análisis empírico y propuestas de política para la
       ampliación de la cobertura del sistema chileno de pensiones”, Departamento de Economía,
       Universidad de Chile, Borrador, Junio.
Brown, Jeffrey, Olivia S. Mitchell, James Poterba, and Mark Warshawsky (2001): The Role of Annuity
       Markets in Financing Retirement. MIT Press.
Castañeda, T. Para combatir la pobreza. Política social y descentralización en Chile durante los 80. Centro
       de Estudios Públicos, Noviembre, 1990.
Cheyre, Hernán. 1988. La previsión en Chile ayer y hoy. Santiago: CEP.
Cheyre, Hernan. (1988): La previsión en Chile ayer y hoy. Santiago, Centro de Estudios Públicos.
Cogan, John F. and Olivia S. Mitchell (2003): “Perspectives from the President’s Commission on Social
       Security Reform.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 17(2). Spring.
Diamond, Peter. 1994. "Privatization of Social Security: Lessons from Chile." Revista de Análisis
      Económico, Vol. 9, No. 1, (June): 21-33. Santiago: ILADES.
Diamond, Peter and Salvador Vadés-Prieto. 1994. "Social Security Reform." In B. Bosworth, R.
      Dornbusch and R. Labán, eds., The Chilean Economy. Chapter 7: 257-328. Washington D.C.:
      The Brookings Institution.
Diaz, C., S.Valdés and A.Torche. 1995. “Cobertura catastrófica para los cotizantes del sistema ISAPRE”.
        Instituto de Economía, Diciembre.
Feldstein, Martin 1996. "The Missing Piece in Policy Analysis: Social Security Reform." NBER Working
        Paper, No 5281, (January). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Feldstein, Martin S. and Jeffrey Liebman (2002). The Distributional Aspects of Social Security and Social
        Security Reform. University of Chicago.
Feldstein, Martin and Jeffrey B. Liebman (2001): “Social Security”. NBER Working Paper 8451,
        September.
Gill, Indermit, Truman Packard, and Juan Yermo . 2005. Keeping the Promise of Social Security in Latin
         America. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Gruber, Jonathan (1997): “The Incidence of Payroll Taxation: Evidence from Chile”, American
       Economic Review. March.
Gruber, Jonathan and David Wise (2002): “Social Security Programs and Retirement Around the World:
        Micro Estimation.” NBER Working Paper, December 2002.
                                                                                                          27



Gustman, Alan, and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 2001. “Imperfect Knowledge, Retirement and Saving.”
      NBER Working Paper No. 8406.
Gustman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier. 1999. “What People Don'  t Know About Their Pensions and
      Social Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data from the Health and Retirement Study.” NBER
      Working Paper No. 7368.
Heller, P.S. (1998), “Rethinking Public Pension Reform Initiatives”, IMF Working Papers 98/61, April.
Hernández, Héctor and Alberto Arenas de Mesa. 1999. “Proyecciones del déficit previsional chileno:
       Gasto en garantía estatal de pensiones mínimas 1999-2037.” Documento interno de trabajo,
       Dirección de Presupuestos, Ministerio de Hacienda.
Holzmann, Robert. 1994. "Funded and Private Pensions for Eastern European Countries in Transition."
      Revista de Análisis Económico, Vol. 9, No 1, (June): 169-210. Santiago: ILADES.
Holzmann, Robert. 1996. “Pension reform, financial market development and economic growth :
      preliminary evidence from Chile.” WP/96/94 (August). Washington. D.C. : IMF.
Holzmann, Robert, Truman Packard and Jose Cuesta (2000): “Extending Coverage in Multipillar Pension
      Systems: Constraints and Hypotheses, Preliminary Evidence and Future Research Agenda,”
      Social Protection Discussion Paper No. 0002; World Bank Primer Paper, 2000.
Iglesias, Augusto and Rodrigo Acuña. 1991. Chile: Experiencia con un regimen de capitalización 1981-
         1991. Santiago: CEPAL/PNUD.
James, Estelle, Guillermo Martinez and Augusto Iglesias. 2006. “The Payout Stage in Chile: Who
        Annuitizes and Why?” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance. forthcoming.
James, Estelle and D. Vittas. , 1996. “Mandatory Saving Plans: Are They the Answer to the Old Age
        Problem?" in Private Pensions in International Perspective, eds. O. Mitchell and J. Turner,
        University of Pennsylvania Press
Kotlikoff, Laurence.1996. "Simulating the Privatization of Social Security in General Equilibrium."
        NBER Working Paper, No. 5776 (September). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
        Research.
Larrañaga, Osvaldo, 1999: “Health Sector Reforms in Chile”, in G Perry and D Leipzeger, editors, Chile.
        Recent Policy Lessons and Emeging Challenges, WBI Development Studies, The World Bank,
        Washington DC.
Lusardi, Annamaria. 2003. “Planning and Saving for Retirement,” Dartmouth Working Paper.
        http://www.dartmouth.edu/~alusardi/Lusardi_pdf.pdf.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2006. “Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning:
        Implications for Retirement Wellbeing.”Pension Research Council Working Paper. Lusardi,
        Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. “Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning: Implications for
        Retirement Wellbeing.”
Marcel, Mario and Alberto Arenas. 1992. "Social Security Reform in Chile." Inter-American
        Development Bank (IDB), Occasional Papers, No 5. Washington, D.C.: IDB.
Marcel, M. and A. Arenas de Mesa, (1992): “Social Security Reform in Chile”. Inter-American
        Development Bank (IDB), Occasional Papers, No 5. Washington, D.C.: IDB.
Margozzini, Francisco. 1988. "Estimaciones de las pensiones de vejez que otorgará el actual sistema de
      pensiones." In S. Baeza and R. Manubens, eds., Sistema privado de pensiones en Chile.: 251-274.
      Santiago: CEP.
                                                                                                                    28



Mesa-Lago, C. (1985): El Desarrollo de la Seguridad Social en América Latina. Estudios e Informes de la
      CEPAL N°43, Santiago.
Mesa-Lago, Carmelo (1994): Changing Social Security in Latin America: Toward Alleviating the Costs
      of Economic Reform. Boulder and London: Lynne Rienner Publishers, Inc.
Mesa-Lago, Carmelo (1998): “La Reforma Estructural de Pensiones en América Latina: Tipología,
      Comprobación de Presupuestos y Enseñanzas”. Pensiones en América Latina, Dos Décadas de
      Reforma, Alejandro Bonilla García y Alfredo H. Conte-Grand (compiladores), OIT.
Mesa-Lago, Carmelo (1996): “Las reformas de pensiones de seguridad social en América Latina:
      Sistemas públicos, privados, mixtos y paralelos”. Estudios de la Seguridad Social, No. 80: 58-85.
Mesa-Lago, Carmelo and A. Arenas de Mesa, (1998): “The Chilean Pension System: Evaluation, Lessons
      and Challenges”. En M.Cruz-Saco and C.Mesa-Lago (editores), The Reform of Pension and
      Health Care System in Latin America. Do Options Exist ?, University of Pittsburgh Press.
      Pittsburgh
Mesa-Lago, Carmelo and Alberto Arenas de Mesa. 1999. “Fifteen years after the privatization of the
      Chilean Pension System: Evaluation, Lessons and Challenges.” In Reforming Pension and Health
      Care System in Latin America: What are the options? edited by Maria Amparo Cruz-Saco and
      Carmelo Mesa-Lago. University of Pittsburgh Press. Pittsburgh (march).
Mitchell, Olivia S. 1988. “Worker Knowledge of Pension Provisions.” Journal of Labor Economics 6, 21-
        39.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Flavio Barreto (1997): “After Chile, What? Second-Round Social Security
        Reforms in Latin America”. Revista de Analisis Economico, 12(2) November: 3-36.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Steven P. Zeldes (1996): "Social Security Privatization: A Structure For
        Analysis," American Economic Review, 86(2) May: 363-367.
Ortúzar, Pablo. 1988. “El déficit previsional : recuento y proyecciones.” In Baeza, Sergio and Rodrigo
        Manubens, Sistema privado de pensiones en Chile. Santiago: CEP.
Paredes, Ricardo, Pilar Romaguera, and Andras Uthoff. 1987. “Modelos de capital humano y
        segmentación: Test y nueva evidencia.” Estudios de Economía. Vol. 14, No 2 (December): 335-
        372. Santiago: Universidad de Chile.
Pini, Claudio Javier. 1998. “El déficit operacional del sistema público de pensiones en Chile: Análisis,
        proyecciones e implicancias de política.” Preliminary Draft, diss. Master degree. ILADES-
        Georgetown University. (manuscript, December).
Rohter, Larry. (2006).”Chile'
                            s Candidates Agree to Agree on Pension Woes.” NYT, January 10.
        select.nytimes.com/mem/tnt.html?emc=tnt&tntget=2006/01/10/international/americas/10chile.html&tntemail0=y

Shoven, John (2000): Administrative Aspects of Investment-Based Social Security Reform. University of
       Chicago.
Superintendencia de Administradoras de Fondos de Jubilaciones y Pensiones (SAFJP), Superintendencia
        de Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones (SAFP), and Superintendencia de Administradoras
        Privadas de Pensiones (SAPFP). 1996. Reformas a los sistemas de pensiones. Argentina, Chile,
        Perú. Santiago: SAFJP, SAFP, SAPFP.
Superintendencia de Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones (SAFP). 1996. El sistema chileno de
        pensiones. Santiago: SAFP (third edition).
Superintendencia de Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones (SAFP). 2002. El sistema chileno de
        pensiones. Santiago: SAFP (fifth edition).
                                                                                                     29



Valdes Prieto, Salvador. 2005. “Para Aumentar La Competencia Entre Las AFP.” Estudios Publicos,
       Otoño. Santiago, Chile.
Wagner, Gert. 1991. "La seguridad social y el programa de pensión mínima garantizada." Estudios de
      Economía, Vol. 18, No. 1 (June): 35-91. Santiago: Universidad Católica de Chile.
World Bank, 1994. Averting the Old-Age Crisis. Washington: World Bank.
Zurita, Salvador. 1994. “Minimum pension insurance in the Chilean pension system.” Revista de Análisis
         Económico, Vol 9. Nº 1. (June): 105-126. Santiago: ILADES.
                                                                                             30




Table 1: Pension System Contribution Patterns: 1975-80
(percentages)

   Year          Contributors/Employment               Contributors/Labor Force
                 AFP        INP     Total              AFP        INP      Total
   1975           NA      71.2%     71.2%              NA       61.9%      61.9%
   1980           NA      53.3%     53.3%              NA       47.8%      47.8%
   1985         44.0%     12.8%     56.9%             38.8%     11.3%      50.1%
   1990         50.6%      8.1%     58.7%             46.8%      7.5%      54.4%
   1995         57.2%      5.5%     62.7%             53.5%      5.1%      58.6%
   2000         59.4%      4.2%     63.6%             54.5%      3.9%      58.4%
Source: Derived from Arenas de Mesa, Berhman, and Bravo (2004)
NA: Not applicable




Table 2: Pre-1980 Old-Age System Revenues and Expenditures: 1974-1980


             Revenues        Expenditures   Deficit   Revenues Expenditures        Deficit
Year       (millions of 2003 pesos )                  (percent of GDP)
1974           344,523         698,866    -354,342         3          6.2           -3.1
1975           310,985         422,261    -111,276        3.4         4.6           -1.2
1976           360,509         662,877    -302,369        3.4         6.2           -2.8
1977           454,651         831,933    -377,282        3.6         6.7            -3
1978           556,642        1,027,681   -471,039        3.7         6.8           -3.1
1979           937,063        1,241,874   -304,811        5.2         6.9           -1.7
1980          1,017,362       1,336,172    -318,81        5.5         7.2           -1.7
Sources : Marcel and Arenas de Mesa (1992); Central Bank of Chile (BCCH).
                                                                   31




Table 3: Cumulative Value and Rates of Return on Chilean
Pension Fund Assets: 1981-2003



                         Pension Fund                Returns on
                         Assets under                   Fund
             Year        Management                    Assets
                                                      Average
                                                     yearly real
                             Value        % of GDP     return

                           (millions of
                         current pesos)               (percent)
                1981         11,695         0.9         12.8
                1982         44,495         3.7         28.5
                1983         99,474         6.5         21.3
                1984        159,576         8.4          3.6
                1985        281,807        10.3         13.4
                1986        433,377        12.7         12.3
                1987        644,728        14.1          5.4
                1988        885,875        14.7          6.5
                1989       1,329,268       17.5          6.9
                1990       2,244,481       23.3         15.6
                1991       3,769,243       29.7         29.7
                1992       4,736,462       29.4           3
                1993       6,830,788       35.4         16.2
                1994       8,983,563       38.8         18.2
                1995      10,230,990       36.1         -2.5
                1996      11,555,632        37           3.5
                1997      13,405,826       38..6         4.7
                1998      14,552,547       39.8         -1.1
                1999      18,093,003       48.7         16.3
                2000      20,343,371       50.1          4.4
                2001      22,955,974       52.8          6.7
                2002      25,227,058       54.4           3
                2003      29,176,611       58.6         10.5
             1981–1991                                  14.2
             1991–2003                                   8.7
             1981–2003                                  10.4

Source: Arenas (2005)
                                                                                                                  32



Table 4: Distribution of Investment Portfolio: 1981–2003
(percentages of total investments)

                                                                                   Mutual
                            Financial            Nonfinancial                    funds and   Foreign
   Year       Govern-ment Institutions a         institutions b     Equities c    others d   Assets e   Other f
   1981            28.1            71.3              0.6               0             0          0         0
   1985            42.4             56               1.1               0             0          0        0.5
   1990            44.1            33.4              11.1             11.3           0          0        0.1
   1995            39.4            22.4               5.2             30.1          2.6        0.2       0.1
   2000            35.7            35.1                4              11.6          2.5       10.8       0.2
   2003            24.7            26.3               7.7             14.5          2.9       23.8       0.1
Note: Totals should sum to 100 percent except for rounding error.
a. Financial sector less the equities of financial institutions.
b. Business firms less equities and quotas o f investment funds.
c. Stocks of financial institutions plus those of the business sector.
d. Investment funds of the business firms plus others from the external sector.
e. Foreign issuers less others from the external sector.
f. Disposable assets.
Source : Derived from Arenas (2005)
                                                                                                                 33



Table 5: Contribution Patterns to the Chilean Retirement System by Sex, Age, and
Education: Number of Months Contributed by EPS 2002 Respondents

A. Respondents with Linked Records: Months of AFP Contributions Only
                       Mean       Mean         Ratio
                    Self-Report   Admin      Self/Admin       N
         Total          113         90          126%       12108
         By Sex
         Men            129         103         125%        6722
         Women           94         73          127%        5386
         By Age
         18-20           12         13           97%         208
         21-25           32         27          117%        1252
         26-30           64         51          123%        2013
         31-38          107         84          128%        3190
         39-45          150         114         131%        2571
         45-50          161         129         125%        1257
         51-55          170         141         121%         964
         56-60          169         141         120%         653
         By Education
         < Elem         114         82          139%        2064
         < HS           112         83          135%        3267
          HS            110         88          126%        3725
         >HS            117         103         113%        3052


B. All Respondents: Months of Contributions to All Retirement Systems
                         Mean                          Mean
                      Self-Report*        N       Self-Report**        N
              Total        121          12128            120        13397
           By Sex
           Men             137          6728             136         7330
           Women           101          5400             100         6067
           By Age
             18-20          12           213              11          245
             21-25          33          1255              33         1319
             26-30          66          2016              65         2057
             31-38         112          3193             111         3271
             39-45         161          2575             156         2781
             45-50         176          1259             169         1459
             51-55         185           964             174         1251
             56-60         184           653             166         1014
           By Education
           < Elem          126          2065             122        2629
           < HS            120          3276             118        3625
           HS              117          3733             117        3938
           >HS             122          3054             122        3205
Source: Authors' computations from the EPS 2002 and administrative records linked with EPS respondents.
Notes: EPS respondents in 2002 age 18-60; all results weighted.
*Respondents with a linked administrative record; ** All EPS 02 respondents
Number of months of contributions counted from the date of the first self-reported contribution to AFP system.
                                                                                                                             34




Table 6: Pattern of Contribution Months to All Retirement Systems
by Sex, Age, and Education: Labor Market Status at Time of Contribution




                              Mos While Mos While Mos While                            % of Months Contributing of Months in
                               Working Unemployed   NILF                     N                    that LF Status
           By Sex                                                                     Working Unempl.      NILF     Wage Wkr
           Men                   135            0.5            0.7         7330        78.72%     5.44%      3.67%     89.30%
           Women                 97             0.6            2.2         6067        81.86%     4.00%      2.92%     90.56%
           By Age
                18-20            10             0.1            0.3         245          80.92%      1.95%        3.86%   81.69%
                21-25            32             0.2            0.4         1319         82.26%      2.79%        1.91%   86.31%
                26-30            65             0.2            0.6         2057         80.89%      2.48%        1.47%   86.87%
                31-38            110            0.4            1.2         3271         77.89%      3.28%        2.40%   87.63%
                39-45            154            0.6            1.4         2781         79.32%      4.68%        3.24%   89.93%
                45-50            166            1.0            2.1         1459         79.87%     11.04%        5.98%   91.65%
                51-55            171            1.2            1.6         1251         82.03%      7.56%        4.55%   93.30%
                56-60            161            0.8            4.1         1014         82.73%      4.70%        7.39%   93.54%
           By Education
           < Elem                119            1.0            1.8         2629         71.34%       5.49%       2.41%   85.29%
           < HS                  116            0.6            1.4         3625         76.07%       4.59%       3.59%   88.22%
           HS                    116            0.4            1.2         3938         84.09%       4.30%       3.31%   91.29%
           >HS                   121            0.3            1.4         3205         85.96%       4.27%       2.92%   92.26%

Source: Authors' computations from the EPS 2002 and administrative linked data.
Notes: EPS respondents in 2002 age 18-60; all results weighted.
NILF = not in labor force.
Number of months of contributions counted from the date of the first self-reported contribution to AFP system.
                                                                                                       35



Table 7: Retirement Balances Accumlated Under the AFP and Recognition Bonds:
Self-Report vs Administrative Records

A. Individual Account Balances, AFP System: Self Report vs Admininstrative Records
(04 Chilean Pesos)
                            For Those with a Self-Reported AFP Balance            Doesn't Know         Total
                                                 (N=4,677)                               (N=7,686)    (N=12,363)
      Percentile   Self-Report Amt        Admin. Amt            Diff       Percentage   Admin. Amt   Admin. Amt
         p25           820,000              906,000           -86,000          -10        126,400      324,100
         p50          3,000,000            2,929,800          70,200            2         742,600     1,529,000
         p75          8,000,000            7,087,800          912,200          11        2,567,400    4,575,100

B. Individual Account Balances Plus Recognition Bonds: Administrative Records Only
(04 Chilean Pesos; N=2,458)

      Percentile     AFP Balance             Bond               Total
         p25            86,800             748,857           5,800,972
         p50           4,263,400          4,491,373          12,700,000
         p75          10,700,000          13,000,000         23,800,000

C. Individual Account Balances For Those with No Recognition Bonds: Administrative Records Only
(04 Chilean Pesos; N=9,905)

      Percentile     AFP Balance
         p25           341,700
         p50          1,293,000
         p75          3,561,700

Source: Authors' computations from the EPS 2002 and administrative linked data.
Notes: EPS respondents in 2002 age 18-60; all results weighted.
                                                                                                                                                                  36



Table 8: Knowledge of Chilean Pension System Attributes
                                                         2002 Survey                                               2004 Survey
                Variable                     All respondents      2002 Affiliates   All respondents   2002 Affiliates    2004 New Affiliates   2004 Non-Affiliates
                                              %          n        %            n     %          n     %            n        %          n         %           n

A. Receipt of AFP statement
1.1 Receives AFP statement                   60.7      12367      60.6       5942
1.2 Received AFP statement past 12 mos                                              69.2      10131   68.8      9324      74.3        807

B. Knowledge Regarding Contributions
1. Claims knows AFP amt contrib              52.2      13397      51.5      10659   38.0      13711   46.2     10009      39.9        828       8.8        2874
2. Gave correct amt AFP contrib              28.0      13397      27.0      10659   30.9      13711   34.3     10009      34.9        828       17.8       2874

C. Knowledge Regarding Prices (Commissions)
1. Claims knows Fixed AFP commiss       1.5            12367       1.5       9805   1.7       10131   1.7       9324       1.5        807
2. Claims knows Var AFP commiss         2.7            12367       2.5       9805   2.1       10131   2.1       9324       1.7        807
3. Claims knows both commissions        0.6            12367       0.5       9805   0.5       10131   0.5       9324       0.5        807

D. Knowledge Regarding Accumulations
1. Claims knows AFP accum                    44.9      12367      45.5       9805   52.7      10131   53.7      9324      42.1        807
2. Gave correct amt AFP accum (+-20%)                                               21.6      10124

E. Knowledge Regarding Investments
1. Knows how pension funds are invested (only 10.3
                                              2002)    12367       9.9       9805
2.1. Knows about multifunds                                                         47.4      10131   47.5      9324      46.8        807
2.2. Knows how many are the multifunds                                              32.8      10131   33.1      9324      30.3        807
2.3. Knows correctly number of multifunds                                           20.2      10131   20.2      9324      20.4        807
2.4. Knows his/her type of fund                                                     32.8      10131   33.1      9324      28.9        807
2.5. Knows correctly his/her type of fund                                           15.8      10131   16.1      9324      13.0        807
2.6. Knows the riskier fund                                                         38.1      10131   38.8      9324      30.0        807
                                                                                                                                                                    37



Table 8 (cont)



                                                         2002 Survey                                                 2004 Survey
                 Variable                    All respondents      2002 Affiliates     All respondents   2002 Affiliates    2004 New Affiliates   2004 Non-Affiliates
                                              %          n        %            n       %          n     %            n        %          n         %           n
F.1. AFP System
1.1. Knows Female legal retirement age       83.2      13397      82.8      10659     76.5      13711   79.0     10009      73.3        828       68.5       2874
1.2. Knows Male legal retirement age         86.1      13397      85.9      10659     80.0      13711   82.7     10009      77.0        828       71.4       2874
1.3. Knows how AFP calculates pensions       14.2      12367      13.8       9805     9.3       13711   11.1     10009      8.3         828       3.5        2874
1.4a. Claims spouse gets survivor pension
benefit                                      66.4      13397      66.7      10659     65.2      9755    64.1      7319      61.0        384       69.8       2052
1.4b. Claims spouse gets survivor pension
benefit */                                   69.3       9931      69.6       7910     66.1      9037    64.9      6818      62.6        287       71.1       1932
1.5a. Claims kids get survivor pension
benefit                                      61.4      13397      60.9      10659     32.8      11061   40.7      8272      30.5        444        5.3       2344
1.5b. Claims kids get survivor pension
benefit */                                   61.4      13397      60.9      10659     33.3      10599   41.3      7944      33.0        387        5.1       2268

F.2. Guaranteed Benefits
2.1. Claims knows reqs for min pen           6.8       13397       6.8      10659     31.1      13711   34.3     10009      19.8        828       23.2       2874
2.2. Knows reqs for min pen                  0.2       13397       0.2      10659     0.2       13711    0.2     10009      0.1         828       0.2        2874
2.3a Knows there's minimum pension                                                    44.9      13711   49.0     10009      38.1        828       32.9       2874
2.3b Claims knows min pension amt            20.3      13397      21.0      10659     32.8      13711   36.0     10009      25.9        828       23.9       2874
2.4. Gave correct value min pension amt       4.9      13397      5.1       10659     3.4       13711    3.7     10009      2.5         828       2.6        2874

F.3. Welfare Benefits
3.1. Claims knows reqs for welfare pension
                                             19.3      13397      20.3      10659     19.6      13711   20.5     10009      12.3        828       18.4       2874
3.2. Gave correct reqs for welfare pension    2.7      13397      2.7       10659     3.8       13711    4.0     10009      1.4         828       3.9        2874
3.3. Claims knows welfare pension amt        17.0      13397      18.0      10659     17.5      13667   17.8      9972      10.4        828       18.6       2868
3.4. Gave correct amt welfare pension        11.2      13397      11.9      10659     11.9      13667   11.5      9972      6.9         828       14.6       2868



Notes:
1. Affiliation Status comes from administrative data
2. Sample is restricted to population 18-60 (ages in year 2002)
*/ 2002 and 2004 surveys have different questions making VI.1.4 and VI.1.5 not comparable.
*/ VI.1.4b and VI.1.5b apply to more comparable subsets of people among 2002 and 2004 surveys
n=refers to number of people who were asked the question
Source: Authors’ calculations from respondents to SPS 2002 and 2004 surveys.
                                                                                                   38



Table 9: Pensions Under the AFP System
Self-Report vs Administrative Records

A. Pensions, AFP System: Self Report vs Administrative Records*
(04 Chilean Pesos)
                   For Those with Self-Reports and Administrative records in AFP
                                        Phased Withdrawal
                                     (Median of the percentile)
                                                   (N=148)
                  Self-Report
       Percentile     Amt     Admin. Amt         Diff                 Percentage
          p25       65,000      60,667         4,333                      6.7
          p50       69,420      74,175         -4,755                    -6.8
          p75       70,000      74,883         -4,883                    -7.0

                     For Those with a Self-Reports and Administrative records in AFP
                                              Life Annuity
                                       (Median of the percentile)
                                                   (N=604)
                  Self-Report
       Percentile     Amt     Admin. Amt         Diff                 Percentage
          p25       70,000      73,454         -3,454                    -4.9
          p50       85,000      93,041         -8,041                    -9.5
          p75      130,000     142,361        -12,361                    -9.5


B. Pensions in the AFP System: Knowledge **

                For Those with Self-Reports and Administrative records in AFP
                                                                              %            N
B.1. Know that have a retirement pension                                     84.4        1,092
   Life Annuity                                                              92.8         702

   Phased Withdrawal                                                         72.6            440
   Temporary Income                                                          95.5             64
  Median pension of those that know                                               78,602
  Median pension of those that don't know                                        129,430
B.2. Claim Knows his/her type of pension                                     82.0        911
   Life Annuity                                                              89.4        648
   Phased Withdrawal                                                         68.1        308
   Temporary Income                                                          92.4         60
  Median pension of those claim know                                              81,126

  Median pension of those claim don't know                                          92,256
B.3. Know correctly his/her type of pension                                  66.0            911
   Life Annuity                                                              74.9            648
   Phased Withdrawal                                                         52.1            308
   Temporary Income                                                          73.2             60
  Median pension of those correctly know                                          91,085
  Median pension of those claim don't know correctly                             110,998
B.4. Know his/her amount of pension (+-20%)                                  63.9        676
   Life Annuity                                                              68.2        539
   Phased Withdrawal                                                         57.0        179
  Median pension of those that know his/her amount of pension                     91,760
  Median pension of those that don't know his/her amount of pension              121,013

Source: Authors' computations from the EPS 2002 and administrative linked data.
* Old Age Pension, Phased Withdrawal and Annuities
** Panel 2002-04, Old Age Pension include Phased Withdrawal and Life Annuity
                                                                                                              39



C. Number of benefits in the AFP System : Official Figures

                       Old Age                           Disability                        Survival
            Phased       Life    Temporary    Phased       Life       Temporary   Phased     Life     Temporary

     1990   16,893     12,689         84        4,095         2,645      45       15,176    4,857        19
     2000   76,710     142,446      6,217      12,045         7,840     396       55,229   38,402        19
     2005   115,236    256,107      5,786      22,496        14,475     1090      71,057   62,507        40

Source: SAFP
                                                                                                                                     40




Figure 1: Contribution Patterns to the Chilean AFP System by Age:
Self-Reported vs Administrative Records


A. Months of Contributions to the AFP System
l
  200
  180
  160
  140
  120
  100
   80
   60
   40
   20
    0
        18
                 20
                       22
                             24
                                   26
                                         28
                                              30
                                                   32
                                                        34
                                                             36
                                                                  38
                                                                        40
                                                                             42
                                                                                  44
                                                                                       46
                                                                                              48
                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                        52
                                                                                                             54
                                                                                                                  56
                                                                                                                       58
                                                                                                                            60
                                               Mean-Self        Mean-Admin           Diff:Self-Admin



B. Months of Contributions to All Retirement Systems


   200
   180
   160
   140
   120
   100
    80
    60
    40
    20
        0
            18

                  20

                        22

                              24

                                    26

                                          28

                                                30

                                                     32

                                                           34

                                                                36

                                                                      38

                                                                           40

                                                                                42

                                                                                     44

                                                                                            46

                                                                                                 48

                                                                                                      50

                                                                                                            52

                                                                                                                 54

                                                                                                                      56

                                                                                                                           58

                                                                                                                                60




                                                 Mean-Self           Mean-Admin           Diff:Self-Admin



Source: Authors' computations; EPS '02 respondents age 18-60 with linked administrative record;
All results weighted; N=11,305.
Notes: Number of months of contributions counted from the date of the first contribution to any AFP
                                                                                                         41



Figure 2: Projected Accumulations in AFP Accounts at Retirement Age
Given Alternative Density of Contribution Assumptions


                40

                35

                30
  M Chilean $




                25

                20

                15

                10

                 5

                 0
                     Male Density 80% 65 Male Density 60% 65   Female Density 80%   Female Density 43%
                      ys.old w/spouse 60  ys.old w/spouse 60       60 ys.old            60 ys.old
                             ys.old              ys.old


Source: Arenas de Mesa, Behrman, Bravo (2004)
                                                                                          42



Figure 3: Projected Replacement Rates
Under Alternative Density of Contribution Assumptions


    0.7
                  0.58
    0.6

    0.5                               0.44              0.43
    0.4

    0.3
                                                                           0.229
    0.2

    0.1

      0
          Male Density 80% 65 Male Density 60% 65 Female Density 80% Female Density 43%
           ys.old w/spouse 60 ys.old w/spouse 60      60 ys.old          60 ys.old
                  ys.old             ys.old



Source: Arenas de Mesa, Behrman, Bravo (2004)
