                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      IS CRIME CONTAGIOUS?

                                               Jens Ludwig
                                             Jeffrey R. Kling

                                          Working Paper 12409
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12409


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006


Support for this research was provided by grants from the National Science Foundation to the National
Bureau of Economic Research (9876337 and 0091854) and the National Consortium on Violence Research
(9513040), as well as by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, the National Institute of
Child Health and Development and the National Institute of Mental Health (R01-HD40404 and
R01-HD40444), the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the Russell Sage Foundation, the Smith Richardson
Foundation, the MacArthur Foundation, the W.T. Grant Foundation, and the Spencer Foundation. Additional
support was provided by grants to Princeton University from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and from
NICHD (5P30- HD32030 for the Office of Population Research), by the Princeton Center for Economic
Policy Studies, the Princeton Industrial Relations Section, the Bendheim-Thoman Center for Research on
Child Wellbeing, the Princeton Center for Health and Wellbeing, the National Bureau of Economic Research,
and a Brookings Institution fellowship supported by the Andrew W. Mellon foundation. We are grateful to
Todd Richardson and Mark Shroder at HUD; to Judie Feins, Stephen Kennedy, and Larry Orr of Abt
Associates; to our collaborators Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Alessandra Del Conte Dickovick, Greg Duncan,
Lawrence Katz, Tama Leventhal, Jeffrey Liebman, Meghan McNally, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Justin Treloar and
Eric Younger; to Jeff Grogger, Eric Stewart and George Tita for sharing data and unpublished results; and
to Philip Cook, John Donohue, Greg Duncan, Dave Kirk, Steve Levitt, Edgar Olsen, Becky Pettit, Peter
Reuter, Stephen Ross, seminar participants at Yale, the University of Chicago and the University of
Maryland 2005 Crime and Economics summer workshop, and Sam Peltzman and an anonymous referee for
valuable suggestions. Any findings or conclusions expressed are those of the authors.The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2006 by Jens Ludwig and Jeffrey R. Kling. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Is Crime Contagious?
Jens Ludwig and Jeffrey R. Kling
NBER Working Paper No. 12409
July 2006
JEL No. H43

                                            ABSTRACT


Understanding whether criminal behavior is “contagious” is important for law enforcement and for
policies that affect how people are sorted across social settings. We test the hypothesis that criminal
behavior is contagious by using data from the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) randomized
housing-mobility experiment to examine the extent to which lower local-area crime rates decrease
arrest rates among individuals. Our analysis exploits the fact that the effect of treatment group
assignment yields different types of neighborhood changes across the five MTO demonstration sites.
We use treatment-site interactions to instrument for measures of neighborhood crime rates, poverty
and racial segregation in our analysis of individual arrest outcomes. We are unable to detect evidence
in support of the contagion hypothesis. Neighborhood racial segregation appears to be the most
important explanation for across-neighborhood variation in arrests for violent crimes in our sample,
perhaps because drug market activity is more common in high-minority neighborhoods.


Jens Ludwig
Georgetown University
3520 Prospect, NW
Washington, DC 20007
and NBER
ludwigj@georgetown.edu

Jeffrey Kling
The Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20016
and NBER
jkling@brookings.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

        Crime varies dramatically across countries, states, cities and, most relevant for the

present paper, neighborhoods, which represents what Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman (1996,

p. 507) call “the most puzzling aspect of crime.” Understanding whether this variation in

criminal behavior reflects the causal effects of social context or instead simply how high-risk

people are sorted across areas is relevant for government policies that affect how people are

distributed across neighborhoods and schools. This question is also relevant for the optimal

allocation of law enforcement resources. For example, the possibility that the prevalence of peer

delinquency affects behavior in a non-linear fashion (“tipping points”) has been the focus of

much public discussion and, if true, could generate large differences across areas in the marginal

productivity of police spending.

        A large body of theoretical literature has developed to explain why social context may

affect an individual’s propensity to engage in crime. One possibility is that criminal behavior is

“contagious.” Local prevalence of a given type of criminal behavior may change the

individual’s propensity to engage in that same behavior by affecting the social stigma associated

with the act (preferences), perceptions about the net returns to the behavior (information), or the

actual probability of arrest (constraints) (see Cook and Goss, 1996; Becker and Murphy, 2000;

Manski, 1993, 2000). An alternative possibility is that criminal behavior is affected by

“contextual effects” -- other attributes of neighborhood residents, including socio-economic

status (SES) as in role model stories (Wilson, 1987) or the willingness of neighbors to become

involved in local order maintenance, which Sampson et al. (1997) term “collective efficacy.” A

third possibility is “correlated effects” – policing, schools or other institutional characteristics of

neighborhoods may matter for criminal behavior (Jencks and Mayer, 1990, Levitt, 1997, 2002,

Sherman, 2002, Lochner and Moretti, 2004). Determining whether any of these models – or

                                                   1
selection – explains neighborhood variation in crime is important because only with contagion

are policy interventions and other external shocks amplified through “social multipliers”

(Glaeser et al., 1996, 2003).

        Despite the large body of theoretical literature on this question, the available empirical

evidence is limited. Most previous studies of how neighborhoods influence criminal behavior

are susceptible to bias from unmeasured individual attributes associated with neighborhood

selection.1 Studies that employ stronger research designs often provide stronger evidence that

“like begets like” for other outcomes such as student test scores (Hoxby, 2000), investment

behavior (Hong et al., 2004, 2005; Hong and Kacperczyk, 2005), and college drinking

(Sacerdote, 2001; Duncan et al., 2005). Crime might be at least as “contagious” as these other

outcomes if Becker and Murphy (2000, p. 4) are correct that behaviors “most subject to strong

social pressures from peers and others are those that take place publicly.” The “public” nature of

at least some crime is suggested by high levels of group offending by youth (Zimring 1998), and

certainly many assaults involving people of any age are public spectacles.

        Even in the absence of the selection problem, research in this area will typically have

difficulty determining which of the models described above are responsible for any observed

neighborhood effects on criminal behavior (Case and Katz, 1991; Manski, 1993; Moffitt, 2001).

Youth growing up in the same neighborhoods will be exposed to similar peer influences, but also

to similar adult role models, schools, and policing services.

        In this paper we try to empirically test whether crime is contagious by drawing on data

from the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) randomized housing-mobility experiment. Sponsored

by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), MTO has been in operation
1
 Glaeser et al. (1996) document excess variation in crime across areas beyond what can be explained by standard
socio-demographic determinants of crime. Their results suggest social interactions are more important for less-
serious than more-serious crimes. Perhaps the most famous study providing more direct evidence for social
multipliers is Crane (1991). For a comprehensive review see Sampson et al. (2002).

                                                        2
since 1994 in five cities: Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York. Eligibility is

restricted to low-income families with children living in public or Section 8 project-based

housing in selected high-poverty census tracts.2

        From 1994 to 1997, a total of 4,248 families were randomly assigned into one of three

groups. The Experimental group was offered the opportunity to relocate using a housing

voucher that could only be used to lease a unit in census tracts with 1990 poverty rates of 10

percent or less.3 Families assigned to the Section 8 group were offered housing vouchers with no

constraints under the MTO program design on where the vouchers could be redeemed. Families

assigned to the Control group were offered no MTO services but did not lose access to social

services to which they were otherwise entitled such as public housing. Because of random

assignment, MTO yields three comparable groups of families living in different kinds of post-

program neighborhoods.

        Previous studies use MTO’s experimental design to compare average arrest outcomes

across the three randomly-assigned mobility groups and find mixed effects of assignment to the

experimental or Section 8 groups on criminal behavior. The experimental treatment reduces

arrests for violent and property crimes for female youth and reduces arrests for violent crime for

male youth, at least in the short run, but increases male problem behaviors and property crime

arrests. MTO has few detectable effects on adult arrests (Kling, Ludwig and Katz, 2005, Ludwig

and Kling, 2005).

        However, estimates for the overall effects of MTO mobility assignments are not directly

informative about whether crime is contagious because MTO moves change multiple

neighborhood characteristics simultaneously, which could have offsetting effects. For example,
2
  Section 8 project-based housing is essentially privately-operated public housing (Olsen 2003).
3
  Housing vouchers provide families with subsidies to live in private-market housing. MTO vouchers required
residence in these tracts for a minimum of one year for renewal of the subsidy. Experimental group families were
provided with mobility assistance and in some cases other counseling services as well.

                                                         3
“relative deprivation” models suggest people may have adverse psychological or behavioral

responses to being surrounded by more affluent peers (Jencks and Mayer, 1990), a possibility

with some empirical support from Luttmer (2005). Disentangling the effects of specific

neighborhood attributes on behavior necessarily requires analysis that ventures beyond MTO’s

basic experimental design, since comparing average arrests across MTO groups identifies the net

effect of all of the neighborhood changes that are induced by treatment-group assignment.

       In this paper we use data from MTO to determine the degree to which variation across

neighborhoods in criminal behavior is due to the prevalence of crime in the area, as suggested by

contagion models, or to some other feature of the neighborhood. Our analysis exploits the fact

that random assignment to the two MTO treatment groups produced different types of

neighborhood changes across the five MTO sites. This enables us to use site-treatment

interactions as instrumental variables for specific neighborhood attributes in our analysis to

examine how differences by MTO site and group in treatment effects on specific neighborhood

attributes relate to site-group differences in MTO effects on individual arrest outcomes. For

example, assignment to the experimental rather than control group has an unusually large effect

in reducing neighborhood violent crime rates for participants in the Chicago MTO site. If crime

is “contagious,” we would expect the treatment-control difference in violent crime arrests to

MTO participants to also be larger (more negative) in Chicago than other MTO sites.

       While the experimental-control difference in neighborhood violent crime rates is largest

in Chicago, experimental group assignment has the largest effect on racial segregation in the

Boston site and on neighborhood poverty rates in the Los Angeles and New York sites. We can

exploit the fact that differences across sites in the effect of MTO treatment assignment on

different neighborhood characteristics are not perfectly correlated to simultaneously instrument




                                                 4
for neighborhood crime plus some measure of neighborhood socio-demographic composition,

such as poverty or racial integration.

       Our results are not consistent with the idea that contagion explains as much of the across-

neighborhood variation in violent crime rates as previous research suggests. We do not find any

statistically significant evidence that MTO participants are arrested for violent crime more often

in communities with higher violent crime rates. Our estimates enable us to rule out very large

contagion effects, but not more modest associations. This general finding holds for our full

sample of MTO youth and adults as well as for sub-groups defined by gender and age, and it also

holds when we simultaneously instrument for neighborhood racial segregation or poverty rates.

       Our results suggest that neighborhood racial segregation may play a more important role

in understanding variation across communities in violent crime. In order to understand why

racial segregation is related to violent criminal behavior among MTO participants we examine

the degree to which this relationship can be explained way by conditioning on more detailed

measures from the MTO surveys of neighborhood social processes that are predicted by leading

theories to mediate neighborhood effects on crime. Our analysis suggests that neighborhood

racial composition may affect violent behavior because drug market activity appears to be more

common in neighborhoods that contain a large share of minority residents.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes our data.

Section 3 discusses our empirical approach. Section 4 presents our results. Section 5 discusses

the limitations of our analysis as well as policy implications.

II. DATA

       Our analysis focuses on all adults who were part of MTO households at baseline, as well

as baseline youth who were ages 15 to 25 at the end of 2001 (the sample used in Kling, Ludwig

and Katz, 2005). We have baseline socio-demographic information for everyone in MTO plus

                                                  5
household information such as total income and welfare receipt. Outcome measures come from

two sources: follow-up surveys conducted in 2002 (about 4-7 years after random assignment),

which are available primarily for a random sample of MTO youth and, by virtue of the sampling

scheme, most MTO female adults; and administrative arrest records, which are available for

almost everyone in MTO and capture all arrests through the end of 2001. The follow-up surveys

also include reports about neighborhood social processes. Details are in the Data Appendix.

         Table 1 presents basic characteristics for male and female adults and youth. Almost all

program participants are members of racial or ethnic minorities, and most households were

receiving AFDC at baseline. About three-quarters of households report that getting away from

gangs and drugs was one of their top two reasons for joining MTO.

         For adults assigned to the experimental group, the fraction that used the MTO voucher

was equal to 48 percent for females and 40 percent for males. For adults assigned to the Section

8 group, MTO voucher use rates equaled 62 percent for females and 53 percent for males.4 The

take-up rates are similar for youth within MTO groups.

         Table 1 also shows that there are no statistically significant differences across MTO

groups in the fraction of male or female adults or youth who have ever been arrested prior to

random assignment, or for that matter in other baseline characteristics. These results, together

with those in Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007), suggest that assignment was in fact random.5

         Eligibility for MTO was limited to families in public housing or Section 8 project-based

housing located in some of the most disadvantaged census tracts in the five MTO cities and, in

4
  Leasing up through MTO is complicated because many apartments are not affordable under HUD’s voucher
payment standards and some landlords may not accept vouchers. Families also have a limited time (usually no more
than half a year) to use their vouchers from when they are issued. And families assigned to the experimental group
are constrained by the requirement to move to a low-poverty tract.
5
  Note that for a given MTO group, baseline characteristics for male adults differ somewhat from those of female
adults or youth because of differences by city and race / ethnic group in the propensity of women to be married or
cohabit with an adult male. Our results are not sensitive to the uneven distribution of adult males across MTO sites,
as shown below in part by our separate estimates for other gender-age subgroups.

                                                          6
fact, in the country as a whole. As shown in Table 2, the average post-random-assignment

Census tract had a poverty rate of over 40 percent for people in the control group. Assignment to

an MTO treatment group produced significant changes in average Census tract characteristics,

although MTO had more pronounced effects on economic than racial residential integration. In

principle, neighborhood mobility under MTO could differ by gender and age if household

composition affects mobility outcomes, but Table 2 shows that in general, tract characteristics

within MTO groups do not vary much by gender or age.

         Table 2 also shows the average number of crimes reported to police per 10,000 residents

for the police beats in which MTO families have lived since random assignment.6 MTO

treatment-group assignment generally has more pronounced effects on violent than property

crime rates within police beats. Note that the resolution provided by these beat data varies across

cities: Baltimore has 9 police beats, while Boston has 11, Chicago has 279, Los Angeles 18, and

New York City 76. We discuss the potential for bias from measurement error with our beat-level

crime variables in detail below.

III. EMPIRICAL METHODS

         A key issue in the study of neighborhood effects on individual behavior is the selection

problem arising from the likely systematic sorting of people across areas on the basis of

important (unobserved) determinants of behavioral outcomes. To identify the causal effect of

residential location on an outcome, we must compare people living in different locations who

would have experienced the same outcome, at least on average, if they had lived in the same

location. Since people cannot be located in two places at once, this comparison necessarily

involves a counterfactual that cannot be directly observed.


6
  In some cities these administrative units are districts or areas instead of beats, although for convenience in what
follows we refer to all of these areas as “beats.”

                                                           7
         We use the random assignment of families to different treatment groups in MTO to

examine how individual criminal behavior responds to changes in neighborhood crime rates and

other characteristics. Our analysis builds on the approach of Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007),

who developed a method for examining the effects of neighborhood attributes by exploiting

variation across MTO sites in the effects of both the experimental and Section 8 treatments on

neighborhood characteristics. With this approach, a socio-economic measure of the local area

(W) such as the Census tract poverty rate is viewed as a summary index for a bundle of

neighborhood characteristics that are changed as a result of MTO. Interactions between treatment

group assignments (Z) and site indicators (S) are used as instrumental variables to isolate the

experimentally-induced variation in W across sites and groups, as in eq. (1), where the main site

effects are subsumed in a set of baseline characteristics (X).7 All regressions use sample weights

(see Orr et al., 2003). We present robust standard errors clustered at the family level to account

for the fact that observations from people within the same family are not statistically

independent.8

         (1)      W = Z*Sπ1 + X        1   +   1


         The second-stage estimates in equation (2) using Z*S interactions as excluded

instruments show how the effects on neighborhood characteristics in the MTO sample are related

to treatment effects on outcomes (Y).

         (2)      Y = Wγ2 + X      2   +   2

7
  We control for a set of individual and household characteristics taken from the MTO baseline surveys in order to
account for residual variation in our arrest outcome measures and to improve the precision of our key parameter
estimates of interest. Excluding these baseline measures from our specification has little effect on our point
estimates but causes our standard errors to increase slightly. A full description of our baseline characteristics is
provided in Kling, Ludwig and Katz (2005), Appendix Table 3.
8
  In principle an alternative would be to cluster standard errors at the level of the MTO site-and-group – that is,
essentially use a model with site-by-group random effects. Our IV models parameterize the site-by-group variation
in outcomes to be linear in the endogenous neighborhood variable for which we instrument. Over-identification
tests do not reject this hypothesis. In addition, clustering on site-and-group would leave us with just 15 clusters,
which limits our ability to use standard asymptotic (i.e. large sample) theory to justify statistical inference with our
standard errors (see for example Donald and Lang, 2004).

                                                           8
        Our analysis differs from Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) in two important respects.

First, we focus on criminal behavior, which for a variety of theoretical reasons may be more

“contagious” than behaviors such as employment or mental health (Cook and Goss, 1996).

Second, Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) focus on estimating the effects of neighborhood

poverty rates and testing for nonlinear effects.9 We extend this approach to also disentangle the

effects of beat crime rates as well as class and race composition. That is, we use the 10

treatment-site interactions to instrument for multiple neighborhood measures simultaneously.

The literature on neighborhood effects suggests each of these measures may have conceptually

distinct effects on criminal behavior. Contagion models predict neighborhood crime rates should

be positively related to individual criminal behavior, even after controlling for tract poverty or

race composition.

        How much explanatory power do our instruments have in predicting variation across

MTO participants in post-random assignment neighborhood characteristics? When we estimate

the first-stage equation (1) using as our neighborhood measure the local-area violent crime rate,

tract share minority and tract share poor in turn, the corresponding F-statistics for the instruments

excluded from the second-stage equation equal 6.1, 10.2 and 28.9, respectively, with partial R-

squared values of .028, .042 and .118. That our instruments – based on across-site variation in

MTO treatment effects on mobility outcomes – have more explanatory power for neighborhood

poverty than other attributes is consistent with the focus of MTO to move families to lower-

poverty areas.10


9
 They also examine fraction college graduates, households headed by females, and median income.
10
  Hahn and Hausman (2002) present two alternative tests to determine whether weak instruments are a problem,
based on comparing standard IV estimates with “reverse” estimates that switch the dependent and endogenous right-
hand-side variables. Applying their tests to our MTO data provides some indication that limited information
maximum likelihood (LIML) may be preferable to two-stage least squares (2SLS) in estimating our equations (1)
and (2). However, in practice the pattern of results from LIML and 2SLS are very similar, and so in our tables
below we show estimates from 2SLS for simplicity.

                                                       9
       The key identifying assumption behind our IV analysis is that the only source of variation

across sites in MTO’s treatment effects on criminal behavior is the variation across sites in how

treatment assignment influences post-randomization neighborhood characteristics. This

assumption strikes us as plausible. There is no obvious reason why, for example, low-income

minority families in New York should respond differently than low-income minority families in

Baltimore or Boston to the same type of MTO-induced change in neighborhood environment.

       The main concern with our empirical approach is that our ability to distinguish between

the effects of different neighborhood attributes is limited by the number of available instruments.

Because MTO engenders change in many neighborhood characteristics simultaneously, these IV

estimates cannot be interpreted literally as the effects of changing a given neighborhood

characteristic on criminal behavior. We expect neighborhood crime rates to capture any

contagion mechanisms that may operate on individual criminal behavior plus whatever other

neighborhood attributes influence crime and are correlated with neighborhood crime rates.

However, our ability to simultaneously condition on other neighborhood measures such as

poverty or racial composition should help account for other criminogenic neighborhood

attributes. Our ability to also control for tract poverty is particularly important because this

variable is strongly correlated with other tract socio-economic characteristics and measures from

the MTO surveys about neighborhood social processes that previous theories suggest are

important.

IV. RESULTS

       In what follows we begin by demonstrating that the application of standard non-

experimental regression methods to our MTO data yields findings similar to those reported in

previous studies, suggesting that criminal behavior is contagious. This helps establish that any

difference in findings between our preferred IV analyses and previous studies results from our

                                                 10
use of a different (we believe superior) research design, rather than from something peculiar or

problematic about our own dataset.

         We then show that when we use MTO site-group interactions to instrument for

neighborhood measures in our preferred IV research design we do not find evidence for a large

positive effect of beat crime rates on individual criminal behavior by MTO participants, contrary

to the prediction of contagion models. Nor are the beat crime variables significant after

conditioning on tract race or poverty, suggesting that a contagion effect is not simply being offset

by a third factor. We believe the lack of a detectable association between neighborhood crime

and individual arrests is quite informative. Although not conclusive, the pattern of results

suggests to us that there are aspects of residential neighborhoods that affect crime, particularly

racial segregation, but that the role of neighborhood crime is more limited.

A. Non-experimental estimates of neighborhood effects on crime

         In Table 3 we show that applying the standard non-experimental estimation method to

our MTO data yields evidence like that of previous studies that criminal behavior may be

contagious. Note that we have some non-experimental variation in our data that comes from the

fact that within MTO groups variation in neighborhood attributes results from the mobility

decisions made by individual families. This non-experimental variation is the basis for Table 3.

         The non-experimental results in Table 3 include data just on adults and youth assigned to

the MTO experimental group and use ordinary least squares to regress our measure of arrests to

individuals against our measures of post-random-assignment neighborhood characteristics and a

set of baseline control variables.11 Identification of neighborhood effects with these and other


11
   Note that in principle we could have instead followed convention and conducted our non-experimental analyses
using the sample assigned to the MTO control group. But there is more variation in most of our neighborhood
measures within the experimental group and thus more power to detect relationships between neighborhood
attributes and individual arrest outcomes. The variance in tract share poor is a third larger for the experimental than
control group, while the variance for tract share minority is about three-quarters larger for the experimental group.

                                                          11
non-experimental estimates assumes that the process through which families select

neighborhoods is “ignorable” conditional on observed individual and family characteristics. In

our case the set of observables includes powerful demographic predictors of criminal

involvement such as age, race and gender, and family background characteristics such as the

household head’s baseline educational attainment and work status. Importantly, we also control

for another strong predictor for future criminal involvement – past criminal involvement.

Specifically, we include a set of indicators for whether each MTO participant had 1, 2, or 3 or

more arrests for violent crimes prior to random assignment , with similar indicators for prior

arrests for property or other crimes.

         The first panel of Table 3 provides suggestive evidence that criminal behavior might be

contagious, particularly among the group at highest risk for criminal offending more generally –

males. The first row shows results of estimating regressions where the right-hand side

neighborhood measure is each respondent’s local-area violent crime rate, and each column

shows the estimates for this local crime rate variable from a separate estimation on the sample

for that column. All endogenous neighborhood variables are scaled in standard deviation units to

facilitate comparison across panels, with the standard deviation values themselves given in the

notes to the table.

         For example, the result in the first row for male youth suggests that a 1 standard deviation

increase in the local-area violent crime rate increases arrests for violent crimes of MTO male

youth by .075 arrests per person (p-value <.10), equal to 16% of the mean arrest rate for this

group. The coefficient is of about the same magnitude for male adults, although it is not quite

statistically significant. Controlling for tract share minority, share poor or both poor and



The distribution for beat violent crime rate has a slightly larger variance for the control group (about a fifth) but is
also somewhat more skewed with extremely high values.

                                                            12
minority does not change the point estimate for male youth much but does serve to make the

“contagion” effect for adult males statistically significant. These results provide one benchmark

for comparison with our preferred estimates below.

B. Experimental estimates of neighborhood effects on crime

         In contrast to the non-experimental estimates presented above, results that use the

experimental design of the MTO data to try to parse out the separate effects of beat crime rates

from other neighborhood characteristics yield no detectable “contagion” effects.

         In a model where the only baseline covariates are site indicators, two-stage least squares

estimation of equation (2) with one endogenous neighborhood variable reduces the data to fifteen

group means (three randomly assigned groups at each of the five sites) normalized so that the

overall mean for each site is zero, and then calculates the slope of the relationship between the

site-by-group means of the arrest outcome measure and the site-by-group means of the

neighborhood variable.12 Assuming no other confounders, this method estimates how the

magnitude of the neighborhood treatment “dose” (such as the change in beat violent crime rates

for a particular treatment group at a given site) is associated with the treatment response (the

effect on the total number of violent crime arrests for MTO individuals in the experimental or

Section 8 voucher groups at that site).

         Figure 1 highlights the intuition behind our IV approach by plotting the 15 site-by-group

values for beat violent crime rates and individual violent-crime arrest outcomes for our full MTO

sample (adults and youth of both genders). The solid line in Figure 1 shows the linear regression

relationship among these 15 site-by-group data points between neighborhood violent-crime rates

and arrests for violent crime of individual MTO participants. This line has a modest negative


12
   Although we use a larger set of covariates than just site indicators, they are approximately orthogonal to the
treatment indicators conditional on site, and the same essential intuition holds.

                                                          13
slope, which could arise if MTO participants are more likely to employ violence when this will

be a successful strategy, and that for a given person, winning a fight is more difficult in violent

neighborhoods where residents are more adept at fighting.13 In any case, a negative relationship

between neighborhood violent crime and individual violent behavior is the opposite of what we

would expect under a simple contagion story.

         The estimated relationship between local-area violent crime and individual arrest

outcomes is both more and less sensitive to outliers than the simple regression slope shown in

Figure 1 would suggest. Figure 1 shows that MTO participants assigned to the control group in

the Chicago demonstration site live in neighborhoods with unusually high violent crime rates

relative to the overall Chicago mean,14 but the average arrest rate for families in the MTO control

group itself is below that site’s mean. Yet the positive relationship between beat-level violent

crime and individual arrest outcomes when we exclude data from the Chicago site as a whole

(the dashed line in Figure 1) is itself an artifact of the correlation between neighborhood violent

crime rates and minority composition. Figure 2 shows the results of using our indicators for site

and treatment group interactions to simultaneously instrument for beat violent crime and tract

minority composition. In this case we now observe a negative relationship between

neighborhood violent crime and arrests to MTO participants, with or without data from Chicago

in the sample.




13
   Kling, Ludwig and Katz (2005) hypothesize that the positive treatment-control difference they find for property
crime arrests for male youth in MTO could be due to a comparative advantage in property-crime offending for
experimental youth in their new lower-poverty neighborhoods. If there is “learning by doing” in fighting (most
violent-crime arrests in our and other datasets are for assault), then MTO participants may be less likely to have a
comparative advantage in fighting in more violent neighborhoods; see for example also the model for decisions
about whether to use violence in Donohue and Levitt (1998).
14
   The very high beat violent crime rate for control group families in Chicago is not surprising given that most of
these families were living in some of the nation’s most notorious public housing projects on the city’s South Side.
For details on the geographic distributions of MTO families see Orr et al. (2003).

                                                         14
       More generally we find no statistically significant evidence that violent crime is

contagious for the full sample or any sub-group of MTO participants, even after conditioning on

census tract poverty rates or racial composition, as summarized in panel A of Table 4. This table

presents the results of using our experimental IV approach described by equations (1) and (2) to

estimate the relationship between beat violent crime rates and individual arrest outcomes to

MTO participants. As with the previous Table 3, each cell has results of a separate regression

described by the row and column labels.

       Table 4 also provides information about the degree of collinearity between our different

neighborhood variables and thus our ability to use our ten excluded instruments to estimate the

effects of multiple neighborhood measures at once. Moving from the first to the second row we

see that conditioning on tract share minority increases the standard error for the estimated effect

of beat violent crime rates on individual arrest outcomes by 36 percent. The standard error

increases more markedly when we condition on tract poverty (by 77 percent) or both tract

poverty and minority (79 percent). These results imply that neighborhood poverty and violent

crime rates are strongly correlated in our data but that neighborhood minority composition is not

as strongly correlated with these two other measures. We use no more than three endogenous

variables in our IV estimations in order to avoid severe multicollinearity.

       Our estimates enable us to rule out large contagion effects but not more modest effects.

For example, in the last row of Table 4, Panel A, the estimated effect of beat violent crime on

arrests per male youth in MTO is equal to -.109, with a standard error of .117. The upper bound

of the 95% confidence interval thus implies that a 1 standard deviation increase in beat violent

crime rates would increase arrests to male youth by +.125, a relative change of around one-

quarter of a benchmark like the control mean.




                                                 15
        Figure 3 suggests that what does seem to matter for individual arrest outcomes is

neighborhood racial composition. The IV regression line between tract share minority and

individual arrest outcomes for our full MTO sample is positive and not very sensitive to whether

data from Chicago are included or not in the analytic sample. The coefficient (first row, first

column of Table 4, Panel B) shows that a one standard deviation unit decrease in tract percentage

minority, which is equivalent to a change from 90 percent minority to 73 percent minority, is

associated with a decrease of .067 violent crime arrests per person since random assignment,

around one-third of the control mean.15

        Our finding for the influence of neighborhood racial composition on individual violent

behavior holds even after we also condition on beat violent-crime rate or tract share minority in

the instrumented set of neighborhood attributes, as seen in Panel B of Table 4. While the IV

estimates shown in Table 4 seem to suggest that the effects of tract share minority are weak

among young males, as discussed below, estimates that double the number of instruments by also

interacting MTO group and site indicators with indicators for family size yield larger positive

point estimates even for male youth.

        In contrast to the strong association with neighborhood racial composition, individual

arrest outcomes do not have a consistent pattern of association with neighborhood poverty rates.

Panel C of Table 4 shows large and significant effects only for female youth. Moreover, the

coefficient for the tract poverty variable is sensitive to the choice of other neighborhood

characteristics to include in the analysis.




15
  As described above the estimates shown in Table 4 calculate standard errors that are clustered at the level of the
MTO household. An alternative is to aggregate the data to the level of the site and treatment group and estimate the
regression on these cell means; this approach yields a point estimate almost identical to what is shown in the first
row, first column of Table B but with a slightly larger standard error (.041 versus .033) and p-value (.14 vs <.05).

                                                        16
C. Extensions and sensitivity checks

         One particularly important question is whether any contagion or other peer effects vary

non-linearly with neighborhood characteristics, in which case reallocating people or police

resources across communities could change the overall level as well as distribution of violent

crime in society. Re-estimating our basic IV model using a quadratic of the neighborhood

violent crime rate for W in equation (2) yields a pattern that at first glance seems consistent with

a contagious process that becomes less strong as neighborhood crime increases.16 However the

quadratic term in beat violent crime rate is difficult to disentangle from the effects of

neighborhood racial segregation when all three measures are included simultaneously in the

model. Moreover, the quadratic in beat violent crime rate – like the linear specification for beat

violent crime shown in Figure 1, but unlike the effect for tract share minority – is highly

sensitive to whether Chicago is excluded from the sample. We take this pattern of results as

providing stronger support for an effect of racial segregation on violent criminal behavior than

for a non-linear contagion effect.

         Is our inability to detect a statistically significant “contagion” effect with our preferred IV

research design simply an artifact of measurement error with our beat-level violent crime rates?

Perhaps the strongest evidence against this interpretation of our results comes from the fact that

any measurement error with our beat violent crime measure does not prevent us from identifying

a statistically significant association with individual arrest outcomes in our non-experimental

analyses shown above – even despite the fact that our non-experimental estimates draw on just

the 40% of the MTO sample assigned to the experimental mobility group.17


16
    For the full sample results the linear term for local-area violent crime rate is equal to .392 (se=.182), while the
quadratic term is equal to -.087 (.039). These coefficients are driven by the results for male youth, with coefficients
of .702 (.313) and -.170 (.085), respectively.
17
   In addition for Los Angeles, the site where our “beat” measures are largest (around 200,000 people per beat on
average) we were also able to obtain crime data for part of our study period (through 1999) for census tracts (around

                                                          17
         The main concern with our analysis is that with only 10 instruments, our ability to control

for every possible neighborhood attribute that might affect crime is limited. Partial consolation

comes from the fact that we have 10 more plausible instruments for specific neighborhood

characteristics than previous studies in this literature.

         A more constructive way to address this concern is to try to increase our power to

disentangle the effects of different neighborhood attributes by using an expanded set of

instruments that exploits differences by site and family size in how MTO treatment assignment

affects neighborhood environments. Larger families have relatively greater difficulty moving

when offered a MTO voucher and will face a more constrained neighborhood choice set because

vacancy rates tend to be lower for larger rental units (Shroder, 2002).18 The effects of MTO

treatment assignment on mobility outcomes vary across demonstration sites because the gradient

between rental unit size and vacancy rates seems to differ across cities.19 At the same time, a

growing body of research suggests that family size has little effect on children’s outcomes

conditional on birth order (Black et al., 2000, Angrist et al., 2005). In the absence of any main

effect of family size on youth outcomes, there would seem to be little reason to believe that




2,500 and 8,000 people per tract). For our LA MTO sample in 1999 the correlation between beat and tract-level
violent crime is +0.25. A linear regression suggests a one-unit increase in the beat violent crime rate is associated
with a 1.37 unit increase in the tract measure (standard error .113). When we replace beat with tract level violent
crime for our LA sample through 1999 we get results similar to those in Table 4. Thanks to Jeffrey Grogger and
George Tita for sharing these tract data with us.
18
   The 2003-4 American Housing Surveys show rental vacancy rates for 1 and 2 room units equal 24.7%, compared
to 10.9% for 3 room units, 10.4% for 4 room units, 9.0% for 5 room units, and 7.5% for units with 6 rooms or more.
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/hvs/qtr205/q205tab3.html, accessed 10/17/05.
19
   Data from the 1998 / 1999 American Housing Surveys show a rental vacancy rate in Chicago of 12.4% for 2-
bedroom apartments compared to 6.5% for those with 3 bedrooms and 8.9% for those with 4 or more bedrooms.
The rental vacancy rates in the Los Angeles and New York show a similar although more attenuated gradient with
lower overall vacancy rates for every rental size, while the Baltimore and Boston metropolitan areas show slightly
higher vacancy rates for apartments with 3 or 4+ bedrooms vs 2 bedroom units.
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/ahs/metropolitandata.html, accessed 10/17/05.

                                                         18
interactions of family size and MTO treatment assignment should affect youth outcomes other

than through influencing mobility outcomes.20

         When we replicate our estimates with this expanded set of instruments we generally

obtain results qualitatively similar to those shown in Table 4. The one exception is with models

where we instrument simultaneously for all three of our neighborhood measures (tract share

poverty, share minority, and local-area violent crime), which is where we might expect the

greatest value-added from the expanded instruments.               These results confirm that tract share

minority is the most consistent predictor of individual arrest outcomes. This approach also

yields estimates for the effects of tract share minority on arrests of MTO male youth that are

larger than those presented above; we now cannot reject the hypothesis that neighborhood racial

segregation has similar effects on individual arrest outcomes for male and female youth.

         In terms of accounting for other neighborhood characteristics that might influence

individual arrest outcomes, it is helpful for our purposes that neighborhood poverty is very

highly correlated with most of the other neighborhood “structural” socio-economic

characteristics that might influence violent behavior, such as welfare receipt, female-headed

households, unemployment, or the presence of affluent (college-educated) adults. Tract poverty

is also correlated with most of the social processes that previous theories predict should mediate

neighborhood effects on crime.21




20
   Using this expanded set of instruments typically increases the size of the first-stage partial R-squareds for our
instruments by around 20-25% for local-area violent crime and tract share minority and by around 5% for tract share
poor, while the first-stage F-statistics for the instruments decrease by around 30-40%.
21
   The correlations of tract poverty with other neighborhood measures are as follows [correlations with tract
minority in brackets for comparison]: female-headed households, +.73 [+.47]; employment rate -0.85 [-0.55];
welfare receipt, +0.87 [+0.55]; share adults college educated, -0.65 [-0.62]; problem with police not coming when
called, +0.25 [+0.15]; fraction of neighborhood problems such as graffiti, trash or youth hanging out, +0.22 [+0.16];
discriminated against by police, +0.05 [+0.03]; overall satisfaction with neighborhood, -0.27 [-0.15]; and local drug
market activity, from youth reports, +0.26 [+0.15].

                                                         19
         Why is violent behavior among MTO participants more strongly affected by tract share

minority than other tract socio-economic characteristics, such as poverty or beat-level violent

crime rates? Table 5 presents the results of estimating a series of “horse race” regressions that

control for tract share minority plus some measure of neighborhood social process from our

follow-up MTO surveys. Process measures that help explain away the direct relationship

between neighborhood racial composition and violent-crime arrests to MTO participants are

interpreted to be candidate mediators for this relationship. We focus initially on results for the

full MTO sample given that our main IV specification (last row of Panel B in Table 4) yields

evidence of relatively large effects of neighborhood minority composition on violent-crime

arrests for each of our sub-groups except male youth, and as noted above using an expanded

instrument set that further interacts family size with MTO site and treatment-group indicators

provides evidence for an effect for male youth as well. These results taken together suggest that

local drug market activity may be an important mechanism through which racial segregation

affects violent behavior among MTO participants.

         Table 5 shows that the estimated effect of tract share minority on violent behavior by our

full MTO sample is only modestly affected by also controlling for measures of neighborhood

social process implicated by leading theories such as local policing quality,22 social disorder

(emphasized by “broken windows” theories; see Wilson and Kelling, 1982; Harcourt, 2001;

Harcourt and Ludwig, 2006), or the willingness of local residents to work together to maintain

22
  This is a particularly important measure because criminologists have been concerned with the possibility that the
probability (P) that a criminal event (C) results in arrest (A) varies across neighborhoods, which if true complicates
our efforts to learn about neighborhood effects on actual criminal behavior since the three factors have a mechanical
relationship A=P×C. If the probability of arrest is higher in low-crime, low-poverty areas, our estimates would
understate the effects of moving to a less distressed area on criminal behavior – that is, we might understate any
contagious processes at work among the MTO population. Some support for this concern comes from evidence that
MTO household heads assigned to the experimental or Section 8 groups are less likely than controls to report that
their neighborhoods have a problem with police not coming in response to 911 calls for service (Kling, Ludwig and
Katz, 2005). In addition to possible “under-policing,” a closely-related hypothesis is that victims are less likely to
report crimes to police in high-minority areas. Yet we obtain qualitatively similar findings when we focus on just
the most serious violent crimes for which presumably victim reporting problems are less severe.

                                                         20
order and shared social norms, what Sampson et al. (1997) term “collective efficacy” (variable

definitions in the notes to Table 5). Nor are any of these social process measures themselves

statistically significant predictors of violent behavior by MTO participants, with many of the

point estimates of the opposite sign of what these leading theories would predict. However the

standard errors are sometimes large, particularly for male youth, which limits our ability to draw

firm conclusions about the importance of these theories for explaining violent behavior.

         In contrast we do find that controlling for our measure of local drug market activity

seems to explain away the positive association between tract share minority and violent-crime

arrests to our full sample of MTO participants. Our drug measure has a positive and large

association with violent criminal behavior in the full sample and for three of our subgroups, even

when controlling for tract share minority, and is particularly large (and statistically significant)

for male youth (Table 5).23 We also find that our drug measure unlike the other neighborhood

process variables has a pronounced relationship with violent-crime arrests to MTO participants

when we control for neighborhood poverty or beat violent crime rates (results not shown).

         Drug market activity may be important in explaining individual arrest outcomes because

violence, or at least the threat of violence, is common in many underground markets as a way of

enforcing contracts (Blumstein, 1995, Miron and Zwiebel, 1995, Cook et al., 2005).24 It is

possible that drug market activity congregates in disproportionately minority neighborhoods

simply because minorities are more likely to be involved with drug use, drug selling or gangs, or



23
   We focus on survey reports of local drug activity by youth who were ages 15-19 at the end of 2001 rather than on
adult reports about drug activity because the youth reports seem to be more informative. The correlation between
adult and youth reports is on the order of about .35, and the youth reports correlate more highly with other outcomes
that we would expect to be related to local drug activity, such as whether the MTO youths report having ever sold
drugs themselves. This last finding does not appear to be an artifact of increased drug involvement leading to more
observation of drug activity, since we do not find a strong correlation between youth reports of local drug activity
and the youths’ own drug use.
24
   Without Chicago in the sample, the effects of local drug activity on individual arrest outcomes are smaller than
those shown in Table 8 but are still larger than for most other neighborhood measures.

                                                         21
alternatively something about the residential concentration of minority residents itself could

increase the volume of drug-market activity within a city. Unfortunately with our data we cannot

explore why drug market activity is more common in heavily minority neighborhoods.

       Additional support for drug markets as the explanation for why racial segregation affects

individual arrest outcomes comes from the fact that tract share minority does not have a

statistically significant relationship with a behavior problems measure for MTO youth.

Whatever is happening in predominantly minority neighborhoods appears to be specific to more

serious criminal activity rather than general to all forms of anti-social behavior. We also find

that tract share minority increases the likelihood that MTO youth report that they have sold drugs

themselves (see Ludwig and Kling, 2005).

V. CONCLUSION

       Previous studies claim to produce evidence that crime is “contagious,” which if true has

important implications for government policy and law enforcement since external shocks to

criminal behavior will be amplified in this case through social multipliers. Applying the same

non-experimental estimation techniques to data from MTO yields similar evidence for contagion,

concentrated mostly among males. However, exploiting exogenous variation in neighborhood

conditions generated by the experimental design of MTO yields no evidence that contagion is as

important as much of the previous research would suggest in explaining across-neighborhood

variation in crime rates.

       For example, Glaeser et al. (1996) note that variation across neighborhoods in socio-

demographic and other observable population characteristics accounts for no more than 30% of

the variation in neighborhood crime rates. By comparison, in the MTO data we find that about

25% of male youth experience at least one post-random-assignment arrest for violent crime, with

a mean number of violent-crime arrests for this group of 1.84. The difference in neighborhood

                                                22
violent-crime rates between this “violent” quartile of male youth and the three quarters of “non-

violent” male youth is equal to about one-quarter of a standard deviation. As noted above, the

95% confidence interval for our estimated effect of neighborhood violent crime rates (controlling

for tract poverty and racial composition) implies that a one-standard-deviation increase in

neighborhood violent crime would increase violent-crime arrests of male youth by no more than

+0.12 arrests per person. Our estimates thus imply that differences in neighborhood violent

crime rates between the violent quartile and other male youth in our MTO sample can explain no

more than around 2% of the difference in arrests of these youth for violent crimes.25

         Our estimates seem to rule out an important role for contagion models that operate on

information or constraints rather than preferences, since we are measuring outcomes for MTO

participants “only” 4-7 years after random assignment and only contagion models that emphasize

peer effects on preferences would seem to plausibly depend on residential duration. One might

wonder in this case how important contagion might be in general if peer influences require

extended social exposure, given the high degree of residential mobility that has been documented

for national samples of low-income minority families (South and Crowder, 1997; Briggs and

Keys, 2005).

         An alternative possibility is that race and violent behavior interact to affect preferences

about violent behavior. If the predominantly minority population in MTO is most likely to

socialize with others of the same race, it is possible that we cannot detect the effects of



25
   An alternative way to think about magnitudes is in terms of effect sizes, although this is complicated by the fact
that studies focus on slightly different outcome measures and draw on different samples. With this caveat in mind,
previous estimates for the effects of neighborhood or peer violence or delinquency on individual involvement with
the same behavior range from around .1 or .2 standard deviations (Aseltine, 1995; Matsueda and Anderson, 1998;
Liu, 2000) up to .6 standard deviations (unpublished results from Stewart and Simons, 2006, which do not mediate
the effects of neighborhood violence on individual violent behavior by also controlling for peer violence). Our
estimates imply an effect size for neighborhood violent crime on violent-crime arrests of male youth of around .14
standard deviations, so we can rule out estimates at the upper end of the previous range but not some of the smaller
estimates.

                                                         23
“contagion” because what matters is violent crime rates among the neighborhood’s minority

residents, not violent crime rates overall. However, there does not appear to be much room for

divergence between violent crime rates for a neighborhood as a whole versus among a

neighborhood’s minority community given that most MTO families stay in census tracts that are

predominantly minority.

       A final concern has to do with the generalizability of our estimates for contagion. But

there are reasons to believe that if anything, people participating in the MTO demonstration may

be above-average in their behavioral sensitivity to changes in neighborhood environment, since

the eligible public housing families who signed up for MTO would be those who expected to

benefit the most from moving. And by far the most important reason families signed up for

MTO was to escape from gangs and drugs.

       In principle, less serious types of criminal activity might be more susceptible to

endogenous peer effects, as suggested by previous non-experimental estimates by Glaeser et al.

(1996, 2003). However, administrative criminal justice data may confound variation across

areas in criminal behavior with variation in victim reporting of crimes to the police or the

probability that police identify and arrest suspects, a problem that may be more pronounced for

less-serious than more-serious offenses. For this reason our analysis is focused on arrests of

MTO participants for violent crimes.

       Our results taken together suggest that the role of neighborhood race segregation may

play a more important role in understanding variation across neighborhoods in violent crime than

is currently thought. One obvious question is – why? Our data provide suggestive support for

one candidate explanation – drug market activity, which appears to be more common in racially

segregated neighborhoods. If our MTO results generalized to the minority population as a

whole, they would imply that around one-eighth of the decline in violent crimes in the U.S.

                                                24
during the 1990s was due to a decline in neighborhood racial segregation over this period.26 To

the extent to which other studies have claimed that contagion is in fact the main source of

variation across neighborhoods in violent crimes, the results would seem to be due instead to

some combination of endogenous sorting (self selection) and unmeasured aspects of

neighborhood racial segregation.




26
   From 1991 to 2001 the FBI’s violent crime index rate declined by 34% (Levitt, 2004) while residential racial
segregation (defined as the tract share black for the average black in metropolitan areas) declined by around 10-
15%, or 5 percentage points (Glaeser and Vigdor, 2001). Data from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting system
suggest that around 40% of those arrested for violent index crimes are black (the data unfortunately do not
distinguish Hispanics from non-Hispanic whites) (Sourcebook, 1998, p. 342). Our estimates show that a one-
standard-deviation decline in the average tract share minority (equal to around 17 percentage points; note this figure
does not distinguish between blacks and Hispanics) reduces individual arrests for violent crime among our MTO
sample (which consists of both blacks and Hispanics) by around 33% of the control mean. If the tract share minority
for the average minority also declined by around 5 percentage points during the 1990s, and if offending and arrest
rates are proportional, then our estimates would suggest that declines in racial residential segregation reduced
violent offending rates among minorities by around 10%. If minorities make up 40% of the population arrested for
violent crimes, this implies a 4% reduction in the overall violent crime index due to reductions in offending among
minorities, equal to (.04 / .34) 12% of the overall decline in violent crimes during the 1990s.

                                                         25
                                                Data Appendix

        Our outcome measures come from two sources: administrative arrest records, which are

available for all MTO adults and capture all arrests through the end of 2001; and follow-up

surveys conducted in 2002, which are available primarily for a random sample of MTO youth

and, by virtue of the sampling scheme, most MTO female adults.

        Follow-up surveys conducted during 2002 were completed by one adult per household

from a total of 4,248 MTO households, as well as with 1,807 youth ages 15-20 from the MTO

households. The adult surveys gave priority to interviewing the female head of household

identified at baseline, then to interviewing the wife of the head of household at baseline, then to

interviewing male household heads. In practice, over 98% of completed surveys were with

female adults. The overall effective response rate for the adult survey was 90%27 and was equal

to 88% for the youth survey. For both adults and youth the survey response rates are quite similar

across MTO treatment groups. The youth but not adult surveys include questions about risky and

delinquent behavior, although both surveys capture a variety of other non-market behaviors that

are relevant for understanding the potential mechanisms through which MTO affects adult crime.

        Our main source of outcome data for the present study comes from administrative arrest

records obtained from government criminal justice agencies. We attempted to match all MTO

adults and youth to their official arrest histories using information such as name, race, sex, date

of birth, and social security number. We successfully obtained arrest data from criminal justice

agencies in the states of each of the five MTO sites – California, Illinois, Maryland,

Massachusetts and New York – as well as from 15 other states to which MTO participants had

moved. Overall, we have complete arrest histories for around 95% of MTO participants. As seen
27
  An initial interviewing phase from January to June of 2002 yielded an 80% response rate. At that point, we drew a
3-in-10 sub-sample of the remaining cases in order to concentrate our resources on interviewing these hard-to-find
families and interviewed 48% of this selected group. We calculate the effective response rate as 80 + (1 - .8)*48 =
89.6.

                                                        26
in the final row of Table 1, this “administrative data response rate” is quite similar across MTO

groups. (We exclude the small share of observations for which we are missing arrest data).

       The administrative arrest histories include information on the date of all arrests, each

criminal charge for which the individual was arrested, and, in most cases, information on the

disposition of each charge as well. Because these are lifetime arrest histories we are able to

construct measures of arrest experiences both before and after random assignment and examine

how neighborhood effects change with time since randomization.

       While administrative arrest data are not susceptible to self-reporting problems, the main

limitation for our purposes is that they may confound variation across neighborhoods in criminal

behavior with variation in the probability that a criminal event leads to arrest. In our empirical

analysis we focus primarily on arrests of MTO participants for violent crimes (most of which are

assaults, but the category also includes murder, rape, and robbery) because we expect there to be

less variation across neighborhoods for more serious than less serious offenses in the likelihood

that victims report crimes to the police or that police arrest suspects.

       Information on post-random assignment addresses for MTO families comes from a

variety of active and passive tracking sources that are updated regularly throughout the post-

random assignment period (Goering et al., 1999). In calculating average post-randomization

neighborhood environments for MTO families, we weight neighborhood characteristics for each

address found for someone in MTO by the amount of time spent at that address following

random assignment (that is, duration-weighted averages).

       Our measures for local-area or neighborhood crime rates are average crime rates for the

police beats in which MTO families have resided since random assignment. These findings come

from local-area crime and population data for the years 1994 through 2001 using the FBI Part I




                                                  27
Index offenses for which consistent data are available across areas.28 The crime types used to

construct our neighborhood violent and property crime rates are the same as those used to define

the violent and property arrest outcome measures for MTO participants.29 All MTO addresses

located within the five original demonstration cities were geo-coded and assigned the crime rate

of the police “beat” in which that address was located.30




28
   These crime figures come from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting system, which is subject to a number of well-
known problems such as non-reporting or incomplete reporting. Our results for MTO’s impact on local-area crime
rates do not appear to be sensitive to how we handle these reporting problems. Our default procedure is to impute
missing data using the FBI’s standard procedure, which is subject to a number of problems (Maltz 1999). We
replicate the analysis using only crime data for jurisdictions that report complete data and obtain similar results.
29
   The violent crime rate includes murder, rape, robbery, and aggravated assault. The property crime rate includes
burglary, motor vehicle theft, and larceny. The only difference between the neighborhood crime measures and the
individual arrest outcomes for MTO participants is that our arrest data do not allow us to distinguish between
aggravated and simple assaults, and so we count arrests for all assaults as violent-crime arrests, and also do not
allow us to distinguish between grand and petite larceny
30
   Addresses that could not be geo-coded are assigned the city’s overall crime rate. Addresses located outside of the
five original MTO cities are assigned either place- or county-level crime data, depending on whether the
municipality in which the address is located is patrolled by a local or a county law enforcement agency. For
Baltimore we are missing beat-level offense data for 1994 and 1995, so we estimate these beat-level offense counts
assuming that the annual percentage change observed between 1996 and 1997 is similar to what Baltimore
experienced in 1994-6. We use a similar procedure to estimate beat-level 2002 data for Chicago and New York. In
the end, we have local-area criminal justice data for nearly 47,000 of the 48,751 MTO address spells for the years
1997-2001. These figures run a bit lower for 1994-6 because of missing crime data for two of Boston’s police
districts in those years. Fully 77% of addresses are matched to beat-level data and 10% to city-level data in the 5
MTO cities; 7% of addresses are matched to place-level data outside of these cities, and 2% are matched to county
data outside MTO cities.

                                                         28
                                      REFERENCES

Angrist, Joshua, Victor Lavy and Analia Schlosser. 2005. “New Evidence on the Causal Link
   Between the Quantity and Quality of Children.” NBER Working Paper 11835.
Aseltine, Robert H. 1995. “A reconsideration of parental and peer influences on adolescent
   deviance.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior. 36(2): 103-121.
Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy. 2000. Social Economics: Market Behavior in a Social
   Environment. Cambridge, Mass: Belknap / Harvard Press.
Black, Sandra A., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2005. “The More the Merrier? The
   Effect of Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics. 120(2): 669-700.
Blumstein, Alfred. 1995. “Youth Violence, Guns, and the Illicit Drug Industry.” Journal of
   Criminal Law and Criminology. 86(4): 10-36.
Briggs, Xavier de Souza and Benjamin J. Keys. 2005. “Did Exposure to Poor Neighborhoods
   Change in the 1990s? Evidence from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.” Working
   Paper, MIT Department of Urban Planning.
Case, Anne C. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. “The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family
   and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths.” NBER Working Paper 3705.
Cook, Philip J. and Kristin A. Goss. 1996. “A Selective Review of the Social-Contagion
   Literature,” Working paper, Sanford Institute of Policy Studies, Duke University.
Cook, Philip J., Jens Ludwig, Sudhir A. Venkatesh, and Anthony A. Braga. 2005. “Underground
   Gun Markets.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper 11737.
Crane, Jonathan. 1991. “The Epidemic Theory of Ghettos and Neighborhood Effects on
   Dropping Out and Teenage Childbearing,” American Journal of Sociology 96, 1226-1259.
Donald, Stephen G. and Kevin Lang. 2004. “Inference with Difference in Differences and Other
   Panel Data.” Working Paper, Boston University Department of Economics.
Donohue, John J. and Steven D. Levitt. 1998. “Guns, Violence, and the Efficiency of Illegal
   Markets.” American Economic Review. 88(2): 463-467.
Duncan, Greg J., Johanne Boisjoly, Michael Kremer, Dan M. Levy and Jacque Eccles. 2005.
   “Peer Effects in Drug Use and Sex among College Students.” Journal of Abnormal Child
   Psychology. 33(3): 375-385.
Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose A. Scheinkman. 1996. “Crime and Social
   Interactions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 507-548.
Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose A. Scheinkman. 2003. “The Social Multiplier,”
   Journal of the European Economic Association, 1, 345-353.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Jacob Vigdor. 2001. “Racial Segregation in the 2000 Census: Promising
   News.” Center on Urban and Metropolitan Policy Survey Series, Brookings Institution.
Hahn, Jinyong and Jerry Hausman. 2002. “A new specification test for the validity of
   instrumental variables.” Econometrica. 70(1): 163-189.
Harcourt, Bernard E. 2001. Illusion of Order: The False Promise of Broken-Windows Policing.
   Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Harcourt, Bernard E. and Jens Ludwig. 2006. “Broken Windows: New Evidence from New York
   City and a Five-City Social Experiment.” University of Chicago Law Review.
Hong, Harrison and Marcin Kacperczyk. 2005. “The Price of Sin: The Effects of Social Norms
   on Markets.” Working Paper, Princeton University Department of Economics.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2004. “Social Interaction and Stock-
   Market Participation.” Journal of Finance 59, 137-163.

                                            29
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik and Jeremy C. Stein. 2005. “Thy Neighbor’s Portfolio: Word-
   of-Mouth Effects in the Holdings and Trades of Money Managers.” Journal of Finance 60,
   2801-2824.
Hoxby, Caroline. 2000. “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race
   Variation.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper 7867.
Jencks, Christopher and Susan E. Mayer. 1990. “The Social Consequences of Growing Up in a
   Poor Neighborhood,” in (Inner-City Poverty in the United States. Edited by L. Lynn and M.
   McGeary. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman., Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of
   Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica (forthcoming).
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2005. “Neighborhood Effects on Crime
   for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1), 87-130.
Levitt, Steven D. 1997. “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police
   on Crime,” American Economic Review, 87, 270-290.
Levitt, Steven D. 2002. “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police
   on Crime: A Reply,” American Economic Review, 92, 1244-1250.
Levitt, Steven D. 2004. “Understanding Why Crime Fell in the 1990s: Four Factors that Explain
   the Decline and Six that Do Not.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 18(1): 163-190.
Liu, Xiaoru. 2000. ‘The conditional effect of peer groups on the relationship between parental
   labeling and youth delinquency.” Sociological Perspectives. 43(3): 499-514.
Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti. 2004. “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from
   Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports,” American Economic Review, 94, 155-189.
Ludwig, Jens and Kling, Jeffrey R. 2005. “Is Crime Contagious?” Princeton University Center
   for Economic Policy Studies Working Paper No. 117.
Luttmer, Erzo F.P. 2005. “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics. 120(3): 963-1002.
Maltz, Michael D. 1999. “Bridging Gaps in Police Crime Data, NCJ 176365,” Washington, DC:
   Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Manski, Charles F. 1993. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
   Problem.” Review of Economic Studies, 60, 531-542.
Manski, Charles F. 2000. “Economic Analysis of Social Interactions,” Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, 14(3), 115-136.
Matsueda, Ross L. and Kathleen Anderson. 1998 “The Dynamics of Delinquent Peers and
   Delinquent Behavior.” Criminology. 36(2): 269-308.
Miron, Jeffrey and Jeffrey Zwiebel. 1995. “The Economic Case Against Drug Prohibition.”
   Journal of Economic Perspectives. 9(4): 175-192.
Moffitt, Robert A. 2001. “Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibria and Social Interactions.”
   In Social Dynamics, Edited by Steven N. Durlauf and H. Peyton Young. Washington, DC:
   Brookings Institution Press. pp. 45-82.
Olsen, Edgar O. 2003. “Housing Programs for Low-Income Households,” in (R. Moffitt, ed.)
   Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the Untied States, Chicago: University of Chicago Press
   and NBER, 365-441.
Orr, Larry, Judith D. Feins, Robin Jacob, Erik Beecroft, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Lawrence F. Katz,
   Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Jeffrey R. Kling. 2003. Moving to Opportunity: Interim Impacts
   Evaluation, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office
   of Policy Development and Research.

                                               30
Sacerdote, Bruce. 2001. “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
   Roommates.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 116(2): 681-704.
Sampson, Robert J., Stephen W. Raudenbush, and Felton Earls. 1997. “Neighborhoods and
   Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy,” Science, 277, 918-924.
Sampson, Robert J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Thomas Gannon-Rowley. 2002. “Assessing
   ‘Neighborhood Effects’: Social Processes and New Directions in Research,” Annual Review
   of Sociology, 28, 443-478.
Sherman, Lawrence W. 2002. “Fair and Effective Policing,” in (James Q. Wilson and Joan
   Petersilia, eds.) Crime: Public Policies for Crime Control, Oakland, CA: Institute for
   Contemporary Studies Press, 383-412
Shroder, Mark. 2002. “Locational Constraint, Housing Counseling, and Successful Lease-Up in a
   Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment.” Journal of Urban Economics. 51: 315-338.
South, Scott J. and Kyle D. Crowder. 1997. “Escaping Distressed Neighborhoods: Individual,
   Community and Metropolitan Influences.” American Journal of Sociology. 102(4): 1040-
   1084.
Stewart, Eric A. and Ronald L. Simons. 2006. “Structure and Culture in African American
   Adolescent Violence: A Partial Test of the ‘Code of the Streets’ Thesis.” Justice Quarterly.
   23(1): 1-33.
Wilson, James Q. and George Kelling. 1982. “Broken Windows: The Police and Neighborhood
   Safety.” The Atlantic Monthly, March, 1-11.
Wilson, William Julius. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Zimring, Frankling E. 1998. American Youth Violence. NY: Oxford University Press.




                                              31
                                                                                              Figure 1
                                                                Own Violent Crime on Local Violent Crime
                                                    .06
  Violent crime arrests relative to site overall mean

                                                                                                                                    All sites
                                                                                                                                    without Chi
                                            .04




                                                                S Chi                                    C Bos
                                                                                       E NY                         C LA
                                                                                                                                    C Bal
                                   .02




                                                                            E Chi
                                                                                                S Bos
                                                                                    E Bal        S LA
                           0




                                                                                                         C NY
                −.02




                                                                                               S NY
                                                                           E LA
        −.04




                                                                               S Bal        E Bos


                                                                                                                                            C Chi
−.06




                                                          −50           −25                      0                         25               50
                                                                         Beat violent crime per 10k relative to site overall mean



                                                                         Y: Arrests W: Beat violent crime




                                                                                                    32
                                                                                                        Figure 2
Own Violent Crime on Beat Violent Crime Rate, Conditioning on Tract Share Minority

                                                       .06
     Violent crime arrests relative to site overall mean

                                                                                                                                               All sites
                                                                                                                                               without Chi
                                               .04




                                                                          S Chi                           E NY
                                                                                            E Chi                E Bal
                                      .02




                                                                                                     C Bos
                                                                                                                 C LA
                                                                                                  S Bos                                C Bal
                                                                                                  S LA
                              0




                                                                                                                    E LA
                    −.02




                                                                                                                        C NY
                                                                                                                               E Bos
                                                                                                          S NY
           −.04




                                                                                        S Bal
    −.06




                                                                                                                                                      C Chi

                                                             −50                  −25                        0                         25                    50
                                                                                  Beat violent crime per 10k relative to site overall mean
                                                                                                Partialling out percentage minority


                                                                   Y: Arrests W: Beat Violent Crime Rate, Tract Share Minority




                                                                                                             33
                                                                                          Figure 3
                                                                Own Violent Crime on Tract Share Minority

                                                    .06
  Violent crime arrests relative to site overall mean
                                                                                                                                         All sites
                                                                                                                                         without Chi
                                            .04



                                                                                                         S Chi                   C Bos

                                                                                          E NY                                            C LA
                                                                                                                                         C Bal
                                   .02




                                                                                           E Chi                        S Bos
                                                                              E Bal
                                                                                                                       S LA
                           0




                                                                                                                 C NY
                −.02




                                                                                                         S NY
                                                               E LA
                                                                      E Bos
        −.04




                                                                                                       S Bal



                                                                                                               C Chi
−.06




                                                          −8             −4                       0                          4                         8
                                                                           Percentage minority relative to site overall mean




                                                                      Y: Arrests W: Tract Share Minority




                                                                                                 34
                                                     Table 1
                       Baseline Descriptive Statistics for MTO Adult and Youth Samples
                                         Females                                        Males
                         Experimental    Section 8      Control         Experimental   Section 8   Control
ADULTS
Black                        .650          .646           .657              .359         .364       .386
Hispanic                     .294          .297           .298              .505         .494       .487
MTO site:
Baltimore                    .150          .162           .147              .039         .071       .051
Boston                       .229          .223           .221              .211         .192       .287
Chicago                      .209          .209           .210              .149         .128       .131
LA                           .155          .149           .158              .304         .351       .345
NYC                          .257          .257           .264             .297**        .259       .185
HH on AFDC at                .739          .752           .756              .579         .586       .491
baseline
Moved because:
 Drugs, crime                .767          .755           .783              .739         .755       .764
 Schools                     .468         .521**          .465              .469         .577       .489
Age at end of 2001           39.0          39.4           39.1              43.0         43.4       44.8
Any pre-RA arrest            .258          .231           .260              .375         .423       .354

Missing admin arrest         .038          .054           .035              .056         .048       .057
data
N                           1,483          1,013         1,102              224          153        166
YOUTH
Black                        .647          .606           .640              .609         .605       .612
Hispanic                     .296          .318           .304              .329         .333       .339
MTO site:
Baltimore                    .168          .138           .140              .151         .154       .139
Boston                       .187          .192           .216              .166         .200       .189
Chicago                      .210          .215           .203              .220         .209       .205
LA                           .165          .185           .199              .195         .189       .196
NYC                          .270          .271           .242              .269         .248       .270
HH on AFDC at                .732          .744           .749              .743         .706       .727
baseline
Moved because:
 Drugs, crime                .807          .732           .782              .780         .760       .791
 Schools                     .460          .524           .483              .511         .549       .505
Age at end of 2001           19.1          18.9           18.9              19.0         18.9       19.0
Any pre-RA arrest            .062          .041           .048              .147         .122       .131

Missing admin arrest         .057          .048           .055              .059         .063       .061
data
N                            966           651            716               988          691        739


   Notes: ** = p-value <.05 on Experimental-Control or Section 8-Control difference.



                                                          35
                                                 Table 2
                           Mobility Outcomes by MTO group, Age Group and Gender
                                                Females                                           Males
                            Experimental       Section 8       Control        Experimental      Section 8          Control
ADULTS
Tract poverty rate             .326**           .351**          .439             .329**          .339**             .417
 0-20%                         .363**           .212**          .110             .333**          .235**             .121
 20-40%                         .266            .409**          .292              .261            .407              .320
 40% plus                      .371**           .379**          .598             .406**          .359**             .559
Percent tract black            .532**           .537**          .566              .389            .454              .402
Percent tract minority         .816**           .868**          .890             .833**           .887              .883
Beat violent crime rate        224.3**          228.3**         264.0             171.9           185.0             194.4
Beat property crime rate       520.2**          522.9**         561.2             403.7           465.6             440.6
YOUTH
Tract poverty rate             .335**           .356**          .444            .338**           .358**             .448
 0-20%                         .329**           .215**          .104            .330**           .208**             .098
 20-40%                         .290            .399**          .290             .274            .403**             .282
 60% plus                      .382**           .386**          .606            .396**           .390**             .620
Percent tract black             .536             .527           .555             .524             .531              .542
Percent tract minority         .831**            .880           .899            .831**           .875**             .903
Beat violent crime rate        223.2**          228.2**         260.1           225.4**          231.0**            260.3
Beat property crime rate        531.9            518.2          574.9            535.4            540.6             547.0

     Notes: Tract data are based on duration-weighted averages of tract characteristics, interpolating between and
     extrapolating from 1990 and 2000 Censuses. Police beat rates are crimes per 10,000 residents in the beat. ** = p-
     value <.05 on Exp-Control or S8-Control difference.




                                                             36
                                              Table 3
           Non-Experimental Estimates for Violent-Crime Arrests Since Random Assignment
Explanatory variable:
                                         Full sample   Female Youth    Male Youth      Female Adults      Male adults
A. Beat violent crime rate
 Violent crime only                         .017          -.002          .075*             -.013             .084
                                           [.017]         [.024]         [.039]           [.016]            [.059]
  Violent crime | Tract minority            .010          -.018          .074*             -.023            .098*
                                           [.018]         [.025]         [.041]           [.016]            [.058]
  Violent crime | Tract poverty             .015          -.001           .08*            -.031*            .115*
                                           [.020]         [.026]         [.046]           [.018]            [.061]
  Violent crime | Tract poverty &
                  Tract minority            .013          -.005          .078*            -.034*            .115*
                                           [.020]         [.026]         [.046]           [.018]            [.060]
B. Tract percentage minority
 Minority only                            .016**           .027*          .017            .014*             -.031
                                           [.008]          [.015]        [.025]           [.008]            [.027]
  Minority | Tract poverty                  .016          .042**          .009             .011             -.013
                                            [.01]          [.019]         [.03]           [.009]            [.029]
  Minority | Beat violent crime             .012           .029*         -.002           .019**             -.042
                                           [.009]          [.016]        [.026]           [.009]            [.027]
  Minority | Beat violent crime &
             Tract poverty                  .014          .040**          .002             .012             -.015
                                           [.010]          [.019]        [.031]           [.010]            [.030]
C. Tract percentage in poverty
 Poverty only                               .007          -.006            .02             .012              -.047
                                           [.008]         [.015]         [.026]           [.008]            [.034]
  Poverty | Tract minority                 -.002          -.031           .016             .007              -.038
                                           [.010]          [.02]         [.032]           [.009]            [.039]
  Poverty | Beat violent crime              .002          -.005          -.010           .025**            -.072**
                                           [.010]         [.016]         [.032]           [.008]            [.034]
  Poverty | Beat violent crime &
            Tract poverty                  -.004          -.028          -.009           .020**             -.063
                                           [.011]         [.02]          [.037]           [.009]            [.039]
 Notes: Each cell in the table contains the coefficient [with standard errors] from a separate OLS estimate of equation
 (2) using data just from the MTO experimental group, with each row label describing the one or two components of
 W in (2). E.g., in the first row W only contains neighborhood violent crime rate; in the second row, W contains
 neighborhood violent crime rate and tract percentage minority, and the coefficient reported is for local violent crime
 rate. Samples vary by column. Endogenous variables are all expressed in standard deviation units relative to the
 standard deviation in the control group for that variable. The control group standard deviations are: 17% for tract
 minority, 14% for tract poverty, 185 for beat violent crime, and 525 for beat property crime. ** = significant at the
 5% level; * = significant at the 10% level.




                                                          37
                                              Table 4
           Experimental IV Estimates for Violent-Crime Arrests Since Random Assignment
                                         Full sample    Female Youth     Male Youth     Female Adults        Male adults
A. Beat violent crime rate
 Violent crime only                        -.016            -.031           .046             -.071              .016
                                            [.07]          [.077]          [.070]           [.072]             [.097]
 Violent crime | Tract minority            -.137           -.173*          -.054           -.209**             -.103
                                           [.095]          [.100]          [.091]           [.098]             [.116]
 Violent crime | Tract poverty             -.111          -.267**          -.078            -.243*             -.077
                                           [.124]          [.131]          [.114]           [.128]             [.146]
 Violent crime | Tract poverty &
                 Tract minority            -.118          -.285**          -.109           -.256*              -.112
                                           [.125]          [.136]          [.117]          [.131]              [.150]
B. Tract percentage minority
 Minority only                             .067**         .114**            .006           .064**               .031
                                            [.033]         [.036]          [.057]           [.029]             [.061]
 Minority | Tract poverty                  .115**         .108**            .002           .152**               .091
                                            [.051]         [.053]          [.084]           [.043]             [.069]
 Minority | Beat violent crime             .110**         .163**            .015           .131**               .057
                                            [.046]         [.045]          [.068]           [.040]             [.065]
 Minority | Beat violent crime &
            Tract poverty                  .115**           .070            .007           .137**               .099
                                            [.053]         [.058]          [.088]           [.045]             [.073]
C. Tract percentage in poverty
 Poverty only                               .008          .082**           -.012             -.015             -.057
                                            [.02]          [.031]          [.050]            [.020]            [.059]
 Poverty | Tract minority                  -.041            .034            .034           -.106**              -.08
                                           [.030]          [.048]          [.073]            [.029]            [.060]
 Poverty | Beat violent crime               .037          .174**           -.032            .071**             -.102
                                           [.034]          [.045]          [.062]            [.036]            [.071]
 Poverty | Beat violent crime &
           Tract poverty                   -.009          .156**            .014            -.009              -.117
                                           [.039]          [.068]          [.086]           [.040]             [.078]
Notes: Each cell in the table contains the coefficient [with standard errors] from a separate 2SLS estimate of
equation (2), with each row label describing the one or two components of W in (2). E.g., in the first row W only
contains neighborhood violent crime rate; in the second row, W contains neighborhood violent crime rate and tract
percentage minority, and the coefficient reported is for violent crime rate. Samples vary by column. Endogenous
variables are all expressed in standard deviation units relative to the standard deviation in the control group for that
variable. The control group standard deviations are: 17% for tract minority, 14% for tract poverty, 185 for beat
violent crime, and 525 for beat property crime. ** = significant at the 5% level; * = significant at the 10% level.




                                                           38
                                               Table 5
           Experimental IV Effects of Neighborhood Social Processes on Violent Crime Arrests
                                        Full sample   Female Youth     Male Youth     Female Adults       Male adults
A. Tract share minority
                                         0.151*           0.066          -0.072           0.074            -0.324
Minority | Problems with police          [0.087]         [0.073]        [0.117]          [0.071]           [0.287]
                                          0.085           0.019          -0.163           0.027            -0.213
Minority | Neighborhood problems         [0.068]         [0.063]        [0.099]          [0.059]           [0.253]
                                          0.112           0.022          -0.112           0.011            -0.222
Minority | Collective efficacy           [0.086]         [0.076]        [0.111]          [0.074]           [0.276]
                                          0.005           0.005         -0.181*          -0.026            -0.055
Minority | Drugs                         [0.067]         [0.064]          [0.1]          [0.063]           [0.136]
B. Problems with police not coming
when called
                                         -0.048          -0.042         -0.093           -0.187            -0.038
Policing                                 [0.061]         [0.094]        [0.176]          [0.206]           [0.058]
                                         -0.192          -0.072         -0.085           -0.245            -0.113
Policing | Minority                      [0.105]         [0.108]        [0.182]          [0.242]           [0.101]
C. Neighborhood problems index
                                            0             0.063          0.165           -0.141             0.034
Problems                                 [0.084]         [0.107]        [0.326]          [0.147]           [0.087]
                                         -0.115           0.047          0.412           -0.136            -0.056
Problems | Minority                       [0.13]         [0.124]        [0.345]           [0.16]            [0.13]
D. Collective efficacy
                                         -0.012          -0.061         -0.217           -0.034             0.031
Collective efficacy                      [0.064]         [0.085]        [0.172]          [0.068]           [0.091]
                                          0.134          -0.036         -0.223           -0.029             0.018
Collective efficacy | Minority           [0.123]         [0.112]        [0.180]          [0.127]           [0.089]
E. Drug use or selling in
neighborhood (from youth surveys)
                                          0.088           0.129          0.289            0.059             0.015
Drugs                                     [0.09]         [0.127]        [0.212]          [0.169]           [0.117]
                                          0.083           0.13          0.432**           0.107             0.006
Drugs | Minority                         [0.094]         [0.139]         [0.21]          [0.192]            [0.13]
Notes: Each cell in the table contains the coefficient [with standard errors] from a separate 2SLS estimate of
equation (2), with each row label describing the one or two components of W in (2). E.g., in the first row W only
contains neighborhood violent crime rate; in the second row, W contains neighborhood violent crime rate and tract
percentage minority, and the coefficient reported is for violent crime rate. Sample is limited to households in which
at least one youth ages 15-19 at the end of 2001 was surveyed and provided a valid response to the question about
drug use or selling in the neighborhood; specific analytic samples vary by column as indicated in the column
headings. Endogenous variables are all expressed in standard deviation units relative to the standard deviation in the
control group for that variable. Neighborhood problems variable is defined as number of positive responses to
questions about whether respondent thinks the following are problems in their neighborhood: litter or trash on the
streets or sidewalk, graffiti or writing on the walls, people drinking in public, abandoned buildings, groups of people
just hanging out, and police not coming when called. Policing quality measure is taken from the neighborhood
problem item for police not coming when called. Collective efficacy constructed from respondent reports about
whether neighbors would do anything if a group of neighborhood children were skipping school and hanging out on
a street corner, and if some children were spray-painting graffiti on a local building. Drug variable comes from
survey reports from youth ages 15-19 at the end of 2001 to the question: During the past 30 days, have you seen
people using or selling illegal drugs in your neighborhood? Youth responses assigned to everyone in the family as a
measure of local drug activity. The control group standard deviations are 17% for tract minority, 1.1 for fraction of
neighborhood problems, 48% for problem with police not coming when called, 43% for collective efficacy, and 50%
for youth drug selling reports. ** = significant at the 5% level; * = significant at the 10% level.




                                                         39
