                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  BOND MARKETS AS CONDUITS FOR CAPITAL FLOWS:
                           HOW DOES ASIA COMPARE?

                                          Barry Eichengreen
                                       Pipat Luengnaruemitchai

                                         Working Paper 12408
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12408


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




University of California and International Monetary Fund, respectively. The views expressed are those of
the authors and should not be attributed to the International Monetary Fund, its Executive Board or its
management. This draft is a revision of a paper prepared for the East Asian Seminar on Macroeconomics,
Kona, Hawaii, 22-24 June 2006. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Barry Eichengreen and Pipat Luengnaruemitchai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Bond Markets as Conduits for Capital Flows: How Does Asia Compare?
Barry Eichengreen and Pipat Luengnaruemitchai
NBER Working Paper No. 12408
July 2006
JEL No. F0, F3

                                          ABSTRACT


We use data on the extent to which residents of one country hold the bonds of issuers resident in
another as a measure of financial integration or interrelatedness, asking how Asia compares with
Europe and Latin America and with the base case in which the purchaser and issuer of the bonds
reside in different regions. Not surprisingly, we find that Europe is head and shoulders above other
regions in terms of financial integration. More interesting is that Asia already seems to have made
some progress on this front compared to Latin America and other parts of the world. The contrast
with Latin America is largely explained by stronger creditor and investor rights, more expeditious
and less costly contract enforcement, and greater transparency that lead to larger and better
developed financial systems in Asia, something that is conducive to foreign participation in local
markets and to intra-regional cross holdings of Asian bonds generally. Further results based on a
limited sample suggest that one factor holding back investment in foreign bonds in East Asia may
be limited geographical diversification by mutual funds, in turn reflecting a dearth of appropriate
assets. Asian Bond Fund 2, by creating a passively managed portfolio of local currency bonds
potentially attractive to mutual fund managers and investors, may help to relax this constraint.


Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
eichengr@econ.berkeley.edu

Pipat Luengnaruemitchai
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
lpipat@imf.org
                                              -1-




        Bond Markets as Conduits for Capital Flows: How Does Asia Compare?1
                 Barry Eichengreen and Pipat Luengnaruemitchai
                                    July 2006

1. Introduction

        Bond market development is high on the policy agenda in East Asia, with the Asian

Bond Fund, the Asian Bond Markets Initiative, and a range of related policy initiatives.2

Building bond markets is designed to free Asian economies from excessive dependence on

bank intermediation and to foster the development of a more diversified and efficient

financial sector. One can think of the desired results as having both domestic and

international dimensions. Domestically, banks have the weakness of being closely connected

to business and political leaders but also the strength of long-standing relationships with

borrowers, enabling them to bridge information gaps that might otherwise impede lending

and borrowing. Bond markets have the opposite strengths and weaknesses: transactions are

at arm’s length, often between anonymous buyers and sellers, but access to the bond market
1
  University of California and International Monetary Fund, respectively. The views expressed are
those of the authors and should not be attributed to the International Monetary Fund, its Executive
Board or its management. This draft is a revision of a paper prepared for the East Asian Seminar on
Macroeconomics, Kona, Hawaii, 22-24 June 2006.
2
  The Asian Bond Fund (ABF) launched by the Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central
Banks (EMEAP) in June 2003 is designed to catalyze the growth of Asian bond markets by allocating
a portion of the reserves of regional central banks to purchases of government and quasi-government
securities. The initial $1 billion of investments, known as ABF-I, was devoted exclusively to Asian
sovereign and quasi-sovereign issues of dollar-denominated bonds. ABF-II is twice as large and
includes bonds denominated in regional currencies. It has two components: a $1 billion central bank
reserve pool to be overseen by professional managers for local bond allocation, and a $1 billion index
unit designed to list on eight stock exchanges beginning with Hong Kong in 2005. The latter is
designed to facilitate one-stop entry for retail and institutional buyers as well as providing a
benchmark structure for tracking pan-Asian performance. The Asian Bond Markets Initiative
(AMBI), endorsed by ASEAN+3 finance ministers at their meeting in Manila in August 2003, is
designed to foster an active and liquid secondary market in local-currency bonds and to develop the
infrastructure needed for the growth of local bond markets, mainly through the activity of six working
groups and a focal group intended to coordinate their activities.
                                            -2-




as a source of finance is available only to the largest, longest-established firms about whom

the best information is available. Given the existence of long-standing relationships between

banks and their clients, the banking system is ideally placed to provide patient finance for

investments subject to limited uncertainty but long gestation periods. Bond markets, in

contrast, are the channel through which creditors lend to enterprises investing in rival

technologies, not all of which will pay off even with sufficient time. Such are the arguments

that a financially mature economy should have diversified sources of finance, including both

an efficient banking system and a well developed bond market.

        The international dimension emphasizes that bond markets may have advantages over

banks as channels for capital flows. Banks value liquidity, given that some of their funds are

raised by offering demand deposits; it follows that bank loans are generally of shorter

maturity than bond issues, and the short maturity of foreign liabilities is a notorious problem

for countries borrowing abroad (Goldstein and Turner 2004). Banks being too big to fail,

market discipline may be weak when such institutions are on the borrowing and/or lending

side of the capital flow. These qualms about bank intermediation of capital flows provided

an important part of the impetus for the Asian Bond Fund and the Asian Bond Markets

Initiative.

        In a previous study (Eichengreen and Luengnaruemitchai 2004), we asked how Asia

was doing along the domestic dimension – how Asia compared to other regions and how

individual Asian countries compared to economies with broadly similar characteristics

elsewhere in the world in terms of the depth of domestic markets. Here we provide a

complementary analysis of the international aspect. We assess bond markets as a conduit for

capital flows (more precisely, as a conduit for cumulated capital flows, that is, stocks).
                                                  -3-




Using bilateral data we analyze the importance of a range of factors determining nonresident

holdings of a country’s bonds, which permits us to compare cross-country holdings in Asia

with cross-country holdings in other regions, as well as analyzing the determinants of

holdings across regions. This allows us to gauge the extent of bond market integration and

how it compares across regions and over time.3

          The vehicle for this analysis (as some readers will have guessed given use of the word

“bilateral” in the preceding sentence) is the gravity model, which provides a natural

framework for analyzing trade in financial assets (as well as trade in goods). An advantage

of this framework is that it is straightforward to compare the results with previous gravity-

model-based studies of the determinants of cross-border capital flows mediated by

international banks.4

          The basic framework explains cross-country bond holdings well. The results point to

the significant regionalization of bond markets in the sense that investors are most inclined to

hold the bonds of other countries in their same region. Not surprisingly this phenomenon is

most extensive in Europe: compared to the base case where the investors and the issuing

country are in different regions, Europeans hold significantly larger bond-market claims on


3
  In principle, one could analyze the integration of bond markets on a number of other dimensions, for
example the convergence of interest rates and spreads. Similarly, one would measure bond market
development not just in terms of market capital capitalization but also liquidity (turnover), bid-ask
spreads, and a number of other measures. Unfortunately, data on these other dimensions are more
limited and fragmentary and thus do not permit as extensive an analysis as we undertake here
(although data on stock market capitalization, utilized below, can be thought of as providing at least
an indirect indication of financial market liquidity). For further discussion, see our 2004 study, and
for an analysis of liquidity and spreads that expressly compares Asia with Latin America, see
Eichengreen, Borensztein and Panizza (2006).
4
    This literature is surveyed below, in Section 2.
                                                -4-




one another. We would be alarmed and begin to question our methodology if we did not find

this, since the single market, the euro and subsequent efforts at regulatory harmonization

provide powerful explanations for this pattern. More striking is that cross holdings are also

greater within Asia than across regions when we control for the basic arguments of the

gravity model. Bond market integration in Asia may have significantly further to go before it

reaches European levels or meets the expectations of regional officials, but our results

suggest that there has already been some progress.5

        A number of our results also caution that bond markets are not a panacea for

countries seeking to tame volatile capital flows. They indicate that bond-market transactions

are heavily influenced by financial conditions in the investing country, in turn suggesting that

emerging economies utilizing bond markets to access foreign finance can suffer disruptions

for reasons largely beyond their control. This was a conclusion of the literature analyzing

early post-Brady Plan bond flows to emerging markets (see e.g. Calvo, Liederman and

Reinhart 1993); it is timely again in 2006, when questions have been raised about whether

flows into local bond markets reflect better fundamentals in emerging-market economies or

simply the fact that the advanced economies are awash with liquidity.6 Our results also


5
 A contrasting case is Latin America, where we find that bond market integration, so measured, is
even less than is typical of pairs of countries located in different parts of the world. This result is
fully explained, it turns out, by the weakness of institutions in Latin American countries, which
continues to discourage foreign investors in the region (as well as foreign investors outside) from
holding their bonds – and which is associated with financial underdevelopment generally. Thus,
Eichengreen, Borensztein and Panizza (2006) compare bond market development in Asia and Latin
America and show that Asian countries rank significantly higher in terms of cost and reliability of
contract enforcement, compliance with international accounting standards, etc.
6
 Empirical evidence that both sets of factors are at work is in Buchanan (2005) and Borensztein,
Eichengreen and Panizza (2006a).
                                                -5-




indicate that that bondholders are attracted to the securities of countries whose returns co-

vary positively with their own; this result would seem to support return-chasing rather than

diversification motives for holding foreign bonds. This evidence of limited diversification

again raises questions about the prospective stability of the market.

        Section 2 starts with a review of previous studies, after which we introduce the data in

Section 3. Section 4 reports the basic results, while Section 5 examines their robustness. In

Section 6 we turn to the key issue of how cross-holdings of bonds within Asia and globally

are related to the development of national financial systems. This leads us in Section 7 to the

role institutional investors (banks, insurance companies and mutual funds). Section 8

reiterates the main findings and draws out their policy implications.



2. Review of Previous Studies

        There are now substantial theoretical and empirical literatures using the gravity model

to analyze bilateral commodity trade. Why the size and distance between importing and

exporting countries should successfully explain patterns of merchandise trade is intuitive:

country size is a proxy for the both the supply and demand for tradeable goods, while

distance between the trading partners has is correlated with transport costs. More recently

there has developed a rapidly growing if still largely unpublished literature using the gravity

model to explain trade in assets.7 In that context the meaning of the distance variable is less



7
  In contrast to the substantial literature on bank-intermediated flows and the growing literature on
equity flows, studies of the bond market – our particular concern in this paper – utilizing this
framework are relatively few and far between.
                                                -6-




straightforward.8 Physical transport costs are negligible in this case; more likely is that

distance to a country is correlated with availability of information about its financial

instruments and the determinants of their performance (investors are likely to know more

about these things in neighboring countries to which travel is relatively cheap). This

perspective suggests augmenting the traditional distance measure with more direct proxies

for ease of information flows, such as bilateral telephone traffic and imports and exports of

newspapers and periodicals.

          There is some theoretical basis for these relationships.. Martin and Rey (2004) show

that if markets for financial assets are segmented, cross-border asset trade entails transaction

or information costs, and the supply of assets is endogeneous, then bilateral asset holdings

are positively related to the size of the markets, negatively related to the transaction or

information costs, and positively related to expected returns of the assets.9 Using a similar

theoretical model, Faraqee, Li and Yan (2004) also show that the gravity equation emerges

naturally. While these models are developed for equity investment, one can show that the

results can be applied for risky bond investments.

          A. Studies using data on bank claims. From the early 1980s the Bank for

International Settlements has provided information on the international claims of BIS-

reporting banks. Banks reporting to the BIS tend to be larger and more internationally-active

than the typical commercial bank, a form of selectivity that should be taken into account in


8
    We return to this below.
9
  This assumption is consistent with the views that financial assets are imperfect substitutes as they
insure against different risks.
                                                -7-




interpreting the finding of studies utilizing this source.10 This measure of international bank

lending is organized by the country of origin of the bank extending the claims (specifically,

the country in which the head office of the reporting bank is located).11 The underlying

information is drawn from supervisory and statistical returns of the countries in which the

banks are headquartered. Data are broken down by the national destination of the loans.

        The first studies to use these data of which we are aware are by Claudia Buch. Buch

(2000a) uses BIS consolidated data for one year, 1999, and limits her source countries to

France, Italy, Japan, Spain, UK, and US (while distinguishing 75 destination countries). The

most important determinant of the extent of cross border lending is financial development in

the destination country (as measured by the ratio of bank credit to GDP). Curiously, the

presence or absence of capital controls does not appear to have a significant impact on the

extent of lending. In a follow-up study, Buch (2000b) then uses BIS consolidated claims

data for the longer period 1983-99. In addition to the standard gravity variables, she includes

in her specification the volume of bilateral trade (which enters positively and significantly,

where lagged trade is used as an instrument for current trade). 12 She also considers a


10
  A not unrelated fact is that country coverage has expanded over time. At most recent report banks
and other lending institutions in some 30 jurisdictions contribute to the construction of the BIS data.
11
  This is in contrast to the BIS’s locational data (not published on the institution’s website), which
distinguishes banks by location rather than nationality. Arguably, the consolidated data are more
relevant for studies of financial integration insofar as they focus on both the cross-border and within-
destination-country lending activities of foreign-headquartered banks.
12
   Rose and Spiegel (2004) focus on the connections between trade and lending as well. Their
strongest finding is that an increase in trade is associated with an increase in bilateral bank lending.
They instrument trade with distance and therefore do not include distance as an explanatory variable
for lending. They also use a common language dummy and a regional trade agreement dummy. An
alternative approach is that of Aviat and Coeurdacier (2005), who use 2001 BIS data. They estimate
two simultaneous equations for trade in goods and trade in assets (using transport costs – UPS
                                                                                            (continued)
                                               -8-




dummy for OECD membership as a measure of the differential effects of the Basle Accord

(which enters positively), the Grilli-Milesi-Ferretti capital controls measure (which has a

negative but quantitatively small impact on cross border bank claims), the share of the

banking system that is government owned (which affects cross border lending negatively),

and a measure of exchange rate volatility (which has no discernible effect on the volume of

cross-border lending).

        Kawai and Liu (2001) use BIS data for the period 1985-2000. They consider 10

OECD source countries and a sample of developing country destinations. Unlike other

studies, they do not pool the annual data for successive years but consider a series of 16 cross

sections. Like Buch, they find that trade flows encourage cross-border banking lending. In

addition, the volume of bank-related inflows declines with measures of consumption and

rises with the credit rating of the recipient country (especially after 1996, suggesting a

growing sensitivity to credit-quality-related considerations). Countries receiving more

bilateral foreign aid also receive more bank loans from the same source. In contrast to

Buch’s earlier conclusion, the authors find that a more volatile exchange rate discourages

bank lending (this coefficient is consistently negative though not always significant). The

interest differential between the source and destination country has no consistent effect.

        Jeanneau and Micu (2002) study lending flows from OECD countries to 10 emerging

markets. Their principal findings include that aggregate flows are procyclical with respect to



shipping rates – as an instrument for trade in goods and hence omitting it from the trade in assets
equation). In addition, they compute the correlation of the average gross return on equity in the two
countries. Interestingly, they find the same thing we do when we consider bonds below: a higher
correlation leads to more claims (they refer to this as the “correlation puzzle”). Another study that
reaches the same result is Coeurdacier and Guibaud (2005).
                                                 -9-




growth in the lending countries. They find a positive correlation between fixed exchange

rates and bank lending (reinforcing the earlier finding of Kawai and Liu). Ferrucci (2004)

studies BIS-reporting banks’ lending to 19 emerging markets, and distinguishes 6 advanced

lending countries. The results support the significance of business cycles in the borrowing

country (but not in the lending country, which is contrary to Jeanneau and Micu), bilateral

exchange rate variability (which reduces lending), the overall level of indebtedness of the

borrower (which again reduces lending), bilateral trade (which enters positively), global

equity returns (which enter negatively), and the yield spread between low and high rated US

corporate bonds as a measure of risk tolerance (which enters negatively).

          The most recent wave of studies (Eichengreen and Park 2005, Kim, Lee and Shin

2005) focuses on comparisons between Asia and Europe. To shed more light on intra-Asian

flows, Eichengreen and Park (2005) supplement the BIS data with unpublished data for

Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore and Korea.13 Banks are distinguished by nationality rather

than location. They find that cross border bank claims are smaller in Asia than in Europe.

The standard gravity variables explain some but by no means all of this difference. The

remainder is explained by policy variables: more intra-regional trade in Europe makes for

more financial flows; past capital controls influence current claims; and less developed

financial markets (as measured by bank credit as a share of GDP) make for fewer flows.

Kim, Lee and Shin (2005) augment the BIS data base with data for Korea. Unlike

Eichengreen and Park, they report results suggesting that there is no remaining significant

difference between the volume of intra-European and intra-East Asian flows once one

13
     Obtained from the national authorities in each country.
                                            - 10 -




controls for the standard gravity models. This may however reflect their limited

geographical coverage for Asia.

       The most comprehensive study in this vein is Papaioannou (2005), who uses BIS

locational banking data from the mid-1980s through 2002. Standard gravity variables

perform as expected, but there is also a role for ICRG political risk ratings, in that recent

declines in country risk in developing countries have led to a significant increase in cross-

border bank claims, other things equal. Papaioannou then tries to unbundle this variable by

substituting bureaucratic quality (which discourages foreign bank investment), time required

to complete a legal case (which has a significant negative effect on cross border bank

claims), and government ownership of the banking system (which has a significant negative

effect). When political risk is reintroduced, it matters as well (“politics and institutions are

both key determinants of international capital transactions”). Papaioannou also considers the

Reinhart-Rogoff de facto classification of exchange rate regimes and finds that foreign banks

prefer investing in countries with more stable exchange rates.

       Finally, Liu (2005) uses BIS data to test for the significance of General Agreement on

Trade and Services (GATS) commitments – which are highly significant in his specification.

In contrast to other studies, he finds no effect of exchange rate volatility or the presence of

capital controls.

       B. Studies using data on equity markets. An early contribution to the literature on

international equity transactions is Ghosh and Wolf (2000), who consider flows from

Germany, Italy, the UK and the U.S. to nine recipient countries. They include only the basic

gravity variables, finding that most of these perform reasonably well. Portes and Rey (2005),

in a more comprehensive effort, consider bilateral equity purchases and sales between 14
                                              - 11 -




source and destination countries in the period 1989-1996.14 They compare the performance

of two measures of information costs: distance and telephone traffic. The number of bank

branches in country i of banks headquartered in country j consistently matters, as if banks

and equity-market flows are complements rather than substitutes. They use market

capitalization in the source and destination countries as a measure of market size.

Interestingly (and in contrast to our results for bonds below), destination country returns do

not appear to matter.

       Izquierdo, Morriset and Olarreaga (2003) use the same data as Portes and Rey (2005)

for a similar period (1990-1996). They again use bilateral telephone traffic as a measure of

information flows but also consider bilateral trade in newspapers and periodicals; by

distinguishing imports and exports of newspapers they can say something about the direction

of the information flow. Their most important finding, which is somewhat counterintuitive, is

that information flowing from the source to the destination country matters most for bilateral

equity flows (newspaper exports from the U.S. to Argentina matter more than newspaper

exports from Brazil to the U.S. in explaining U.S. purchases of Brazilian equities). They

interpret this as an indication of the importance of information about the liquidity of the U.S.

market.15




14
  The data are from Cross-Border Capital. Their Asian countries include Japan, Hong Kong and
Singapore.
15
  In addition they attempt to identify the relationship between trade flows and financial flows, using
import and export taxes as instruments in the commodity trade equation and stock market
capitalization as an instrument in the equities trade equation; the two relationships are estimated
simultaneously.
                                              - 12 -




        C. Studies using data on bonds. Studies concerned with bond markets, our focus in

this paper, are few and far between. Ghosh and Wolf (2000), in the same study noted in

Subsection B above, estimate the impact of the basic gravity variables on debt outflows from

Germany, the U.S. and Italy to a number of different destinations. Interestingly, these

estimates do not appear to fit the data particularly well, except in the case of the United

States. Buch (2000b) uses IMF data on debt securities for 1997 only. In her study the basic

gravity variables are well behaved and look similar to those in regressions for bank claims.16

The impact of having a larger domestic banking system is ambiguous, with the sign of the

effect varying by source country). Finally, coefficients on the ratio of bank loans to total

debt finance suggest that the relative importance of bond finance rises with the financial

development of the host country, while country (population) size is otherwise insignificant,

suggesting minimal economies of scale.17

        Thus, the few previous studies that have utilized the gravity model to study the bond

market raise as many questions as they answer. In what follows we therefore see whether we

can push this literature forward another step.




16
  Suggesting in turn that the relatively poor results in the study by Ghosh and Wolf reflect the very
limited nature of their sample.
17
  In the study otherwise closest to our own, Kim, Lee and Shin (2005) use IMF data on total portfolio
claims (portfolio equity, debt securities and bank claims) rather than just bonds for 1997 and 2001
through 2004. They find that trade is positively associated with financial integration. When trade
variable is added, the dummy variable indicating that both the source and recipient country are in East
Asia goes to zero. They also include a variable for whether one of the pair is a global financial center
and find that this matters strongly for Asia, as if countries in the region are more heavily linked with
global financial centers than with one another.
                                               - 13 -




3. Data and Specification

        The dependent variable in our analysis is the log of bilateral international portfolio

holdings of long-term debt securities from the Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey

(CPIS) compiled by the IMF for the years 2001-2003.18 The purpose of the survey is to

collect information on the stock of cross-border holdings of equities, long-term debt

securities, and short-term debt securities, all valued at market prices and broken down by the

economy of residence of the issuer. Central bank reserve holdings are excluded.19

        To date, the IMF has released five waves of CPIS data.20 The first wave was for end-

1997; 29 economies participated. The second through fourth waves were released annually

from end-2001 through end-2003. The number of countries participating tended to rise over

time; 69 economies participated in 2003. For each participating economy, the survey reports

holdings in all destination economies. The list of reporting economies appears in the

appendix. For this study we create an unbalanced panel using data for 2001-2003.21



18
  To avoid the problem of log of zero, we use natural logs of (1 + the variable). The data set and data
description are available on the internet at http://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/ pi/cpis.htm.
19
   Thus, our results concerning the determinants of such positions should be understood as reflecting
the investment decisions of private agents and, where appropriate, government agencies with foreign
holdings. Although central bank reserves are excluded from the CPIS data, it still could be that large
reserves are signal that exchange rates will be relatively stable, capital markets will remain open, and
liquidity will be ensured through backstopping operations. In the section on sensitivity analysis
below, we therefore add reserves in both the sending and receiving countries to our baseline
specification.
20
  Since the first draft of this paper was written, the fifth wave of CPIS data has been released, but the
amount of information made publicly available, especially at the disaggregated level, is still limited.
We prefer to wait for the complete data set before extending our analysis.
21
  We drop the 1997 data since the smaller and less representative sample would likely aggravate
problems of selectivity (addressed below).
                                                 - 14 -




           In designing this survey the IMF has attempted to ensure comprehensiveness and

consistency across countries. All national surveys are conducted simultaneously, use

consistent definitions, and are structured to encourage the use of best practices in data

collection. Specific procedures are recommended to minimize the danger of

misclassification and double counting. For example, the issuance of depository receipts

creates the potential for double counting since there will then exist two securities that can be

reported as held but only one underlying liability. 22 Depository receipts are therefore

recorded by looking through the financial institution that issues the receipts; instead the

holder of the receipts are taken to have a claim on the underlying asset. In this case

American depository receipts (ADRs) are recorded as liabilities of the non-U.S. enterprise

whose securities underlie the ADR issue and not of the U.S. financial institution that issues

the ADRs.

           Despite all this, there are problems with the CPIS (see also Lane and Milesi-Ferretti

2003). These include (i) incomplete country coverage, as some large holders of portfolio

assets, such as China, Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates, have not participated in the

survey; (ii) under-reporting of assets by CPIS participants due to incomplete institutional

coverage; (iii) third party holding, as the survey responses in some countries may be based on

custodians instead of end-investors; and (iv) problems with collection methods, especially

for those participating in the survey for the first time. The exclusion of China may be

consequential for comparisons of Asia with other regions, although we would note that flows



22
     Depository receipts are securities that represent ownership of securities held by a depository.
                                              - 15 -




from other Asian countries responding to the survey to China are included in our analysis.23

Note that we are unable to analyze separately the determinants of cross-border holdings of

corporate bonds and government bonds, since the CPIS reports only data on the sum of the

two.24 Nor do we have information on the currency composition of bilateral holdings.

        The years 2001-3, spanned by our survey data, were special ones in international

financial markets. The beginning of this period was disturbed by default in Argentina and

financial difficulties in Turkey, while its end was dominated by low global interest rates and

surging cross-border investment.25 It is not clear in what direction these particular conditions

might influence our estimates of the coefficients of interest. Still, it will clearly be important

to include year fixed effects or to apply equivalent treatments to prevent our results from

being contaminated by temporal effects.

        Tables 1 and 2 provide summary statistics of the CPIS data by region of source and

destination countries. Table 1 shows the average amount of cross-border bond holdings

23
  Also, since central bank holdings of foreign bonds are not included in the aggregates analyzed here,
as noted above, the fact that China is not included is somewhat less troubling. In addition to China,
some readers may also concern about the results because of the exclusion of Indian resident’s
holdings of foreign debt securities from the sample. According to the IMF’s International Investment
Position Statistics, India invested US$300-400 million in foreign portfolio debt securities during the
sample period. The exclusion of bond investment from India should affect the results only marginally.
24
  Doing otherwise would violate the IMF’s commitment to keep confidential the information it
obtains on the composition of individual central banks’ foreign reserves, where central banks so
require. Other evidence (such as that reported in Eichengreen, Borensztein and Panizza 2006)
suggests that the cross-border holdings analyzed here predominantly take the form of government
bonds. We are however able, in our companion paper, to analyze the determinants of domestic market
capitalization (as opposed to regional and global bond market integration, our focus here) separately
for corporate and government bonds.
25
  Note, however, that 2005 and the first quarter of 2006, when emerging market spreads fell to
unprecedentedly low levels and enormous volumes of capital flowed into emerging markets as a
corollary of the so-called “carry trade,” are not included in our sample period.
                                                   - 16 -




during the sample period. It is not surprising that the cross-border holdings of long-term debt

securities are the highest within the European Union, as the region’s financial integration and

financial development are relatively more advanced. While Asian countries hold a large sum

of foreign bonds issued by countries outside the region, their holdings of bonds issued by

countries within the region are relatively small. Latin America, on the other hand, holds only

a small position of foreign debt securities, and the intra-regional holdings are smaller than

those of Asia. Table 2 shows cross-border bond investment in percent of the total bonds

outstanding of the destination region.26 In other words, the table shows the share of each

region’s debt securities outstanding held by foreign investors as reported by the CPIS. The

share of intra-regional bond holdings in Asia appears to be smaller than in Latin America

because of its larger amount of bonds outstanding.

        Our empirical strategy is to estimate the gravity model, augmented by various control

variables. Specifically, we estimate the following equation:



 ln(bond ijt ) = α + β1 ln(Sizeit ) + β 2 ln(Size jt ) + β 3 ln(distance ij ) +   '
                                                                                  w   w it +   '
                                                                                               x   x jt +   '
                                                                                                            z   z ijt + ε ijt



where i denotes the source; j denotes the destination country of bond investments; and t

denotes time, which spans from 2001-2003 in the sample. bondijt is the cross-border holdings

of long term debt securities from country i to country j at time t. w it is a vector of source



26
  The total bond outstanding is the sum of domestic and international debt securities from BIS
securities debt statistics.
                                             - 17 -




country-specific explanatory variables, x it is a vector of destination country-specific

explanatory variables, and z it is a vector of bilateral explanatory variables. The descriptions

and sources of these explanatory variables are listed in the appendix. Finally, ε ijt is an error

term, which can be specified differently depending on the estimation method. For example,

in an OLS model, ε ijt would be independently and identically distributed IID(0, σ ε2 ) . If we

assume a destination country fixed effects model, ε ijt = u j + vijt , where u j is constant for

each destination country and vijt is independently and identically distributed IID(0, σ v2 ) . In a

random effects model, u j would be drawn from IID(0, σ u2 ) where u j and all explanatory

variables are uncorrelated with vijt .



4. Basic Results

        To implement the gravity model, we will start with ordinary least squares, then add

destination-country random effects and fixed effects (where the latter forces us to eliminate

time-invariant recipient country variables), and finally use country-pair fixed effects (forcing

us to drop country pair variables that do not vary over time).

        As shown in Table 4, the basic gravity variables (country size, log of distance, land

border dummy, common language dummy) behave well in our pooled OLS specifications. In

Table 5 we add recipient country fixed and random effects. The Breusch-Pagan Lagrange

Multiplier (LM) test suggests that that random effects are preferred to pooled OLS, and
                                               - 18 -




Hausman’s specification test prefers fixed effects to random effects. Table 6 reports the

baseline results using country-pair random effects model.27

        We find, similar to results in the literature, that country size matters: larger countries

invest more in other countries’ bonds; at the same time, larger countries attract more bond

investment from other countries. The results are similar whether we measure country size by

GDP, land area, or population. Distance between countries enters negatively, consistent with

the information-cost hypothesis. The coefficients on the land border dummy are positive but

not robust. This implies that contiguity is a less important determinant of information and

transaction costs for finance than trade (which makes sense in that physical transportation

costs, which are often minimized by contiguity, matter more for the latter).

        The interest rate variables highlight the importance of push factors: investments do

not always go to the countries with higher interest rates, but they clearly come from countries

with lower interest rates.28 We find the same when we instead use the average monthly

return on home country bonds and the average monthly return on foreign country bonds in

home country currency (Table 7).29 (We interpret the average monthly return as the


27
  Again, the LM test rejects the null hypothesis of pooled OLS. The results with fixed effects are not
reported, as we are forced to drop all country-pair, time-invariant variables (e.g. distance, intra-
regional dummy variables), many of which are of particular interest.
28
  We use the differences between LIBOR rate and domestic interest rates as the independent
variables to control for changes in global interest rates. A positive coefficient on LIBOR - source
country’s interest rate implies that cross-border holdings are higher for source countries with lower
interest rates.
29
   We measure past bond returns using total return indices, taking into account changes in bilateral
exchange rates by using own-currency returns for source countries and source-country-currency
returns for destination countries. For emerging market countries, we use J.P. Morgan’s Emerging
Market Bond Indices (EMBI) total return indices, which compute total returns (capital gains and
interest returns) on U.S. dollar-denominated debt instruments issued by sovereign and quasi-
                                                                                           (continued)
                                              - 19 -




historical or backward-looking return and the interest differential as the contemporaneous or

forward-looking return.) These results are consistent with accounts emphasizing the

importance of global factors and conditions in the financial centers as determinants of

conditions in emerging markets (see e.g. Calvo 1999). They are suggestive for a paper

presented in the summer of 2006, since the first half of the year has been marked by

substantial flows into emerging market bonds and, in turn, prompted a debate over whether

this reflects mainly improved fundamentals in the emerging markets or the low level of

interest rates and abundant liquidity in the advanced economies. Our results provide some

support for the second interpretation.

        The correlation of bond returns enters positively in our equations, which is easier to

interpret in terms of return chasing than diversification.30 This is the “correlation puzzle”

identified by McCauley and Jiang (2004) in their analysis of bank-intermediated flows.

McCauley and Jiang (2004) observe that arbitrage has done little to equalize returns between

Asian local currency bonds and their industrial-country counterparts, consistent with this

sovereign entities. For mature market countries, we use J.P. Morgan’s Government Bond Indices
(GBI), which track total returns on local currency government debt instruments. For source countries
we calculate returns from its bond index and, if applicable, convert the returns into its own currency.
For destination countries we use unhedged bond returns in source country currency to take into
account changes in bilateral exchange rate. In principle, it would be desirable to measure the extent
of hedging behavior directly, perhaps using data on the existence of level of activity on hedging
markets. However, information on activity on such markets, and even on their existence, is available
in systematic form only for a relatively small subset of countries.
30
   We compute the correlation of bond returns using 3-year rolling correlation of the past total bond
returns (as described earlier). Given expected returns and portfolio weights, the lower the correlation
of returns on two assets, the lower the variance of they portfolio they comprise. Hence one would
expect a risk adverse investor to choose foreign assets with lower return correlation with their local
portfolio in order to diversify and minimize portfolio risks. The positive coefficient on the return
correlation implies that investors choose foreign bonds with returns more correlated with their local
bond portfolio.
                                              - 20 -




finding, but they also suggest that this pattern should make diversification attractive; our

results suggest that there has been little such diversification to date. This result is also

consistent with interpretations of recent trends emphasizing the high level of liquidity in the

financial centers in driving flows to emerging markets as well as trend-chasing behavior as

opposed to diversification motives.31

        In contrast to the mixed results in studies of bank loans, for bond markets we

consistently find that capital controls are important.32 The regressions suggest that controls

in both source and destination countries matter in anticipated fashion. Controls on outflows

from the investing country always enter with the larger coefficient (in absolute value terms),

as if these measures are especially binding. All this is consistent with findings in our earlier

paper on the domestic dimension of bond market development – that capital controls are

negatively associated with domestic bond-market capitalization.

        The volatility of the bilateral exchange rate enters with a strong negative coefficient.33

Again, this is consistent with our earlier analysis of domestic bond-market capitalization,

where we found that more volatile exchange rates had a negative effect (which we interpreted

as evidence that exchange rate volatility discourages foreign participation).


31
  We should note that this result is also consistent with reverse causality, in the sense that larger
cross-border investments between two countries could result in higher correlations of domestic and
foreign returns.
32
  We use the lines for restrictions on capital transactions in bonds and other debt instruments from
the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. The data are
entered as a dummy variable where “1” means there is a restriction on capital transactions in bonds
and other debt instrument and “0” means there is not.
33
  The volatility of the bilateral exchange rate is measured as annual standard deviation of monthly
changes of logs of bilateral exchange rates.
                                               - 21 -




        Interestingly, when we add the Asia dummy to the preceding specifications, it enters

with a positive coefficient, as if Asian bond markets are more integrated, so measured, than a

randomly selected pair of bond markets.34 But this coefficient goes to zero in Table 8, where

we include financial sector variables (domestic credit provided by the banking sector as a

percent of GDP and stock market capitalization as a percent of GDP). When we add an

analogous dummy for members of the European Union (as of 2001-3), it is also positive and

significant, and the point estimate is even larger. In contrast to Asia, the EU dummy is not

wiped out by adding financial sector measures. Thus, cross border participation in Europe

appears to reflect more than simply the advanced nature of the region’s financial sector and

the absence of capital controls; it presumably also reflects the extent of, inter alia, regulatory

harmonization.35

         In Table 9, we add several proxies for the quality of institutions of the destination

country.36 Not surprisingly, measures of the quality of institutions in the destination country

are consistently important in explaining cross-border holdings. Indices measuring law and

order, corruption, bureaucratic quality, and the investment risks (higher values mean better



34
  The Asia dummy is equal to 1 for Hong Kong SAR, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Macao SAR,
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China, and Thailand. Note that it leaves out
Laos, Myanmar, Cambodia, Brunei and Vietnam, for which data are spotty and which do not
participate fully in the region’s entire range of financial-market initiatives.
35
  The Latin America dummy is opposite in sign. It also tends to lose some of its statistical
significance when we add financial sector variables, but not across the board.
36
  While these recipient-country-specific control variables are not time-invariant, the variations over
time are small compared to cross-country variations. Results using destination country fixed effects
model thus may not be very meaningful. As a result, we will report the results from the random
effects model only.
                                               - 22 -




institutions) all tend to enter with positive coefficients.37 We similarly obtain a negative

coefficient on number of days required to enforce a contract (from Djankov et al. 2005).38

        Even when we control for institutional quality and interest rates, credit ratings

continue to matter. The direction of the effect is plausible: higher ratings mean higher

foreign holdings. It may be that the rating agencies are capturing something in addition to

the standard measures of institutional quality. Or it could be that restrictive covenants

preventing institutional investors from holding bonds of issuers with sub-investment-grade

ratings are driving this result.

        Interestingly, the intraregional dummy variable for Latin America turns positive and

significant when we control for the quality of institutions. The importance of institutional

weaknesses for various aspects of bond market development in Latin America has been

widely remarked upon. Thus, de la Torre and Schmuker (2004) observe that the high cost of

judicial proceedings is a factor discouraging foreign investors from holding the bonds of a

number of Latin American countries. Inter-American Development Bank (2005) observes

that Latin America fares poorly when rated on both investor and creditor rights. In both

cases the highest ranked Latin American country – Chile – has values according to the

standard indices that are lower than the Asian average. Eichengreen, Borensztein and
37
   An exception is the corruption measure. However, there appears to be strong colinearity between
per capita income and the institutional variables (not surprisingly): the sign and significance of the
latter are sensitive to whether per capita income is included (since this is associated with other hard-
to-observe dimensions of the strength of institutions).
38
  The measures of legal origin, which are negative for both English and French law (where Nordic
law is the omitted alternative), are hard to reconcile with the standard La Porta et al. (1999) view.
Recall that these same variables similarly entered with counterintuitive signs in our earlier study
using domestic-capitalization data and that Djankov et al. (2005) also find that these variables do not
always have the anticipated effects. The mystery deepens.
                                                  - 23 -




Panizza (2006) show that Latin American countries comply less fully with international

accounting standards than do their Asian counterparts. What is interesting here is that the

low level of financial integration in Latin America is fully (indeed, more than fully)

explained by the low quality of institutions.



5. Sensitivity Checks

           We now provide a series of robustness checks of the results reported above.

       •   We adjust the standard errors for the fact that a number of our institutional variables

           do not vary over time by clustering on destination countries.39 Clustering increases

           the standard errors on the institutional variables, as expected, but few of the latter

           lose their statistical significance.40 Overall, the results are very similar to before.

       •   We check for selectivity, which may be important given that only some 70 source

           countries (of some 180-plus IMF members) participated in the CPIS surveys. We re-

           estimated the basic equations using a Heckman selectivity correction. From the first-

           stage selection equations, we find, plausibly, that countries participating in the

           survey are larger, richer and have larger banking systems and stock markets. But

           even after controlling for these selection criteria, the results remain similar to those

           obtained before. The results are reported in Table 10.




39
  In other words, we assume that observations are independent across destination countries but not
necessarily within them.
40
     The results, while not reported, are available on request.
                                               - 24 -




     •   We experiment with alternative measures of the de facto exchange rate regime.

         When we replace exchange rate variability, the measure used above, with dummy

         variables constructed on the basis of Reinhart and Rogoff’s exchange rate regime

         classification, the results remain basically the same.41 We find that pegged exchange

         rates have positive effects on cross-border bond holdings (compared to floating and

         managed floating regimes), while regimes of limited flexibility enter with

         significantly negative signs.42 See Table 11.

     •   We experiment with alternative measures of policies toward the capital account. For

         example, we substitute the alternative measures of the absence of restrictions on all

         inflows and outflows as well as the financial openness index kindly made available

         by Nancy Brune.43 Again, the results are largely the same. We then substitute Chinn


41
  We use the update through 2003 of the Reinhart and Rogoff de facto classification in Eichengreen
and Razo-Garcia (2005). For tractability we reclassify their more detailed classifications into 3 main
categories: peg, limited flexibility, and floating/managed floating and assign a dummy variable for
each category. Floating/managed floating is the alternative omitted from the regressions.
42
  These results, however, are not robust to the measures of the rate of returns. The coefficients lose
their significance when we use historical returns instead of interest rate differential.
43
   The measure of capital openness of all inflows is the sum of five dummy variables, measuring
respectively controls on inflows of invisible transactions, controls on inflows of export transactions,
controls on inflows pertaining to capital and money market securities, controls on inflows pertaining
to credit operations, and controls on inward direct investment. For each component, a value of one
means open (no restriction) while zero means closed (restriction in place). The resulting measure
ranges from zero to five, where higher values imply more open capital account on inflow transactions.
Similarly, the measure of capital openness of all outflows is the sum of four variables: controls on
outflows of all transactions mentioned previously, except export transactions. The resulting measure
ranges from zero to four, where higher values imply more open capital account on outflow
transactions. The financial openness index is the sum of the measures of capital openness of inflows
and outflows as well as dummy variables indicating controls on inward direct investment, controls on
outward direct investment, controls on real estate transactions, provisions specific to commercial
banks, and exchange rate structure (where this last variable takes on a value of zero if country has
dual or multiple exchange rates). The resulting index ranges from zero to 12.
                                              - 25 -




         and Ito’s (2005) measure of financial openness.44 Once again, the results are

         consistent with before: as expected, financial openness has a positive effect on

         foreign holdings of portfolio debt securities. Again, see Table 11.

     •   We add a lagged dependent variable to see whether the patterns we detect are robust

         to a model that explicitly allows for hysteresis or habit formation. Previous work on

         the determinants of bilateral trade flows using purely cross section data (e.g.

         Eichengreen and Irwin 1996) showed that such habit formation can be important in

         practice. To see whether this holds in the present context, we include the lagged

         dependent variable to a cross section regression estimated 2003 data45 To correct for

         the bias resulted from adding a lagged dependent variable, we also instrument for the

         lagged dependent variable by the lagged independent variables using two-stage least

         square regressions. The results are shown in Table 12. In all specifications, we find

         that there is a strong evidence for the habit formation. While most other coefficients

         remain unchanged, the Asia dummy becomes insignificant when we control for bond

         holdings in the previous year. This suggests that whatever is distinctive about cross-

         border bond holdings within Asia is persistent over time.

     •   Although central bank reserves are excluded from the CPIS data, it still could be, as

         noted above, that large reserves are signal that exchange rates will be relatively


44
  A note on calculation of this measure is available at http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/Readme_
kaopen163.pdf
45
  We also add a lagged dependent variable to the panel estimates. However, this may create
problems for the consistency of the estimates; hence we prefer to rely on the simple cross section for
2003.
                                        - 26 -




    stable, capital markets will remain open, and liquidity will be ensured through

    backstopping operations. Countries with ample reserves will be more sanguine,

    intuition suggests, about policies of benign neglect toward outward investment. In

    the inward investment side, some authors (e.g. Dooley and Garber 2005) have argued

    that reserves should be thought of as collateral, that high reserve levels make it easier

    for emerging markets to access foreign financial markets. We therefore add reserves

    scaled by GDP in the sending and receiving countries to our baseline specification.

    As shown in the first column of Table 13, the coefficient on the reserves of the

    sending country is positive and significant; as expected, countries with ample

    reserves can invest abroad with fewer worries. However, reserves in the receiving

    country enter negatively, which is inconsistent with the collateral hypothesis.

•   We explored further possible interpretations of the coefficient on distance. In Table

    13, we also added to the basic framework measures of incoming and outgoing

    telephone traffic and the cost of telephone calls on the grounds that these tell us

    something about the information flows that are important in portfolio investment

    decisions, and that this may be what the distance variable is picking up. These

    additional variables also enter with the expected signs (positive and negative,

    respectively) and are strongly significant. But the distance variable is still negative

    and significant as well. This suggests that distance is picking up something besides

    information communicated through these channels (e.g. time zone difference

    described above).

•   One possibility is that distance is simply a stand-in for the additional difficulty of

    investing across time zones. Insofar as claims on countries are traded primarily in
                                                - 27 -




         their own time zones, portfolio managers and others may find it inconvenient to get

         up in the middle of the night to check market conditions and transact. Those

         impressed by the ease of obtaining information on far distant markets in the internet

         age may be inclined toward this alternative interpretation. We therefore

         experimented with a measure of the number of time zones separating the source and

         destination markets (see Table 13). When this is substituted for distance in our basic

         specifications, it is again negative and significant (not surprisingly, insofar as

         distance and time zone differences are positively correlated). But when we include

         both distance and time zone differences, the former is still significantly negative, as

         before, while the latter is not positive and significant. It would appear, in other

         words that distance is not simply a proxy for time zone differences. The positive

         coefficient on the latter appears to be capturing a tendency for investors to prefer

         transactions with countries to their east and west rather than to their north or south,

         although why this should be the case remains an open question.46



6. Connections with Other Aspects of Financial Development

        In this section we consider further variables and specifications designed to shed light

on the impact of other aspects of financial development on bond market integration.

        We first ask whether stock and bond markets are substitutes or complements. We

start by adding the value of listed companies in the source and destination countries as way

46
  In particular, this result is not being driven by the inclusion of the major financial centers (the U.S.,
UK and Japan in the sample). The results are largely the same when we exclude the U.S. and Japan
from the sample (see Table 13).
                                           - 28 -




of capturing the depth of their financial markets. Both variables enter positively (Table 14),

but it is the size of stock markets in the source (investing) country that seems to matter. This

may indicate that these countries have an active institutional investor community inclined to

take positions in the securities issued by foreign countries. We attempt to provide more

direct evidence on this below.

       We also ask, again following up on our previous work, whether having a large and

well-developing banking system encourages or discourages efforts to place bonds with

foreign investors. For both the source and destination countries, domestic credit provided by

the banking sector as a share of GDP is positive, suggesting that a large and active banking

system encourages foreign participation in domestic bond markets. This is the same thing

found in our previous study on the size of domestic bond markets. There we suggested a

number of reasons why this might be so. Banks are producers of information about

conditions in financial markets and about the characteristics of financial instruments that may

be particularly valuable to foreign investors. They provide underwriting services for

domestic issuers, advising the issuer on the terms and timing of the offer. They provide

bridge finance in the period when the marketing of bonds is still underway. They provide

distribution channels for government bonds and form an important part of the primary dealer

network. Their institutional support may also be conducive to secondary-market liquidity.

Finally and most directly, banks owing to their relatively large size can be major issuers of

bonds themselves.

       Conversely, there is the fear that an inefficient banking system may hinder bond

market development and participation and that an imperfectly competitive system, in which

banks have significant market power, may allow them to use their incumbency advantage to
                                                 - 29 -




hinder the advance of securitization and disintermediation.47 We therefore constructed

measures of the concentration of the banking system in both the source and destination

countries (as a Herfindahl-Hirschman index of commercial bank assets, using data from

Bankscope – thus, a higher value indicates greater concentration). Here measures for both

the source and destination countries enter negatively as expected, although the signs and

levels of statistical significance are sensitive to what control variables are included. We

similarly added the share of bank assets accounted for by public-sector banks as an additional

measure of banking sector efficiency.48 Again, this enters in the expected fashion

(negatively). It suggests interpreting this set of results in terms of the negative impact of a

relatively inefficient banking system of various aspects of bond market development, more

than in terms of strategic behavior by banks with market power.

           While our other results remain unchanged, the negative coefficient on cross-holdings

within Latin America now goes to zero even without the addition of measures of the quality

of institutions.49 Borensztein, Eichengreen and Panizza (2006b) show that Latin America

looks better in terms of other dimensions of bond market development when one controls for

the underdevelopment of the region’s financial system generally.50 We find the same thing



47
  They may do so by limiting access to the payment system and by supporting the maintenance of
regulations that increase the cost of underwriting and issuance (Schinasi and Smith 1998, Rajan and
Zingales 2003, Eichengreen and Luengnaruemitchai 2004).
48
  We compute country-level public bank assets by summing assets of commercial banks with share
of public ownership more than 50 percent, using the data from Micco, Panizza and Yañez (2004)
49
     Sometimes we even get a significantly positive, albeit small, coefficient.
50
  Another way of putting the point is that the region’s bond markets are underdeveloped for the same
reasons that the rest of the region’s financial system is underdeveloped (those reasons having to do
                                                                                        (continued)
                                               - 30 -




here. Note that institutional (and other) factors stunting the development of the banking

system do not appear to be what is holding back bond market integration in Asia (the

coefficients on the dummy variable for intra-Asian cross holdings is little different than

before).



7. The Composition of the Investor Base

        Another approach to analyzing the importance of institutional factors is to make use

of the fact that the CPIS reports data by type of institutional investor (banks, insurance

companies and mutual funds). East Asia and other regions are making considerable efforts to

cultivate the participation of institutional investors in their bond markets. We can use the

CPIS data to analyze the importance of these agents for cross-border investment both within

the region and globally.

        In Table 15 we run three parallel regressions for the three categories of holders –

banks, insurance companies and mutual funds – estimating them by seemingly unrelated

regression to capitalize on the correlation of disturbance terms across types of holders for

given country pairs. These results should be interpreted cautiously, since the sample size is

now considerably smaller than before. (There turn out to be a non-negligible number of

empty cells when we disaggregate by type of investor.)

        For what they are worth, the results show that the basic gravity variables are well

behaved (virtually without exception the signs remain the same as before). When we turn to



with the institutional variables that also caused the coefficients for intra-Latin American cross
holdings to go to zero in Section 4 above).
                                              - 31 -




the dummy variables for intra-regional cross holdings, the comparison of Asia and Europe is

particularly interesting. For banks, insurance companies and mutual funds alike, we get large

positive coefficients for intra-regional positions in bond markets in Europe. In Asia,

however, we get a positive coefficient for insurance companies but a strongly negative

coefficient for mutual funds. This points to the development and behavior of the mutual fund

industry as a potential constraint on bond market development in the region. We want to be

careful here and to reiterate the provisional nature of these findings, since we have

information on the foreign asset positions of mutual funds for only a limited number of Asian

countries. Still, the results appear to make sense; in a number of Asian countries assets under

management by insurance companies remain significant larger than those under management

by mutual funds. Total assets under management by mutual funds are of roughly the same

size relative to GDP in East Asia and Latin America (IMF 2005). Despite the fact that Latin

American financial markets are relatively underdeveloped along a number of other

dimensions, regulators there have taken aggressive steps to encourage the participation of

institutional investors, mutual funds and pension funds in particular.51 But, in both regions,

cross-border investment by mutual funds continues to be hindered by a dearth of appropriate

assets.52 Note that the Asian Bond Fund, by creating a set of passively managed index funds

of regional bonds, is designed to address precisely this problem.53


51
     Again, see Borensztein, Eichengreen and Panizza (2006b).
52
  A problem that is compounded by the existence of restrictive covenants that limit the classes of
assets in which funds can invest.
53
  As noted above, Asian Bond Fund 2 has two components: a $1 billion central bank reserve pool to
be overseen by professional managers for local bond allocation, and a $1 billion index unit designed
                                                                                          (continued)
                                             - 32 -




8. Conclusions and Policy Implications

        The development of bond markets can be gauged in a number of ways. In this paper

we have concentrated on the international dimension. We used data on the extent to which

residents of one country hold the bonds of issuers resident in another as a measure of

financial integration or interrelatedness, asking how Asia compares with Europe and Latin

America and with the base case in which the purchaser and issuer of the bonds reside in

different regions. It is no surprise that Europe is head and shoulders above other regions in

terms of financial integration so measured. More interesting is that Asia already seems to

have made some progress on this front compared to Latin America and the world as a whole.

The contrast with Latin America is largely explained by stronger creditor and investor rights,

more expeditious and less costly contract enforcement, and greater transparency that lead to

larger and better developed financial systems in Asia, something that is conducive to foreign

participation in local markets and to intra-regional cross holdings of Asian bonds generally.

Further results based on a limited sample suggest that one factor holding back investment in

foreign bonds in East Asia may be limited geographical diversification by mutual funds, in

turn reflecting a dearth of appropriate assets. Asian Bond Fund 2, by creating a passively

managed portfolio of local currency bonds potentially attractive to mutual fund managers and

investors, may help to relax this constraint.




to list on eight stock exchanges beginning with Hong Kong. The regional index is designed to
provide a benchmark structure for tracking pan-Asian performance as well as facilitating one-stop
entry for retail and institutional buyers in particular.
                                           - 33 -




       We also find evidence that cross-holdings are heavily driven by financial conditions

in the investing country, which suggests that bond market conditions could adjust abruptly

for reasons having nothing to do with policies in the borrowing economy. Our results also

indicate that bondholders are attracted to the securities of countries whose returns co-vary

with their own, suggesting return chasing rather than diversification behavior. These are

reasons for skepticism that the development of bond markets is a panacea for stabilizing

capital flows.
                                         - 34 -




                                        References

Aviat, Antonin and Nicolas Coeurdacier (2005), “The Geography of Trade in Goods and
Asset Holdings,” unpublished manuscript, CNRS-EHESS-PNPC-ENS.

Borensztein, Eduardo, Barry Eichengreen and Ugo Panizza (2006a), “Debt Instruments and
Policies for the New Millennium: New Markets and New Opportunities,” unpublished
manuscript, Inter-American Development Bank (March).

Borensztein, Eduardo, Barry Eichengreen and Ugo Panizza (2006b), “Building Bond
Markets in Latin America,” unpublished manuscript, Inter-American Development Bank
(March).

Buchanan, Michael (2005), “Emerging Markets and the Global Economy – Hysteresis not
Hysteria,” Global Economics Weekly, Goldman Sachs (30 November).

Buch, Claudia (2000a), “Are Banks Different? Evidence from International Data,” Kiel
Working Paper no. 1012, Kiel: Kiel Institute of World Economics.

Buch, Claudia (2000b), “Information or Regulation: What is Driving the International
Activities of Commercial Banks?” Kiel Working Paper no. 1011, Kiel: Kiel Institute of
World Economics.

Calvo, Guillermo (1999), “Contagion in Emerging Markets: When Wall Street is a Carrier,”
unpublished manuscript, University of Maryland.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Liederman and Carmen Reinhart (1994), “Capital Inflows and
Real Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America,” IMF Staff Papers 40, pp.108-151.

Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito (2005), “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital
Controls, Institutions, and Interactions,” NBER Working Paper No. 11370, also
forthcoming in the Journal of Development Economics.

Coeurdacier, Nicolas and Stephane Guibaud (2005), “International Equity Holdings and
Stock Return Correlations: Does Diversification Matter at All for Portfolio Choice?”
unpublished manuscript, PSE-ENS-EHESS (July).

De la Torre, Augusto and Sergio Schmukler (2004), Whither Latin American Capital
Markets? Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

Djankov, Simeon, Carlee McLiesh and Andrei Shleifer (2005), “Private Credit in 129
Countries,” NBER Working Paper no. 11078 (January).
                                         - 35 -




Dooley, Michael and Peter Garber (2005), “Is it 1958 or 1968? Three Notes on the Longevity
of the Revived Bretton Woods System,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp.147-
187.

Eichengreen, Barry (2005), “Comment: Is it 1958 or 1968? Three Notes on the Longevity of
the Revived Bretton Woods System,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp.188-193.

Eichengreen, Barry, Eduardo Borensztein and Ugo Panizza (2006), “A Tale of Two
Markets: Bond Market Development in Latin America and East Asia,” unpublished
manuscript, Inter-American Development Bank.

Barry Eichengreen & Douglas A. Irwin (1996), “The Role of History in Bilateral Trade
Flows,” NBER Working Papers no. 5565.

Eichengreen, Barry and Pipat Luengnaruemitchai (2004), “Why Doesn’t Asia Have Bigger
Bond Markets?” NBER Working Paper no. 10576.

Eichengreen, Barry and Yung Chul Park (2003), “Why Has There Been Less Financial
Integration in East Asia than in Europe?” in Yung Chul Park, Takatoshi Ito and Yunjong
Wang (eds), A New Financial Market Structure for East Asia, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar,
pp.84-103.

Eichengreen, Barry and Raul Razo-Garcia (2005), “The International Monetary System in
the Last and Next 20 Years,” unpublished manuscript, University of California, Berkeley.

Faruqee, Hamid, Shujing Li and Isabel K. Yan (2004), “The Determinants of International
Portfolio Holdings and Home Bias,” IMF Working Paper no. WP/04/34 (February).

Ferrucci, Gianluigi (2004), “Understanding Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies,”
Financial Stability Review (June), pp.89-97.

Ghosh, Swati and Holger Wolf (2000), “Is There a Curse of Location? Spatial Determinants
of Capital Flows to Emerging Markets,” in Sebastian Edwards (ed.), Capital Flows and the
Emerging Economies, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.137-158.

Goldstein, Morris and Philip Turner (2004), Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging
Market Economies: An Alternative to the Original Sin Hypothesis, Washington, D.C.:
Institute for International Economics.

Inter-American Development Bank (2005), Unlocking Credit: The Quest for Deep and Stable
Bank Lending, Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.

International Monetary Fund (2005), “Development of Corporate Bond Markets in Emerging
Market Economies,” Global Financial Stability Report, Washington, D.C.: IMF, pp.103-141.
                                          - 36 -




Izquierdo, Alejandro, Jacques Morriset and Marcelo Olarreaga (2003), “Information
Diffusion in International Markets,” Working Paper no. 488, Research Department,
Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.

Jeanneau, Serge and Marian Micu (2002), “Determinants of International Bank Lending to
Emerging Market Countries,” BIS Working Paper no. 112 (June).

Kawai, Masahiro and Li-Gang Liu (2001), “Determinants of International Commercial Bank
Loans to Developing Countries,” unpublished manuscript, University of Tokyo and Asian
Development Bank Institute.

Kim, Soyoung, Jong-Wha Lee and Kwanho Shin (2005), “Regional and Global Financial
Integration in East Asia,” unpublished manuscript, Korea University.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andre Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1999),
“Investor Protection: Origins, Consequences and Reform,” NBER Working Paper no.7429
(December).

Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2004), “International Investment Patterns,”
Center for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper no. 4499.

Liu, Li-Gang (2005), “Impact of Financial Services Trade Liberalization on Capital Flows:
The Case of China’s Banking Sector,” unpublished manuscript, Hong Kong Monetary
Authority.

Papaioannou, Elias (2005), “What Drives International Bank Flows? Politics, Institutions and
Other Determinants,” Working Paper no. 437, Frankfurt: ECB.

Martin, Philippe and Helene Rey (2004), “Financial Super-Markets: Size Mattes for Asset
Trade,” Journal of International Economics 64, pp.335-361.

McCauley, Robert and Guorong Jiang (2004), “Diversifying with Asian Local Currency
Bonds,” BIS Quarterly Review (September), pp.51-66.

Micco, Alejandro, Ugo Panizza and Mónica Yañez (2004), “Bank Ownership and
Performance,” IADB Working Paper no. 518.

Portes, Richard and Helene Rey (2005), “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows,”
Journal of International Economics 65, pp.269-295.

Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (2003), “Banks and Markets: The Changing Character
of European Finance,” NBER Working Paper no. 9595.

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2002), “The Modern History of Exchange Rate
Arrangements: A Reinterpretation,” NBER Working Paper no. 8963.
                                        - 37 -




Rose, Andrew and Mark Spiegel (2004), “A Gravity Model of Sovereign Lending: Trade,
Default and Credit,” IMF Staff Papers 51 (special issue), pp.50-63.

Schinasi, Gary and Todd Smith (1998), “Fixed Income Markets in the United States, Europe
and Japan: Some Lessons for Emerging Markets,” IMF Working Paper no. 98-173.
                                               - 38 -




       Table 1. Average Cross-Border Portfolio Holdings of Long-Term Debt, 2001-2003
                                 (In Millions of US Dollars)

Investments        USA &                                  Eastern     Latin
From\To            Canada         Asia         EU15       Europe     America    Others     Total

USA & Canada          12,299       51,524      326,252       6,313     65,230   250,916    712,535

Asia                 444,215       41,920      527,525       3,124     10,771   254,125   1,281,679

EU15                 624,247       86,538     2,914,030     46,689     51,621   404,261   4,127,386

Eastern Europe         2,140              9      6,669       1,033        46      1,028     10,926

Latin America         15,193             78      2,225         22       6,999     1,161     25,678

Others               260,587       19,503      324,228       3,090     14,189    76,259    697,856

Total             1,358,682        199,573    4,100,929     60,271    148,856   987,749   6,856,060
Sources: IMF; Authors’ calculation
                                           - 39 -




      Table 2. Average Cross-Border Portfolio Holdings of Long-Term Debt
    as Percentages of Destination Countries’ Total Outstanding Debt Securities
                                   (In Percent)

Investment            USA &                                  Eastern     Latin
From\To               Canada        Asia            EU15     Europe     America    Others

USA & Canada               0.06        0.64           2.60       2.05       7.97      9.65

Asia                       2.34        0.52           4.20       1.02       1.32      9.77

EU15                       3.29        1.07          23.18      15.20       6.31     15.54

Eastern Europe             0.01        0.00           0.05       0.34       0.01      0.04

Latin America              0.08        0.00           0.02       0.01       0.86      0.04

Others                     1.38        0.24           2.58       1.01       1.73      2.93

Total                     7.17          2.48         32.62      19.62      18.20     37.98
  Sources: IMF; BIS; Authors’ calculation
                                              - 40 -




         Table 3. Average Cross-Border Portfolio Holdings of Long-Term Debt,
                           by Sector of Holders, 2001-2003
                              (In Millions of US Dollars)

                                                     Investment to
  Investment from        USA &                                Eastern        Latin
                                      Asia          EU15                                  Others        Total
                         Canada                               Europe        America
         Banks
                         129,438.7     5,689.3     122,740.3       174.7       632.3       88,296.3    346,971.7
         Insurance
 Asia    Companies        79,301.7     1,228.7      62,933.7        12.3       629.3       35,074.7    179,180.3
         Mutual Funds
                          20,187.7      297.7       20,691.7       178.3      1,110.0       6,402.7     48,868.0
         Nonfinancial
         Corp.            29,971.7     2,384.0      72,740.3      1,259.3     4,122.0      34,666.3    145,143.7
         Banks
                         160,959.0    51,952.7     792,584.7     19,756.3    17,033.7     168,458.7   1,210,745.0
         Insurance
 EU15    Companies       105,456.3     6,570.7     373,012.0      1,476.7      902.3       43,001.3    530,419.3
         Mutual Funds
                          40,387.3     4,105.7     211,480.0      1,538.0     4,121.7      21,861.0    283,493.7
         Nonfinancial
         Corp.            29,592.0      981.3      103,420.7      2,243.3    13,031.0      31,213.7    180,482.0
         Banks
                             293.3           5.7        750.3       50.7        25.7           58.3       1,184.0
Eastern Insurance
Europe Companies               0.7             -           4.7          -             -         2.7             8.0
         Mutual Funds
                               3.3             -           5.7        1.3             -         1.7         12.0
         Nonfinancial
         Corp.                64.3           1.3         86.0           -       15.3           18.7        185.7
         Banks
                           4,596.3       53.0           996.7         5.0     4,659.0        812.3      11,122.3
 Latin Insurance
America Companies            689.7       18.3           277.7         8.7      131.0           51.7       1,177.0
         Mutual Funds
                             131.3           0.7         17.7         3.0      218.0            8.0        378.7
         Nonfinancial
         Corp.             3,568.7           0.3        114.0           -      739.3           67.0       4,489.3
         Banks
                          19,519.0      851.0       29,469.7       592.0       550.0        6,583.0     57,564.7
         Insurance
Others   Companies        37,889.7      679.0       22,482.7        33.7       196.3        2,512.0     63,793.3
         Mutual Funds
                          15,836.7     1,439.0      13,357.3       142.3       886.0        3,216.0     34,877.3
         Nonfinancial
         Corp.               820.0       11.3          1,634.3      15.0        24.0         230.3        2,735.0
 Source: IMF; Authors’ calculation.
                                                - 41 -




                                     Table 4. Baseline Results: Pooled OLS
                                                     (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)

log of GDP-source country                           0.405       0.419                               0.307
                                                  (38.71)**   (36.48)**                           (27.43)**
log of GDP-destination country                      0.636       0.654                               0.524
                                                  (85.38)**   (80.27)**                           (58.72)**
log of GDP, PPP-source country                                              0.384
                                                                          (28.15)**
log of GDP, PPP-destination country                                         0.666
                                                                          (67.91)**
log of GDP per capita-source country                                                    0.900       0.764
                                                                                      (34.36)**   (32.18)**
log of GDP per capita-destination country                                               0.902       0.445
                                                                                      (60.27)**   (29.22)**
log of Distance                                    -0.579      -0.545      -0.470      -0.244       -0.456
                                                  (24.47)**   (21.24)**   (16.90)**    (8.99)**   (19.16)**
Land Border Dummy                                   0.133       0.198       0.266       1.277       0.535
                                                   (1.22)      (1.74)      (2.18)*    (10.45)**    (5.07)**
Common Language Dummy                               0.415       0.335       0.445       0.151       0.259
                                                   (8.46)**    (6.36)**    (7.74)**    (2.65)**    (5.32)**
Control on bond transactions (inflow)              -0.359      -0.411      -0.654      -0.009       0.012
                                                   (9.99)**   (10.41)**   (15.21)**    (0.21)      (8.92)**
Control on bond transactions (outflow)             -0.806      -0.816      -1.079      -0.080       0.002
                                                  (20.15)**   (18.56)**   (22.42)**    (1.48)       (1.51)
LIBOR - Source Country Interest Rate                            0.020       0.021       0.012       -0.122
                                                              (14.38)**   (13.77)**    (7.93)**    (3.19)**
Destination Country Interest Rate - LIBOR                      -0.010      -0.018      -0.000       -0.149
                                                               (6.85)**   (11.09)**    (0.04)      (3.21)**
Asia                                                0.860       0.643       0.803       2.305       1.112
                                                   (5.72)**    (4.24)**    (4.95)**   (14.19)**    (7.92)**
EU15                                                3.808       3.516       3.940       3.683       3.056
                                                  (43.57)**   (39.34)**   (41.43)**   (38.20)**   (36.69)**
Latin America                                      -0.279       0.199       0.306       0.187       0.407
                                                   (2.83)**    (1.80)      (2.55)*     (1.57)      (3.98)**
Constant                                          -19.034     -19.694     -20.157     -11.876      -25.709
                                                  (50.56)**   (48.57)**   (41.38)**   (31.79)**   (63.07)**
Observations                                        12,481     10,654      10,180      10,654       10654
R-squared                                            0.58       0.61        0.57        0.55         0.67
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                         Table 5. Baseline Results: Destination Country Fixed and Random Effects
                                                     (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
                                                     RE           FE          RE           FE          RE          FE          RE          FE          RE           FE
log of GDP-source country                           0.428        0.430       0.439       0.440                                                        0.317       0.318
                                                  (45.63)**    (45.91)**   (42.10)**   (42.25)**                                                    (30.49)**   (30.65)**
log of GDP-destination country                      0.585        0.814       0.620       0.809                                                        0.489       -0.068
                                                  (23.45)**     (2.04)*    (22.44)**     (1.75)                                                     (18.72)**     (0.05)
log of GDP, PPP-source country                                                                        0.425       0.429
                                                                                                    (35.36)**   (35.80)**
log of GDP, PPP-destination country                                                                   0.633       0.459
                                                                                                    (20.56)**     (0.97)
log of GDP per capita-source country                                                                                            1.006       1.014       0.794       0.797
                                                                                                                            (46.06)**   (46.87)**   (36.17)**   (36.36)**
log of GDP per capita-destination country                                                                                       0.838       1.328       0.423       1.068
                                                                                                                            (19.81)**     (2.53)*    (9.89)**      (0.65)
log of Distance                                      -0.714      -0.730      -0.657       -0.669      -0.575      -0.586       -0.373      -0.377      -0.566      -0.584
                                                   (27.65)**   (27.84)**   (22.87)**   (22.87)**    (19.09)**   (19.15)**   (13.47)**   (13.45)**   (20.98)**   (21.09)**
Land Border Dummy                                   -0.098       -0.121      0.011       -0.006       0.078       0.060        0.764       0.733       0.349       0.323
                                                     (0.98)      (1.22)      (0.11)       (0.06)      (0.71)      (0.55)     (7.34)**    (7.10)**    (3.50)**    (3.23)**
Common Language Dummy                                0.353        0.348      0.323        0.322       0.403       0.396        0.301       0.323       0.278       0.284
                                                   (7.50)**     (7.38)**    (6.33)**     (6.27)**    (7.43)**    (7.31)**    (5.94)**    (6.39)**    (5.78)**    (5.87)**
Control on bond transactions (inflow)                -0.178      -0.105      -0.259      -0.183       -0.351      -0.132       -0.129      -0.143      -0.144      -0.167




                                                                                                                                                                            - 42 -
                                                    (2.20)*      (1.01)     (2.83)**      (1.55)     (3.59)**     (0.98)       (1.43)      (1.22)      (1.78)      (1.48)
Control on bond transactions (outflow)               -0.874      -0.877      -0.870      -0.872       -1.219      -1.230       -0.143      -0.149      -0.147      -0.147
                                                  (24.17)**    (24.25)**   (21.71)**   (21.75)**    (28.51)**   (28.84)**    (3.17)**    (3.34)**    (3.44)**    (3.45)**
LIBOR - Source Country Interest Rate                                          0.018        0.018       0.019       0.019        0.012       0.012       0.009       0.009
                                                                           (14.28)**   (14.17)**    (14.49)**   (14.51)**    (9.03)**    (9.14)**    (7.59)**    (7.33)**
Destination Country Interest Rate - LIBOR                                    -0.005       -0.001      -0.010      -0.002       -0.001       0.000       0.000      -0.000
                                                                             (1.59)       (0.11)     (2.91)**     (0.37)       (0.20)      (0.05)      (0.06)      (0.08)
Asia                                                 0.932         0.911      0.897        0.893       1.049       1.048        1.910       1.864       1.358       1.351
                                                   (6.32)**     (6.16)**    (5.95)**    (5.89)**     (6.69)**    (6.66)**   (12.82)**   (12.54)**    (9.54)**    (9.42)**
EU15                                                3.183         3.121       3.058        3.010       3.259       3.181        3.115       3.061       2.790       2.746
                                                  (36.04)**    (35.16)**   (33.49)**   (32.76)**    (34.35)**   (33.41)**   (34.52)**   (33.99)**   (32.37)**   (31.59)**
Latin America                                       -0.576        -0.611     -0.103       -0.132      -0.025      -0.055        0.162       0.159       0.251       0.221
                                                   (5.85)**     (6.16)**     (0.93)       (1.18)      (0.22)      (0.47)       (1.47)      (1.44)     (2.39)*     (2.08)*
Constant                                           -17.393      -22.747     -18.636     -23.137      -19.825     -15.512      -11.431     -15.261     -24.345     -16.008
                                                  (25.91)**      (2.37)*   (24.84)**     (2.07)*    (23.02)**     (1.31)    (23.55)**    (3.54)**   (38.15)**      (0.72)
Observations                                        12,481       12,481      10,654      10,654       10,180      10,180       10,654      10,654      10,654      10,654
Number of group (destination countries)               156           156        133          133         129         129          133         133         133         133
R2-overall                                           0.58          0.57       0.61         0.60        0.56        0.53         0.54        0.53        0.67        0.53
R2-within                                            0.40          0.40       0.43         0.43        0.41        0.41         0.44        0.44        0.49        0.49
R2-between                                           0.74          0.74       0.79         0.78        0.70        0.69         0.62        0.62        0.86        0.53
Breusch-Pagan LM Test for Random Effects          25,192.19                17,716.94                25,205.25               57,638.89               13,214.07
 Prob > Chi2                                         0.00                     0.00                     0.00                     0.00                    0.00
Hausman Specification Test                                      49.36                    22.97                   123.60                  48.81                   69.50
 Prob > Chi2                                                    0.00                     0.03                     0.00                   0.00                    0.00
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                - 43 -




                      Table 6. Baseline Results: Country Pair Random Effects

                                                         (1)      (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)

log of GDP-source country                            0.407       0.438                               0.301
                                                   (26.44)**   (26.18)**                           (18.10)**
log of GDP-destination country                       0.605       0.622                               0.493
                                                   (55.29)**   (52.30)**                           (37.61)**
log of GDP, PPP-source country                                               0.378
                                                                           (19.44)**
log of GDP, PPP-destination country                                          0.623
                                                                           (43.64)**
log of GDP per capita-source country                                                      0.878       0.745
                                                                                       (25.92)**   (23.31)**
log of GDP per capita-destination country                                                 0.826       0.419
                                                                                       (41.21)**   (19.99)**
log of Distance                                      -0.579      -0.604      -0.558      -0.292      -0.479
                                                   (16.58)**   (16.09)**   (13.84)**    (7.38)**   (13.79)**
Land Border Dummy                                     0.007      -0.037      -0.021       1.152       0.408
                                                     (0.04)       (0.21)      (0.11)    (6.17)**     (2.51)*
Common Language Dummy                                 0.467       0.434       0.561       0.180       0.288
                                                    (6.44)**    (5.60)**    (6.64)**     (2.17)*    (4.03)**
Control on bond transactions (inflow)                -0.190      -0.264      -0.336      -0.106      -0.141
                                                    (5.66)**    (7.00)**    (8.14)**    (2.71)**    (3.80)**
Control on bond transactions (outflow)               -0.488      -0.518      -0.574      -0.197      -0.225
                                                   (12.43)**   (12.12)**   (12.94)**    (4.26)**    (5.18)**
LIBOR – Source Country Interest Rate                              0.005       0.005       0.002       0.002
                                                                (5.32)**    (5.33)**      (1.76)     (2.41)*
Destination Country Interest Rate - LIBOR                        -0.006      -0.009      -0.001       0.000
                                                                (3.86)**    (5.87)**      (0.68)      (0.09)
Asia                                                  0.769       0.581       0.655       2.442       1.213
                                                    (3.27)**     (2.45)*     (2.57)*    (9.66)**    (5.52)**
EU15                                                  4.131       3.846       4.362       3.895       3.254
                                                   (29.60)**   (26.88)**   (28.68)**   (25.39)**   (24.47)**
Latin America                                        -0.159      -0.046      -0.077       0.043       0.313
                                                     (1.10)       (0.30)      (0.46)      (0.26)     (2.21)*
Constant                                            -18.611     -19.376     -18.803     -10.790     -24.340
                                                   (33.15)**   (31.99)**   (26.58)**   (20.89)**   (41.30)**
Observations                                         12,481      10,654      10,180      10,654      10,654
Number of group (country pair)                        5,166       4,436       4,342       4,436       4,436
R2-overall                                             0.58        0.61        0.55        0.55        0.67
R2-within                                              0.02        0.02        0.02        0.03        0.03
R2-between                                             0.57        0.60        0.54        0.54        0.66
Breusch-Pagan LM Test for Random Effects            8,971.53    7,422.27    7,226.88    8,132.88    7,092.55
 Prob > Chi2                                           0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                - 44 -




                     Table 7. Historical Total Bond Returns vs Interest Rates
                                                      (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)
                                                Destination      Pair     Destination       Pair
                                                      FE          RE            FE          RE
log of GDP-source country                           0.961       1.013         0.976        1.038
                                                 (50.33)**    (31.05)**    (45.90)**    (29.56)**
log of GDP-destination country                      2.520       0.864         1.996        0.887
                                                  (2.98)**    (28.28)**      (2.17)*    (26.15)**
log of Distance                                    -0.580       -0.560       -0.593       -0.611
                                                 (12.30)**     (8.75)**    (11.53)**     (8.90)**
Land Border Dummy                                  -0.146       -0.114       -0.188       -0.237
                                                    (1.00)      (0.47)        (1.22)      (0.93)
Common Language Dummy                               0.804       0.864         0.805        0.927
                                                  (9.60)**     (6.69)**     (9.12)**     (6.83)**
Control on bond transactions (inflow)              -0.184       -0.262       -0.060       -0.297
                                                    (0.79)     (3.62)**       (0.20)     (3.58)**
Control on bond transactions (outflow)             -1.624       -1.129       -1.589       -1.107
                                                 (25.88)**    (15.06)**    (23.97)**    (14.04)**
Historical Bond Returns-source country             -0.094       -0.013
                                                  (4.56)**      (1.18)
Historical Bond Returns-destination country         0.043       0.016
                                                   (2.25)*      (1.77)
LIBOR – Source Country Interest Rate                                        0.006         -0.002
                                                                           (2.69)**        (0.98)
Destination Country Interest Rate - LIBOR                                   0.007          0.003
                                                                            (1.07)         (1.17)
Correlation of Bond Returns                       1.598          0.979      1.804          1.154
                                                (11.70)**      (7.73)**   (12.19)**      (8.38)**
Volatility of Bilateral Exchange Rates            -0.101        -0.027      -0.054        -0.020
                                                 (5.74)**      (2.90)**    (3.17)**       (2.09)*
Asia                                              1.416          0.817      1.391          0.710
                                                 (7.88)**      (2.93)**    (7.58)**       (2.51)*
EU15                                              1.736          2.645      1.642          2.450
                                                (11.88)**     (13.19)**   (10.63)**     (11.71)**
Latin America                                     -0.930        -0.661      -0.964        -0.897
                                                 (4.90)**       (2.46)*    (4.48)**      (3.04)**
Constant                                         -82.063       -41.079     -69.033       -41.933
                                                 (3.74)**     (32.67)**    (2.88)**     (30.95)**
Observations                                      4,072          4,072      3,682          3,682
Number of Groups                                    52           1,615        47           1,461
R2-overall                                         0.52           0.67       0.58           0.67
R2-within                                          0.65           0.04       0.65           0.04
R2-between                                         0.67           0.69       0.68           0.69
Hausman Specification Test                        41.36                     29.79
 Prob > Chi2                                       0.00                      0.00
Breusch-Pagan LM Test for Random Effects                      2,592.41                  2,309.43
 Prob > Chi2                                                    0.00                      0.00
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                - 45 -




                                 Table 8. Development of Financial Sector
                                                         (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                    Destination      Pair     Destination      Pair
                                                        RE            RE          RE            RE
log of GDP-source country                              0.303        0.366       0.387         0.454
                                                    (29.59)**     (23.36)**   (28.32)**     (22.00)**
log of GDP-destination country                         0.530        0.547       0.676         0.653
                                                    (20.32)**     (45.33)**   (15.24)**     (33.87)**
log of Distance                                       -0.705        -0.590      -0.857        -0.740
                                                    (28.00)**     (17.49)**   (27.92)**     (18.24)**
Land Border Dummy                                      0.107        0.115       0.027         0.048
                                                       (1.10)       (0.71)      (0.25)        (0.27)
Common Language Dummy                                  0.286        0.364       0.331         0.369
                                                     (6.24)**      (5.19)**    (5.17)**      (3.86)**
Control on bond transactions (inflow)                 -0.166        -0.174      -0.189        -0.231
                                                      (2.16)*      (5.18)**     (1.80)       (4.85)**
Control on bond transactions (outflow)                -0.657        -0.474      -0.938        -0.705
                                                    (18.10)**     (12.01)**   (19.98)**     (13.36)**
Size of Banking Sector-source country                  0.009        0.003       0.011         0.005
                                                    (29.14)**     (11.13)**   (24.99)**     (11.29)**
Size of Banking Sector-destination country             0.006        0.005       0.003         0.003
                                                     (5.87)**     (11.03)**    (2.60)**      (5.44)**
Size of Stock Market-source country                                             0.008         0.005
                                                                              (20.75)**     (11.87)**
Size of Stock Market-destination country                                        0.001         0.001
                                                                                (1.23)       (3.23)**
Asia                                                   0.716         0.541      0.160         0.036
                                                      (4.99)**      (2.39)*     (1.02)        (0.15)
EU15                                                   3.110         3.917      2.606         3.357
                                                     (36.17)**     (29.0)**   (27.65)**      (22.8)**
Latin America                                          -0.269        0.036      -0.479        -0.080
                                                      (2.80)**       (0.26)    (3.35)**       (0.42)
Constant                                              -14.351      -16.744     -19.318       -20.752
                                                     (21.35)**    (29.96)**   (17.23)**     (27.75)**
Observations                                           12,214       12,214      7,961         7,961
Number of Groups                                        153           5088        96           3499
R2-overall                                              0.62          0.61       0.63          0.62
R2-within                                               0.44          0.01       0.56          0.01
R2-between                                              0.80          0.60       0.78          0.63
Breusch-Pagan LM Test for Random Effects             20,862.50     8,336.51   13,797.59      4,952.58
 Prob > Chi2                                            0.00          0.00       0.00          0.00
Number of group(pair)
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                            - 46 -




           Table 9. Quality of Institutions: Destination Country Random Effects
                       (usual gravity model variables not reported)
                                               (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)
log of GDP per capita-source country                      0.872
                                                        (27.37)**
log of GDP per capita-destination country                 0.447
                                                        (11.37)**
Law and order risk                             0.224      0.163                    0.195
                                            (11.21)**    (8.37)**                (6.59)**
Corruption risk                               -0.045      -0.214                   0.021
                                              (2.13)*    (9.92)**                  (0.68)
Bureaucratic quality                           0.237      -0.133                   0.319
                                             (7.71)**    (4.05)**                (7.09)**
Investment profile                             0.148      0.095                    0.307
                                            (10.36)**    (6.85)**               (15.47)**
LIBOR – Source Country Interest Rate                                   0.025       0.007
                                                                    (15.50)**    (4.25)**
Destination Country Interest Rate - LIBOR                              0.011       0.009
                                                                      (2.34)*     (1.97)*
Sovereign Credit Ratings (S&P)                                         0.093       0.109
                                                                     (5.49)**    (6.56)**
English legal origin                                                                          -0.418
                                                                                               (1.17)
French legal origin                                                                           -0.155
                                                                                               (0.44)
German legal origin                                                                           -0.208
                                                                                               (0.55)
Socialist legal origin                                                                        -0.516
                                                                                               (1.28)
Creditor Rights                                                                               -0.020
                                                                                               (0.33)
Contract Enforcement Days                                                                     -0.001
                                                                                              (2.09)*
Asia                                          1.405       1.532       0.811       1.533        0.920
                                             (9.82)**   (11.06)**    (4.78)**    (9.52)**    (5.96)**
EU15                                          3.069       2.917       2.598       2.386        3.164
                                            (35.97)**   (35.28)**   (24.31)**   (23.72)**   (33.14)**
Latin America                                 0.403       0.299       0.180       1.159       -0.697
                                             (3.95)**    (3.02)**     (1.31)     (8.59)**    (6.04)**
Constant                                     -22.425     -24.410     -22.685     -30.615     -21.381
                                            (33.81)**   (39.90)**   (21.77)**   (28.89)**   (23.13)**
Observations                                  12,343      12,343      7,159       7,048       10,420
Number of IFS Country Code 1                   156         156          75          75          121
R2-overall                                     0.60        0.65        0.60        0.64         0.60
R2-within                                      0.44        0.47        0.49        0.56         0.42
R2-between                                     0.75        0.83        0.82        0.81         0.81
Breusch-Pagan LM Test for Random Effects    3,0081.25   19,210.76    5,777.85    8,106.69   13,159.93
 Prob > Chi2                                   0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00         0.00
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                        - 47 -




                  Table 10. Heckman Selectivity Bias Correction

                                                     (1)          (2)          (3)
log of GDP-source country                          0.152        0.232        0.704
                                                 (10.39)**    (18.48)**   (21.65)**
log of GDP-destination country                     0.637        0.637        0.906
                                                 (87.98)**    (87.81)**   (41.79)**
log of Distance                                    -0.540       -0.546      -0.659
                                                 (23.57)**    (23.72)**   (14.59)**
Land Border Dummy                                  0.275        0.381       -0.046
                                                  (2.61)**     (3.63)**      (0.29)
Common Language Dummy                              0.401        0.326        0.615
                                                  (8.33)**     (6.67)**    (7.10)**
Control on bond transactions (inflow)              -0.380       -0.385      -0.526
                                                 (10.80)**    (10.95)**    (7.68)**
Control on bond transactions (outflow)             -0.430       -0.458      -0.825
                                                 (10.46)**    (11.17)**   (10.79)**
LIBOR – Source Country Interest Rate                                         0.026
                                                                           (7.61)**
Destination Country Interest Rate - LIBOR                                    0.011
                                                                           (4.15)**
Correlation of Bond Returns                                                  1.547
                                                                          (10.47)**
Volatility of Bilateral Exchange Rates                                      -0.069
                                                                           (4.13)**
Asia                                               0.968        0.874        0.354
                                                  (6.68)**     (6.04)**     (2.07)*
EU15                                               3.607        3.551        1.448
                                                 (41.34)**    (40.87)**    (9.53)**
Latin America                                      -0.035       -0.155      -0.275
                                                   (0.38)       (1.53)       (1.33)
Constant                                          -12.308      -14.431     -32.144
                                                 (26.44)**    (34.39)**   (28.66)**

Selection Equation
log of GDP-source country                          0.404        0.267        0.367
                                                 (80.29)**    (39.67)**   (34.14)**
log of GDP per capita-source country               0.764        0.718        0.673
                                                 (94.78)**    (66.70)**   (46.07)**
Market Capitalization                                           0.003        0.007
                                                               (9.97)**   (13.63)**
Domestic Bank Credit                                            0.008        0.005
                                                              (29.70)**   (11.58)**
Constant                                           -16.967     -13.715     -16.363
                                                 (124.07)**   (72.32)**   (55.30)**
Observations                                        93,791      35,435      26,902
Absolute value of z statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                        - 48 -




                Table 11. Sensitivity Checks: Destination Country Random Effects
                           (usual gravity model variables not reported)
                                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)
Historical Bond Returns-source country                             -0.091      -0.095      0.062      -0.189       -0.152
                                                                  (4.42)**    (4.57)**    (3.03)**   (8.26)**     (7.43)**
Historical Bond Returns-destination country                        0.035       -0.034      -0.005     -0.096       -0.041
                                                                   (1.90)      (2.46)*     (0.37)    (6.30)**     (2.94)**
Correlation of Bond Returns                                        1.588        1.713      1.511      1.348        1.782
                                                                 (11.62)**   (12.64)**   (11.81)**   (9.01)**    (13.15)**
Volatility of Bilateral Exchange Rates                             -0.100
                                                                  (5.82)**
Pegged Exchange Rate Regime (Reinhart-Rogoff)                                  0.197      0.206        0.033      0.210
                                                                               (1.06)     (1.13)       (0.17)     (1.12)
Limited Flexibility (Reinhart-Rogoff)                                          -0.259     -0.195      -0.385      -0.235
                                                                               (1.66)     (1.31)      (2.27)*     (1.49)
Control on bond transactions (inflow)                              -0.340      -0.159
                                                                  (2.14)*      (0.97)
Control on bond transactions (outflow)                             -1.618      -1.639
                                                                 (25.72)**   (25.98)**
NB_capital openness—inflow                                                                 0.092
                                                                                          (2.26)*
NB_capital openness—outflow                                                                -0.085
                                                                                          (2.14)*
NB_financial openness index-destination country                                            0.340
                                                                                         (20.71)**
Chinn-Ito Capital Control-destination country                                                         0.158
                                                                                                     (2.74)**
share of last 5 years with capital controls on bond inflow                                                         -0.320
                                                                                                                   (1.53)
share of last 5 years with capital controls on bond outflow                                                        -1.999
                                                                                                                 (26.42)**
Dummy for IMF program-destination country                          0.105       0.064       0.111       0.187       0.055
                                                                   (0.60)      (0.36)      (0.65)      (0.91)      (0.31)
Asia                                                               1.380       1.434       1.800       0.853       1.594
                                                                  (7.74)**    (8.03)**   (10.55)**    (4.40)**    (8.90)**
EU15                                                               1.769       1.817       1.557       2.348       1.479
                                                                 (12.15)**   (12.46)**   (11.19)**   (14.55)**   (10.01)**
Latin America                                                      -0.845      -0.956      -0.927      -1.271      -0.743
                                                                  (4.50)**    (5.09)**    (5.17)**    (6.21)**    (3.94)**
Constant                                                          -39.256     -38.902     -42.633     -38.632     -35.946
                                                                 (20.43)**   (19.23)**   (21.54)**   (18.43)**   (17.33)**
Observations                                                        4072        4072        4072        3876        4072
Number of IFS Country Code 1                                         52          52          52          49          52
R2-overall                                                          0.67        0.68        0.70        0.64        0.68
R2-within                                                           0.65        0.65        0.69        0.59        0.65
R2-between                                                          0.71        0.73        0.73        0.77        0.73
Breusch-Pagan LM Test for Random Effects                          4,886.47    4,275.74    5,183.11    2,315.52    4,485.49
 Prob > Chi2                                                        0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00
Absolute value of z statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                      - 49 -




                       Table 12. Sensitivity Checks: Lagged Dependent Variable

                                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)
                                                                   OLS          RE            IV        OLS          IV
Lagged Dependent Variable                                         0.942        0.931        1.061       0.899       0.975
                                                               (130.96)**   (126.05)**   (24.06)**   (71.26)**   (24.04)**
log of GDP-source country                                        -0.005        0.001       -0.056       0.066       0.001
                                                                  (0.49)       (0.07)     (2.63)**    (3.22)**     (0.03)
log of GDP-destination country                                    0.078        0.086       -0.003       0.119       0.053
                                                                (9.95)**     (9.57)**       (0.09)    (6.01)**     (1.33)
Log of Distance                                                  -0.121       -0.126       -0.063      -0.218      -0.194
                                                                (6.12)**     (5.98)**      (2.12)*    (5.99)**    (5.01)**
Land Border Dummy                                                -0.171       -0.168       -0.222      -0.380      -0.407
                                                                 (2.07)*      (2.05)*      (2.51)*    (3.00)**    (3.15)**
1 for Common Language                                            -0.044       -0.027       -0.082      -0.017      -0.064
                                                                  (1.12)       (0.69)       (1.90)     (0.25)      (0.88)
LIBOR - Source Country Interest Rate                              0.011        0.012        0.005
                                                                (4.90)**     (5.21)**       (1.52)
Destination Country Interest Rate - LIBOR                        -0.001       -0.002        0.001
                                                                  (0.97)       (1.11)       (0.64)
control on bond or other debt instruments (inflow)               -0.036       -0.042        0.022      0.006       0.032
                                                                  (1.19)       (1.14)       (0.58)     (0.10)     (0.55)
control on bond or other debt instruments (outflow)              -0.122       -0.129       -0.038     -0.270      -0.150
                                                                (3.13)**     (3.37)**       (0.76)   (4.35)**     (1.71)
Historical Bond Returns-source country                                                                -0.083      -0.055
                                                                                                     (2.78)**     (1.64)
Historical Bond Returns-destination country                                                            0.066       0.054
                                                                                                     (3.55)**    (2.71)**
Correlation of Bond Returns                                                                            0.236       0.170
                                                                                                      (2.01)*     (1.37)
Volatility of Bilateral Exchange Rates                                                                -0.019      -0.008
                                                                                                       (1.02)     (0.40)
Asia                                                            -0.133       -0.099       -0.198      -0.206      -0.261
                                                                 (1.24)       (0.90)       (1.73)      (1.50)     (1.83)
EU15                                                             0.149        0.158       -0.249      -0.012      -0.188
                                                                (2.22)*      (2.27)*       (1.54)      (0.09)     (1.21)
Latin America                                                    0.158        0.106        0.173       0.002      -0.021
                                                                 (1.72)       (1.13)       (1.80)      (0.01)     (0.13)
Constant                                                        -0.313       -0.578        2.152      -2.296       0.642
                                                                 (0.92)       (1.61)      (2.21)*    (2.76)**     (0.38)
Observations                                                      3014         3014         3014        1241       1241
R-squared                                                         0.95                      0.94        0.94        0.94
Number of Destination countries                                                129
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                 - 50 -




       Table 13. Sensitivity Check: Reserves, Distance, Time Zone, and Information costs

                                                          (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)
                                                                                          Exclude
                                                        Full        Full        Full                    Full
                                                                                          US and
                                                       Sample      Sample      Sample                  Sample
                                                                                           Japan
log of GDP-source country                                0.473      0.385        0.416       0.336       0.669
                                                      (21.41)**   (33.25)**   (36.39)**   (27.80)**   (36.15)**
log of GDP-destination country                           0.663      0.653        0.647       0.624       0.577
                                                      (44.35)**   (78.30)**   (79.24)**   (76.00)**   (15.92)**
Log of Distance                                         -0.629                  -0.778      -0.779      -0.537
                                                      (13.50)**               (21.55)**   (21.88)**   (12.41)**
Time Zone Difference                                               -0.050        0.075       0.082
                                                                  (8.40)**     (9.13)**    (9.89)**
phone traffic                                                                                            0.000
                                                                                                       (9.75)**
phone cost                                                                                              -0.548
                                                                                                      (11.24)**
Land Border Dummy                                        0.123       0.955       0.019      -0.010      -0.004
                                                        (0.62)     (8.76)**     (0.17)      (0.09)      (0.02)
1 for Common Language                                    0.259       0.241       0.343       0.274       0.647
                                                       (2.73)**    (4.52)**    (6.54)**    (5.19)**    (7.04)**
LIBOR - Source Country Interest Rate                     0.047       0.024       0.020       0.019       0.034
                                                      (10.80)**   (16.82)**   (13.97)**   (13.99)**   (15.73)**
Destination Country Interest Rate - LIBOR               -0.017      -0.014      -0.008      -0.007       0.014
                                                       (5.65)**    (9.60)**    (5.28)**    (4.90)**    (4.48)**
control on bond or other debt instruments (inflow)      -0.433      -0.453      -0.406      -0.417      -0.121
                                                       (6.11)**   (11.28)**   (10.31)**   (10.71)**     (1.37)
control on bond or other debt instruments (outflow)     -0.946      -0.914      -0.807      -0.760      -1.505
                                                      (10.09)**   (20.55)**   (18.41)**   (17.70)**   (21.38)**
Reserves/GDP - source country                            2.186
                                                       (8.36)**
Reserves/GDP - destination country                      -0.785
                                                       (3.56)**
Asia                                                    -0.044      0.937        0.745       1.137       0.845
                                                        (0.16)     (6.07)**    (4.92)**    (7.31)**    (4.27)**
EU15                                                     3.555      4.047        3.492       3.653       2.867
                                                      (22.29)**   (46.47)**   (39.21)**   (41.94)**   (25.18)**
Latin America                                            0.101      0.463        0.257       0.225       0.472
                                                        (0.51)     (4.13)**     (2.34)*     (2.09)*     (2.21)*
Constant                                               -20.389     -22.934     -17.898     -15.358     -23.678
                                                      (27.10)**   (58.51)**   (39.84)**   (33.35)**   (22.57)**
Observations                                             3387       10654        10654       10220       4501
R-squared                                                 0.64       0.60         0.62        0.62       0.61
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                  - 51 -




                Table 14. Financial Development: Recipient Country Random Effects
                                                               (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)
log of GDP-source country                                     0.317       0.336       0.326       0.418
                                                           (28.42)**   (19.75)**   (28.13)**   (28.51)**
log of GDP-destination country                                0.560       0.648       0.605       0.726
                                                           (20.24)**   (17.96)**   (21.28)**   (16.13)**
log of Distance                                              -0.673      -0.664      -0.664      -0.834
                                                           (24.14)**   (20.25)**   (23.36)**   (24.91)**
Land Border Dummy                                             0.175       0.228       0.178       0.074
                                                             (1.71)      (2.04)*     (1.72)       (0.64)
Common Language Dummy                                         0.271       0.431       0.288       0.273
                                                            (5.46)**    (6.39)**    (5.62)**    (4.09)**
Control on bond transactions (inflow)                        -0.239      -0.241      -0.249      -0.306
                                                            (2.77)**     (2.28)*    (2.90)**    (2.67)**
Control on bond transactions (outflow)                       -0.683      -0.840      -0.724      -0.876
                                                           (17.20)**   (15.66)**   (17.75)**   (16.89)**
LIBOR – Source Country Interest Rate                          0.012       0.015       0.008       0.019
                                                            (9.48)**    (9.94)**    (6.10)**    (7.53)**
Destination Country Interest Rate - LIBOR                    -0.005      -0.004      -0.005      -0.003
                                                             (1.53)       (0.96)     (1.51)       (0.43)
Size of Banking Sector-source country                         0.009       0.012       0.009       0.010
                                                           (26.04)**   (24.73)**   (23.40)**   (21.17)**
Size of Banking Sector-destination country                    0.005       0.005       0.005       0.003
                                                            (4.78)**    (4.32)**    (4.69)**     (2.07)*
Bank Concentration Index-source country                                  -0.325
                                                                         (2.31)*
Bank Concentration Index-destination country                             -0.224
                                                                          (0.80)
Share of public bank assets-source country                                          -0.013
                                                                                   (9.28)**
Share of public bank assets-destination country                                     -0.007
                                                                                   (3.65)**
Size of Stock Market-source country                                                               0.008
                                                                                               (19.41)**
Size of Stock Market-destination country                                                          0.001
                                                                                                 (0.59)
Asia                                                         0.692        0.539      0.736        0.121
                                                            (4.73)**    (3.37)**    (4.98)**     (0.77)
EU15                                                         3.015        2.752      2.932        2.513
                                                           (33.99)**   (28.35)**   (32.70)**   (26.20)**
Latin America                                                0.042        0.275      0.160       -0.201
                                                             (0.39)      (2.29)*     (1.46)      (1.25)
Constant                                                    -15.371     -18.222     -16.542     -21.137
                                                           (21.24)**   (17.70)**   (22.11)**   (18.21)**
Observations                                                 10557        7553       10102        7038
Number of Destination Country                                 132          89         124           85
R2-overall                                                    0.64        0.65        0.65         0.65
R2-within                                                     0.46        0.51        0.47         0.57
R2-between                                                    0.82        0.84        0.85         0.82
Breusch-Pagan LM Test for Random Effects                   16397.08     9351.59    11799.28    10667.40
Prob > Chi2                                                   0.00        0.00        0.00         0.00
Absolute value of z statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                                  Table 15. Investor Base Equations
                                                            Destination RE                           Destination FE                             SUR
                                                   (1)            (2)             (3)       (4)            (5)             (6)       (7)         (8)           (9)
                                                                               Mutual                                   Mutual                              Mutual
                                                   Banks      Insurance         Funds       Banks      Insurance         Funds       Banks    Insurance      Funds
log of GDP-source country                          0.927         0.692          0.857       0.927         0.703          0.847       0.927       0.681       0.881
                                                (36.38)**     (25.08)**      (28.04)**   (36.26)**     (25.40)**      (27.50)**   (26.30)**   (21.68)**   (26.70)**
log of GDP-destination country                     0.666         0.648          0.530       0.077         0.332         -1.825       0.739       0.734       0.564
                                                (10.82)**     (11.62)**      (10.10)**      (0.07)        (0.29)         (1.33)   (21.80)**   (24.28)**   (17.79)**
log of Distance                                   -0.391         0.094         -0.308      -0.382         0.139         -0.346      -0.246      -0.072      -0.266
                                                 (6.35)**        (1.37)       (4.06)**    (5.87)**        (1.91)       (4.14)**    (3.17)**      (1.04)    (3.66)**
Land Border Dummy                                  0.441         0.346          0.110       0.442         0.416          0.076       0.349       0.114       0.168
                                                  (2.47)*        (1.77)         (0.47)     (2.46)*       (2.12)*         (0.32)      (1.28)      (0.47)      (0.65)
Common Language Dummy                              0.644         0.503          0.061       0.662         0.502          0.030       0.538       0.375       0.075
                                                 (5.50)**      (4.35)**         (0.44)    (5.60)**      (4.29)**         (0.22)    (3.45)**    (2.69)**      (0.51)
Control on bond transactions (inflow)             -0.241        -0.403         -0.192      -0.182         0.044          0.152      -0.359      -0.570      -0.258
                                                   (1.46)      (2.60)**         (1.25)      (0.62)        (0.14)         (0.43)    (3.29)**    (5.86)**     (2.53)*
Control on bond transactions (outflow)            -1.380        -1.409         -1.073      -1.389        -1.457         -1.073      -1.198      -1.257      -1.140
                                                (16.75)**     (17.32)**      (10.11)**   (16.72)**     (17.75)**       (9.90)**    (9.50)**   (11.17)**    (9.65)**
Bond Returns-source country                        0.044         0.041          0.048       0.046         0.045          0.049       0.061       0.047       0.056




                                                                                                                                                                      - 52 -
                                                  (2.03)*       (2.16)*        (2.03)*     (2.07)*       (2.33)*        (2.08)*     (2.28)*     (1.97)*     (2.24)*
Bond Returns-destination country                   0.043         0.047          0.054       0.047         0.034          0.056       0.075       0.097       0.055
                                                   (1.95)       (2.20)*        (2.15)*     (2.01)*        (1.47)        (1.99)*    (2.88)**    (4.17)**     (2.23)*
Correlation of Bond Returns                        1.067         2.302          0.659       1.063         2.410          0.688       0.323       1.918       0.562
                                                 (5.49)**     (10.98)**       (2.70)**    (5.41)**     (11.33)**       (2.74)**      (1.15)    (7.66)**     (2.14)*
Volatility of Bilateral Exchange Rates            -0.039        -0.016         -0.067      -0.043        -0.002         -0.067      -0.080      -0.077      -0.070
                                                  (1.99)*        (0.83)       (2.73)**     (2.08)*        (0.12)        (2.49)*    (3.20)**    (3.47)**    (2.99)**
Asia                                               0.330         0.652         -1.075       0.396         0.841         -1.014       0.064       0.265      -1.334
                                                   (1.32)       (2.36)*       (3.24)**      (1.55)      (2.99)**       (2.96)**      (0.18)      (0.84)    (4.01)**
EU15                                               2.244         2.676          1.739       2.272         2.578          1.771       2.802       2.697       1.705
                                                (10.76)**     (11.61)**       (7.08)**   (10.54)**     (10.74)**       (6.67)**   (10.59)**   (11.42)**    (6.88)**
Latin America                                     -0.588         0.390         -0.207      -0.614         0.540         -0.428       0.131       0.162       0.062
                                                  (2.56)*        (1.74)         (0.84)    (2.59)**       (2.30)*         (1.62)      (0.49)      (0.67)      (0.24)
Constant                                         -35.908       -33.980        -31.487     -20.726       -26.616         29.997     -39.148     -34.300     -33.245
                                                (19.81)**     (19.26)**      (18.12)**      (0.74)        (0.91)         (0.84)   (26.21)**   (25.74)**   (23.78)**
Observations                                       2,517         1,749          1,509       2,517         1,749          1,509       1,351       1,351       1,351
Number of Destination Country                        52            52             52          52            52             52
R-squared                                           0.81          0.83           0.73        0.62          0.65           0.58      0.68        0.72        0.63
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                           - 53 -




                         Appendix I: List of Participants in CPIS

                             2001   2002    2003                           2001   2002   2003
Argentina                     1      1       1      Malta                   1      1      1
Aruba                         1      1       1      Mauritius               1      1      1
Australia                     1      1       1      Mexico                  0      0      1
Austria                       1      1       1      Netherlands             1      1      1
Bahamas, The                  1      1       1      Netherlands Antilles    1      1      1
Bahrain                       1      0       0      New Zealand             1      1      1
Barbados                      0      0       1      Norway                  1      1      1
Belgium                       1      1       1      Pakistan                0      1      1
Bermuda                       1      1       1      Panama                  1      1      1
Brazil                        1      1       1      Philippines             1      1      1
Bulgaria                      1      1       1      Poland                  1      1      1
Canada                        1      1       1      Portugal                1      1      1
Cayman Islands                1      1       1      Romania                 1      1      1
Chile                         1      1       1      Russian Federation      1      1      1
Colombia                      1      1       1      Singapore               1      1      1
Costa Rica                    1      1       1      Slovak Republic         1      1      1
Cyprus                        1      1       1      South Africa            1      1      1
Czech Republic                1      1       1      Spain                   1      1      1
Denmark                       1      1       1      Sweden                  1      1      1
Egypt                         1      1       1      Switzerland             1      1      1
Estonia                       1      1       1      Thailand                1      1      1
Finland                       1      1       1      Turkey                  1      1      1
France                        1      1       1      Ukraine                 1      1      1
Germany                       1      1       1      United Kingdom          1      1      1
Greece                        1      1       1      United States           1      1      1
Guernsey                      1      1       1      Uruguay                 1      1      1
Hong Kong SAR of China        1      1       1      Vanuatu                 1      1      1
Hungary                       1      1       1      Venezuela               1      1      1
Iceland                       1      1       1
Indonesia                     1      1       1       Total                 67     67     69
Ireland                       1      1       1
Isle of Man                   1      1       1
Israel                        1      1       1
Italy                         1      1       1
Japan                         1      1       1
Jersey                        1      1       1
Kazakhstan                    1      1       1
Korea, Republic of            1      1       1
Lebanon                       1      1       1
Luxembourg                    1      1       1
Macao SAR of China            1      1       1
Malaysia                      1      1       1
                                                      - 54 -




                                        Appendix II. Data Description
       Variable                                Description                                           Source
GDP                        GDP at current US$                                       World Bank'
                                                                                              s WDI
GDP per capita             GDP per capita at current US$                            World Bank'
                                                                                              s WDI
GDP, PPP                   GDP adjusted for purchasing power parity                 World Bank'
                                                                                              s WDI
Distance                   Distance between countries (in logs)                     Andrew Rose's website
Land border dummy          Dummy variable=1 if the two countries share a land       Andrew Rose's website
                              border
Common language            Dummy variable=1 if the two countries have a             Andrew Rose'
                                                                                               s website
   dummy                      common language
Time zone difference       Time difference between financial centers of the         www.worldtimezone.com
                              countries in hours (in June). The variable ranges
                              from 0 to 12.
Control on bond            Dummy variable=1 if there is a restriction on inflow     IMF' s Annual Report on Exchange
   transactions (inflow)      transaction of bonds or other debt securities            Arrangements and Exchange
                                                                                       Restrictions
Control on bond            Dummy variable=1 if there is a restriction on outflow    IMF' s Annual Report on Exchange
    transactions             transaction of bonds or other debt securities             Arrangements and Exchange
    (outflow)                                                                          Restrictions
LIBOR                      London Interbank Offer Rate                              IMF' s International Financial Statistics
Interest rate              Treasury bill rate                                       IMF' s International Financial Statistics
Exchange Rate              Bilateral (crossed) exchange rate                        IMF' s International Financial Statistics
Historical Bond Returns    Total bond return index--see text                        Bloomberg
Size of Banking Sector     Bank credit to private sector                            IMF' s International Financial Statistics
Size of Stock Market       Stock market capitalization                              IMF' s International Financial Statistics
Law and Order Risk         Political risk rating component on law and order         International Country Risk Guide
                              (higher values means lower risks)
Corruption Risk            Political risk rating component on corruption (higher    International Country Risk Guide
                              values means lower risks)
Bureaucratic Quality       Political risk rating component on quality of            International Country Risk Guide
                              bureaucracy (higher values means lower risks)
Investment Profile         Political risk rating component on assessment of         International Country Risk Guide
                              investment risks (higher values means lower
                              risks)
Sovereign Credit           Numerical variable ranging from 0-20; 0 is equivalent    Standard & Poor'
                                                                                                   s
   Ratings                    to the rating “default” and 20 is AAA
Legal origin               dummy variables identifying the legal origin of the      Djankov et. al. (2005)
                              company law or commercial code of each country.
                              The five origins are English, French, German,
                              Nordic and Socialist.
Creditor'
        s rights           Index of creditor rights, ranging from 0 (weak) to 4     Djankov et. al. (2005)
                              (strong creditor rights)
Contract enforcement       The number of days to resolve a payment dispute          Djankov et. al. (2005)
                              through courts
Share of public bank       Ratio of public commercial banks'assets to total         Micco, Panizza and Yañez (2004) and
   assets                     banking assets                                          Bankscope
Bank concentration         HHI index of commercial bank assets                      Bankscope
de facto exchange          Reinhart-Rogoff de facto exchange rate regime            Eichengreen and Razo-Garcia
    rate regime               classification                                          (2005)
Phone traffics             Minutes of incoming and outgoing telephone traffics      International Telecommunication Union
Phone costs                Costs of international call (US$ per 3 minutes in peak   World Competitiveness Yearbook
                              hours to USA; for USA to Europe)
