                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE EFFECT OF ANTICIPATED TAX CHANGES ON INTERTEMPORAL
            LABOR SUPPLY AND THE REALIZATION OF TAXABLE INCOME

                                             Adam Looney
                                             Monica Singhal

                                          Working Paper 12417
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12417


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2006




We are grateful to Alberto Alesina, Raj Chetty, Darrel Cohen, David Cutler, Martin Feldstein, Amy
Finkelstein, Caroline Hoxby, Jens Hilscher, Larry Katz, Kevin Moore, Ricardo Reis, Jonah Rockoff, Jesse
Shapiro, Dan Sichel, Sam Thompson and numerous seminar and conference participants for helpful
comments and conversations. The analysis and conclusions set forth are those of the authors and do not
indicate concurrence by other members of the research staff or the Board of Governors. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2006 by Adam Looney and Monica Singhal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Effect of Anticipated Tax Changes on Intertemporal Labor Supply and the Realization of
Taxable Income
Adam Looney and Monica Singhal
NBER Working Paper No. 12417
July 2006
JEL No. H2, H31, J22

                                             ABSTRACT


We use anticipated changes in tax rates associated with changes in family composition to estimate
intertemporal labor supply elasticities and elasticities of taxable income with respect to the net-of-tax
wage rate. Changes in the ages of children can affect marginal tax rates through provisions of the
tax code that are tied to child age and dependent status. We identify behavioral responses to these
tax changes by comparing families who experienced a tax rate change to families who had a similar
change in dependents but no resulting tax rate change. A primary advantage of our approach is that
these changes can be anticipated, allowing us to estimate substitution effects that are not confounded
by life-cycle income effects. We estimate an intertemporal elasticity of family labor earnings of 0.75
for families earning between $35,000 and $85,000 in the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP) and find very similar estimates using the IRS-NBER individual tax panel.


Adam Looney
Federal Reserve Board
Washington, DC 20551
adam.looney@frb.gov

Monica Singhal
Harvard University
JFK School of Government
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
monica_singhal@harvard.edu
1        Introduction

Understanding how individuals shift labor supply and income over time in response to wage and

tax rate changes is crucial for numerous economic questions.                 Estimates of intertemporal labor

supply elasticities and taxable income elasticities have important implications for life cycle labor

supply, aggregate employment fluctuations and business cycles, eﬃciency costs of taxation, and

the design of optimal tax and transfer systems. There remains considerable uncertainty over the

magnitude of these responses. Most estimates of the intertemporal elasticity of labor supply find

negligible shifting over time (MaCurdy 1981, Altonji 1986, Blundell and MaCurdy 1999).1 More

recent studies, however, have found more sizable elasticities (Mulligan 1998, Kimball and Shapiro

2003).       Estimates of the elasticity of taxable income are also variable, ranging from 0.10 to 3

(Gruber and Saez 2002).

        We develop and implement an empirical methodology that allows us to identify elasticities using

anticipated tax changes associated with changes in family composition.                   Parents may claim tax

credits and dependent exemptions for their children that are often explicitly tied to children’s ages.

Changes in the ages of children can thus change parents’ marginal tax rates by shifting individuals

across tax brackets or through phase-in or phase-out provisions of tax credits.2                     The aging of

children provides an exogenous source of variation with which to instrument for actual marginal

tax rate changes.       We examine changes in family labor supply and income at the time families

experience a child-related tax rate change. Only families with incomes close to “kink” points or in

phase-in or phase-out ranges experience a change in tax rates as a result of these changes in family

composition. We are therefore able to net out changes in tastes that may accompany changes in

    1
      There is an extensive literature estimating static and intertemporal labor supply elasticities. Surveys of this
literature include: Heckman and Killingsworth (1986), Pencavel (1986), Card (1994) and Blundell and MaCurdy
(1999).
    2
      Exploiting child-related tax code provisions to examine behavioral responses to taxation is proposed in Looney
and Singhal (2004). Subsequent studies using variants of this identification strategy include Dokko (2005) and
Feldman and Katuscak (2005).


                                                         1
family composition by comparing our treatment families to similar families who do not experience

a tax rate change.

   There are several advantages of our methodology for estimating elasticities.          A key feature

of the strategy is that tax rate changes can be anticipated in advance.        This implies that these

changes should not precipitate re-evaluations of lifetime income at the time the tax rate change is

experienced, allowing us to estimate substitution elasticities that are uncounfounded by life-cycle

wealth eﬀects. Most studies estimating the elasticity of taxable income have relied on tax policy

changes which are often sudden and may have significant eﬀects on lifetime wealth. It is therefore

diﬃcult to credibly distinguish between income and substitution eﬀects, which is problematic given

that the relevant parameter for evaluating the eﬃciency cost of taxation is the substitution elasticity.

The estimation of intertemporal labor supply elasticities has similarly been hindered by a lack of

good instruments for anticipated wage changes. We improve on the existing literature by examining

the response to tax rate changes that are both exogenous and anticipated.

   Another advantage is that the tax rate changes we study aﬀect individuals throughout the

income distribution. This allows us to compare families with very similar income and demographic

characteristics. Many previous estimates of the eﬀects of taxes on labor supply rely on comparisons

of diﬀerent income groups. These comparisons can be problematic if incomes of the diﬀerent groups

grow diﬀerentially over time, as during the growth in inequality over the 1980s. We also include

controls for base year income, alleviating problems of mean reversion and changes in the income

distribution.

   Finally, evidence suggests that the magnitude of the behavioral response to taxation varies

across income levels.   In this paper, we are able to provide new elasticity estimates for families

around the median of the U.S. income distribution. Much of the existing literature has focused




                                                   2
on estimates for the extremes of the distribution.3 These estimates are relevant for certain policy

questions: elasticities for high income groups may be particularly relevant for calculating revenue

eﬀects of tax changes and elasticities for very low income families have important implications

for the design of welfare programs.          Elasticities for our income ranges, however, are critical for

determining the magnitude of aggregate employment fluctuations and for evaluating the eﬃciency

costs of taxation.

       We implement our methodology by using panel data from the 1990-1996 SIPP panels and the

NBER tax panel (1987-1990). The SIPP is a nationally representative panel survey of households.

The SIPP data contain detailed demographic and income information on all family members,

allowing us to measure labor supply responses and decompose those estimates into a variety of

margins of response. The tax panel contains precise data on AGI and taxable income and therefore

allows us to estimate a broader measure of the response to tax rate changes.

       We focus primarily on tax rate changes arising from the loss of a dependent exemption. Using

the SIPP, we estimate a significant elasticity of family labor income of 0.75 for families with base

year earnings between $35,000 and $85,000.4 Our estimates using the tax panel data are almost

identical.

       These estimates are at the high end of the range found in previous work.                      This may be

because studies examining unanticipated changes tend to confound substitution and income eﬀects,

which would result in downward biased estimates.                Our high-end estimates are consistent with

elasticities implied by calibrating real business cycle models to data on macro fluctuations and

   3
      An exception is Gruber and Saez (2002) who estimate elasticities across the income distribution using a variety
of tax policy changes. They find an overall elasticity of taxable income of 0.4 which is primarily driven by responses
of high income taxpayers. Studies estimating the elasticity of taxable income of the rich include Feldstein (1995) and
Auten and Carroll (1999). Eissa (1995) estimates the elasticity of taxable income for high-income married women.
Studies focusing on labor supply responses of low income families include Eissa and Leibman (1996), Eissa and Hoynes
(1998), Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001), and Meyer (2002). Kopczuk (2005) shows that measured elasticities may
depend on the tax base. Giertz (2004) provides a survey of the recent literature on the elasticity of taxable income.
    4
      Throughout the paper, all dollar figures are adjusted to year 2000 using the CPI-U.




                                                          3
imply substantial behavioral responses to taxation.

        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of intertempo-

ral substitution in the life-cycle model and explains the importance of anticipation in separating

substitution and income eﬀects.         Section 3 describes the relationship between changes in family

composition and changes in marginal tax rates.                  Section 4 provides a description of the SIPP

and NBER tax panel data and Section 5 describes the empirical methodology. Section 6 presents

results and tests of the identification strategy. Section 7 discusses implications of the results and

concludes.



2        Intertemporal Substitution in the Life-Cycle Model

The traditional life-cycle labor supply model assumes that individuals maximize an intertemporally

separable utility function subject to intertemporal and lifetime budget constraints:



                                           U = ΣTt=0 β t U (cit , lit , ait )                                  (1)



                                     Ait+1 = (1 + rt ) [Ait + wit lit − cit ]                                 (2a)


                                                      AT ≥ 0                                                  (2b)


where β t is a discount factor, cit is consumption, lit is labor supply, wit is the net-of-tax wage,

and ait are characteristics or tastes of the individual in period t. Ait represents assets and rt is the

interest rate.5 Deriving the first order conditions and solving for lit gives the following Frisch labor

supply function:

                                              lit = lit (wit , λit , ait )                                     (3)

    5
     See MaCurdy (1981) or Card (1994) for further discussion of the life-cycle model. This derivation and notation
follow Card (1994).


                                                           4
where λit is the Lagrange multiplier and equals the marginal utility of income in period t. Note

that in this framework λit captures all information about past and future wages (known at time t)

that is relevant for the labor supply decision. After taking a log-linear approximation, changes in

labor supply over time can be decomposed as follows:



              ∆ ln (lit ) = ∆αit + γ∆ ln (wit ) − δ (rit − ρ) + δ [ln (λit ) − Et−1 (ln (λit ))] + δεit         (4a)



                            ∆ ln (lit ) = ∆αit + γ∆ ln (wit ) − δ (rit − ρ) + δΦit + δεit                      (4b)


where ∆ ln (lit ) is the change in log labor supply (or income) between t − 1 and t. This change

is comprised of a response to changes in the net-of-tax wage (∆ ln (wit )), changes in tastes (∆αit ),

diﬀerences between the interest rate and the rate of time preference (rit − ρ), and the diﬀerence

between expected and actual log marginal utility of income (Φit ). εit is a disturbance term. The

parameter of interest is γ, the intertemporal substitution elasticity.

    Wage changes aﬀect labor supply both because they change the wage rate and because they

aﬀect the individual’s lifetime income. A wage change that is unanticipated causes an update to

the marginal utility of income. Estimation strategies that do not properly account for this life-cycle

wealth eﬀect will therefore result in biased estimates of γ. Formally, if cov (∆ ln (wit ) , Φit ) 6= 0,
       ∂∆ ln(lit )
then   ∂∆ ln(wit )   = γ +δ ∂∆∂Φ
                              ln(wit ) . If leisure is a normal good, the latter term is negative and estimates
                                it




are biased downward.6

    Because closed form solutions for λit do not exist, natural approaches to estimating γ are

to use instrumental variables strategies or natural experiments.               However, plausible instruments

that provide exogenous but anticipated wage changes are rare. The past literature has used age

and education related variables as instruments for life-cycle wage changes.                   However, these are

  6
    The life-cycle model also assumes forward looking individuals and perfect capital markets. We discuss the
implications for interpreting our estimates if families are myopic or face credit constraints in the Results section.


                                                         5
unlikely to be exogenous to changes in tastes and therefore do not satisfy the exclusion restriction.

Furthermore, estimates using such characteristics are often sensitive to the choice of instruments

(Mroz 1987). Mulligan (1998) notes these diﬃculties and examines the labor supply response of

welfare recipients to a fully anticipated change in wages: the termination of welfare benefits when

the recipient’s youngest child turns 18.    Mulligan’s estimates imply large elasticities (between

0.38 and 1.66). However, Looney and Singhal (2004) show that these eﬀects can be more readily

explained by mean reversion (mothers on welfare are being observed at a time when earnings are

transitorily low) than by intertemporal substitution.

   Similar issues arise when estimating the elasticity of taxable income. When tax changes are

unanticipated, as is the case with many tax reforms, they aﬀect families’ lifetime income. Resulting

elasticity estimates are therefore a mix of income and substitution eﬀects. When leisure is a normal

good, mixing income and substitution eﬀects will downward bias elasticity estimates. Separating

the two is diﬃcult. TRA86, studied by Feldstein (1995), was designed to be revenue neutral within

income categories and therefore arguably did not induce wealth eﬀects. However, the reform was

at best revenue neutral at the income class level, not the individual level. Saez (2003) estimates

elasticities using “bracket creep,” an experiment in which income eﬀects are likely to be negligible.

Gruber and Saez (2002) attempt to mitigate income eﬀects by explicitly including a term for the

change in after-tax income in their estimating equation. However, the one year change in after-tax

income is not an ideal measure of the total change in wealth over the life-cycle.

   Our estimation strategy exploits wage changes that occur as a result of tax code provisions that

vary based on children’s ages. Because these types of changes can be anticipated in advance, they

should not cause an updating of the marginal utility of income at the time the tax rate change is

experienced. In this case, Φit = 0 and the strategy provides unbiased estimates of γ.




                                                 6
3    Family Composition and Marginal Tax Rates

Changes in the age structure of children may aﬀect marginal tax rates for a number of reasons.

We examine the tax consequences of changes in the number of dependents. Figure 1 illustrates

the diﬀerences in federal marginal tax rates faced by married couples with diﬀering numbers of

dependents. At the lower end of the income distribution, the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)

phase-in and phase-out ranges have the greatest eﬀect on marginal tax rates.                 As shown in the

figure, the EITC schedule varies substantially with the number of dependents.

    The figure also illustrates changes in marginal tax rates that occur as a result of the dependent

exemption. Increases in the number of dependents reduce taxable income (by $2,800 per dependent

in 2000), thereby pushing bracket ”kink” points to higher levels of income.               This is apparent in

Figure 1 for families with income between $55,000 and $65,000. These bracket shifts move families

between the 15 percent bracket and the 28 percent bracket.7 When a child no longer qualifies as

a dependent (i.e., is no longer under age 19 or under age 24 and a full-time student), the marginal

tax rate of families in this income range roughly doubles. We focus primarily on this group in the

following analyses and then consider families in the EITC range.

    Figure 2 shows the change in the budget set for families losing a dependent in the median

income range.      For a given level of income, after tax income shifts down as a result of the loss

of the dependent exemption.         For some families, this loss does not aﬀect the marginal tax rate.

For families with initial income in the region immediately below the kink point, the loss of the

dependent exemption shifts them into a higher tax bracket. Given the same level of income, they

now face a higher marginal tax rate. As the figure shows, there are no dominated kink points in

our experiment; families may rationally chose to locate over the entire budget set.

   7
     Similar changes in the location of the kink point occur at the 28% to 31% bracket for families with income
between $118,000 and $128,000. See Looney and Singhal (2004) for a discussion of other provisions in the tax code
tied to a child’s age and/or post-secondary school attendance.


                                                       7
        Our identification strategy compares changes in labor supply of families for whom the loss of

a dependent causes a change in marginal tax rates (the “treatment” group illustrated on Figure

2 ) to changes of families for whom the loss of a dependent has no marginal tax consequences (the

“control” groups).       The loss of a dependent may, of course, have a number of direct eﬀects on

labor supply.       However, as long as these direct eﬀects are the same for treatment and control

families, our estimates will not be aﬀected.           Under the assumption that treatment and control

groups experience similar changes in tastes and shocks to income between periods, the behavioral

responses are identified by changes in the tax rate of the treatment group.8

        This approach also addresses concerns that diﬀerential income trends between treatment and

control groups can bias estimates of the response to wage and tax changes (Slemrod 1996, Goolsbee

2000a, 2000b). Our treatment and control groups are very similar and we include controls for base

period income. We also test for the possibility of diﬀerential income trends in Section 6.2.



4        Data

We implement our empirical strategy using data from the 1990-1996 panels of the Survey of Income

and Program Participation (SIPP) and the NBER tax panel from 1987-1990.9 By exploiting both

of these data sources, we are able to provide a comprehensive picture of families’ responses to tax

incentives.      The SIPP data contains detailed information on all family members, allowing us to

identify husbands’ and wives’ responses and also to determine whether responses are occurring on

participation, hours or other margins. The SIPP also provides a relatively large sample size and

the detailed information on children required to predict their status as dependents. The tax panel

    8
     Although these figures illustrate only federal marginal tax rates, our empirical analysis uses the TAXSIM calcu-
lators and incorporates state tax rates as well as certain provisions of the child tax credit that can aﬀect marginal
tax rates when a child turns 17.
   9
     The tax panel data are also referred to as the University of Michigan Tax Panel and the Continuous Work History
File. Note that the short panels of the CPS are not suitable for our analysis because of the diﬃculty identifying
dependents once they leave the household and poor matching rates.


                                                         8
is smaller and contains only the most rudimentary demographic information, but has the advantage

of including income measures taken directly from tax forms without measurement error and allows

us to capture other dimensions of the behavioral response to taxation. In addition, we are able to

test our methodology using two entirely separate data sets.

       The SIPP is a nationally representative panel survey of households.                   Each panel includes

between 20,000 and 45,000 households. Within panels each household is interviewed at four month

intervals for between 28 and 48 months. The 1990-1996 panels cover the time period from 1990

to 1999. We focus our attention on married couples who live with their own dependent children

(children under age 19 or under 24 and full time students) at some point during the panel.10

       Our empirical strategy involves looking at year to year changes in income and taxes so we first-

diﬀerence the annual observations and use these changes as the unit of observation. We retain only

those families with first-period income between $35,000 and $85,000 per year. We drop families

that experience a change in marital status. Table 1 provides summary statistics for this sub-sample

of interest. Column 1 includes all observations. Families averaged $56,430 in earnings (defined as

labor income earned by the mother or father). Women in the sample are, on average, 39 years old

(husbands are about 2 years older), high school graduates, and have 1.8 dependents living in their

household. 11 percent are non-white.

       Columns 2 and 3 compare those with no change in the number of dependent children to those

that have one fewer because of a change in the age of their child.11 In general, these families are

very similar. Mothers losing a dependent are seven years older than those with no change, have

slightly lower mean income and schooling, and mechanically have one less child.

       We augment these data with the NBER tax panel for the years 1987-1990.                      The tax panel,

  10
     We limit our sample to married couples because non-married parents often have a choice over which individual
claims a child as a dependent. Such claiming decisions may be endogenous to tax incentives.
  11
     The remaining families included in column 1 are almost entirely families who experienced a gain of one dependent;
families experiencing a gain or loss of more than one dependent represent less than 1% of the sample.


                                                          9
assembled by the Statistics of Income Division of the IRS, is a longitudinal sample of federal tax

returns sampled randomly on the basis of the last four digits of filers’ social security numbers.

These data span the time period from 1979 to 1990. However, we use only the 1987-1990 years to

avoid complications associated with the 1981 and 1986 tax reforms and because the tax schedule

during this period more closely resembles the schedule we examine in the SIPP data.            These

data provide excellent information on tax-related variables; almost every element of a typical filer’s

return is recorded in the data. However, the only demographic information contained in the data

is marital status (through filing status) and a proxy for children (through number of dependents).

The sample originally contained more than 46,000 returns, but after 1981 the IRS choose to follow

only a fraction of the original sample. Combined with attrition due to factors like marriage and

non-filing, approximately 20,000 returns remain each year between 1987-1990.

    Our sample restrictions are similar to those used for the SIPP. We again restrict the sample

to married couples and drop returns filed by dependents or irregular filers and those who change

filing status.

    Table 2, column 1, shows that families in the selected income range have average wage income of

$56,272 (in 2000$), almost identical to the SIPP sample. Average adjusted gross income (AGI) is

$62,601 and taxable income is $29,913. Filers claim an average of 1.3 dependents. Columns 2 and

3 again compare those losing a dependent to those with no change in the number of dependents.

These groups appear quite similar.



5    Methods

The outline of our empirical strategy is as follows: We first predict the change in marginal tax rates

faced by families assuming that family income remains constant in real terms between year 1 and

year 2. We then instrument for the actual change in the net-of-tax rate with our predicted change


                                                 10
in net-of-tax rate. Regressing changes in labor supply and income variables on this instrumented

change in tax price produces estimates of the relevant elasticities.

       We estimate the change in marginal tax rates using the NBER TAXSIM program.12 TAXSIM

calculates state and federal tax liabilities and tax rates from survey data using information on

income, marital status, and number and age of children. For each family, we calculate the predicted

tax rate change from year 1 to year 2 as the diﬀerence between the log predicted tax price in year

2 and the actual log tax price in year 1, where the prediction is formed using constant real income

and actual number of dependents. Formally this corresponds to the following:



      d
  ∆ ln(1 − τ )it = T axit−1 (Incomeit−1 , dependentsit ) − T axit−1 (Incomeit−1 , dependentsit−1 ) (5)



          d
where ∆ ln(1 − τ )it is the predicted tax rate change faced by individual i between periods t − 1

(year 1) and t (year 2), and T axit−1 () is the tax schedule faced individual i in period t − 1 as a

function of income and number of dependent children. Note that we use the t − 1 tax schedule in

both years when forming our prediction so that we do not confound changes in tax rates arising

from changes in dependents with those arising from changes in tax policy. When using the SIPP

data, we define a dependent to be any individual who is eligible to be claimed as a dependent:

individuals under 19 living in the household and individuals under 24 who are full-time students.13

In the publicly available tax panel data, we do not have precise information on the ages of children.

Therefore, we use changes in dependents claimed as reported on the tax return.

       Table 3 provides summary statistics for these tax parameters. In the SIPP sample, families

  12
     See Feenberg and Coutts (1993) for a detailed explanation of the TAXSIM calculators.
  13
     To test our assignment of dependents, we merge data from SIPP Tax Modules to our sample. The predicted
number of dependents matches the actual number recorded by the SIPP 92 percent of the time for people with a copy
of their tax form (N=4,844) and 87 percent of the time more generally (N=15,955). Even for children 18 or older, our
predictions match actual reported dependents correctly 74 percent of the time. In addition to measurement error,
part of the mismatch appears to be due to the fact that 4 percent of married couples report filing separately.




                                                        11
who lose a dependent and those who do not appear very similar in year 1: the year 1 marginal tax

rate and the average taxes paid in year 1 are 31.6 percent and $11,875 for families with no change

and 31.5 percent and $11,845 for families who lose a dependent. These figures include federal, state

and FICA taxes. The predicted tax parameters for year 2 are diﬀerent in the directions we would

expect. Families without a change in dependents are predicted to face no change in marginal tax

rates and only a $5 increase in tax liability.14 In contrast, families losing a dependent are predicted

to experience an increase in marginal tax rates (to 32.3 percent) and an increase in tax liability

(to $12,456).15     Columns 3 and 4 present these statistics for the tax panel sample.                 The year 1

marginal tax rates and average taxes paid are comparable across groups and are similar to those

from the SIPP sample. The year 2 predicted marginal tax rate and tax liability are again higher

for families losing a dependent than for families with no change.

       As a prelude to the estimation strategy described below, we separate the sample of individuals

who lose a dependent into those predicted to experience a tax change and those for whom no change

is predicted. Table 4A provides statistics for the SIPP and tax panel samples. The net of tax rate

falls for families experiencing a tax change (by 12 percent on average in the SIPP sample and by

11 percent in the tax panel) as parents are bumped into higher tax brackets as a result of losing

exemptions. Those who experienced this decrease in the net of tax rate also experienced a larger

drop in income than those with no change in the tax rate. In the SIPP sample, earnings of families

with a change in tax rate dropped by $2,082 on average between year 1 and year 2 compared to

a decrease of only $79 for families with no change. The same pattern is evident in the tax panel

sample: average earnings of families with a tax rate change dropped $3,275 compared to a drop of

  14
     The small change in tax liability for families with no change in dependents arises from families whose taxes are
aﬀected by the loss of the child tax credit when children age from 16 to 17. This is only relevant in the last two
years of the SIPP sample, and is not relevant in the tax panel sample.
  15
     The increase in marginal tax rates for this group is small on average because most families losing a dependent
do not experience a resulting tax rate change.




                                                         12
$586 for families with no change.

         The average drop in log earnings for families experiencing a change in tax rate is 9 percent

compared to 4 percent for families with no change in the SIPP sample (Table 4B). The implied

elasticity using a diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences approach is therefore 0.42, significant at the 10 percent

level.16 In the tax panel, the average drop in log earnings for families experiencing a tax change

is 10 percent, compared to 6 percent for families with no change. The implied elasticity in this

sample is 0.36, very similar to the SIPP estimate.17 Our empirical strategy aims to formalize these

relationships.

         We instrument for the actual change in the log tax price with our predicted change and estimate

equations similar to those described in Section 2:



                                     ∆ ln (lit ) = γ∆ ln (1 − τ it ) + βXit + εit                                     (6)



where ∆ ln (lit ) is the change in log labor supply (or income), ∆ ln (1 − τ it ) is the instrumented

change in the log of the tax price, which measures the change in the net-of-tax wage, and Xit

are covariates intended to control for changes in tastes.                  γ is the estimate of the elasticity of

intertemporal substitution.



6         Results

6.1        Elasticity of Family Labor Income

We focus on families shifting from the 15 percent bracket to the 28 percent bracket as the result

of losing a dependent exemption.            This is likely to be the cleanest experiment since families are

    16
     The implied elasticity is the diﬀerence in the log change in earnings between treatment and control divided by
the diﬀerence in the log change in tax price between treatment and control; in this case, -0.05 divided by -0.12.
  17
     In these diﬀerences calculations (as well as in the following analyses), 7 families in the SIPP and 6 families in the
tax panel are dropped as a result of having no labor income in the second year.


                                                           13
likely to anticipate the loss of a dependent exemption well in advance. Table 5 presents elasticity

estimates from the SIPP sample.       The sample in columns 1-3 consists of families with income

between $35,000 and $85,000 who lost a dependent between years 1 and 2. Column 1 presents the

base IV regression of change in log family earnings on change in log tax price controlling for the log

of family earnings in year 1 and year fixed eﬀects. The elasticity estimate is 0.75 with a standard

error of 0.38. This implies that a one percent change in a family’s net-of-tax wage rate results in

a 0.75 percent change in family labor earnings.

   Adding controls for the number of dependents in year 2 (column 2) and mother’s years of

education (column 3) leaves the elasticity estimate virtually unchanged, and the estimates are now

significant at the 5% level.   The coeﬃcient on log year 1 earnings is negative (around -0.14) as

would be expected if families experience mean reversion in earnings. These results are robust to

adding additional demographic and base-period income controls as would be expected if treatment

and control groups are similar. Controlling for changes in the log of predicted after tax income

does not aﬀect the elasticity estimate.

   The results are also robust to perturbations of the income range.        Using families above the

kink as the control group (income range $55-85,000) gives an estimate of 0.89 (column 4). Using

families below the kink as the control (income range $35-65,000) gives an estimate of 1.04 (column

5). The point estimate remains stable when the income range is narrowed around the discontinuity

(column 6). The standard error increases in columns 5 and 6 as a result of reductions in sample

size, but the estimates remain significant at the 10% level.

   There are several reasons why our estimates may in fact be lower bounds on the true behavioral

response.   First, some families may not be aware of the potential change in marginal tax rates

arising from changes in dependents. Second, families may not have full control over their incomes.

As Saez (2003) points out, this may cause jumps in marginal tax rates to be partially smoothed out,


                                                  14
implying that families’ perceived changes in marginal tax rates may be lower than actual changes.

These factors should all create a downward bias in our estimates.                        Finally, if some families are

myopic and do not predict the change in dependents or if families face credit constraints, they may

be experiencing income eﬀects.             In general, this would also cause us to underestimate the true

substitution eﬀect and bias our results towards the uncompensated elasticity of labor supply that

would arise from a static model. However, both treatment and control groups would experience

similar income eﬀects, minimizing this potential source of bias.

       Despite the downward biases mentioned above, these elasticities are significantly higher than

those estimated in early studies of intertemporal labor supply and lie at the high end of the most

recent estimates of the elasticity of taxable income. If tax changes are anticipated, estimates are

not downward biased by income eﬀects. This bias may be quite substantial. In a survey module

of the Health and Retirement Study, Kimball and Shapiro (2003) ask respondents to predict their

labor supply response to a hypothetical lottery win and use these data to estimate income eﬀects.

In their framework, which assumes that income and substitution eﬀects perfectly oﬀset, these

estimates imply a substitution elasticity of one, consistent with our estimates.18 Anticipation also

means that families have the ability to respond both ex-ante and ex-post, leading to potentially

larger measured responses.19

       It should be noted that we are comparing only year-to-year changes and therefore capture only

short-run responses to taxation. There are two major reasons we might in general expect short-run

responses to tax changes to diﬀer from long-run responses. First, families may shift income over

time in response to the change, creating an upward bias in the ”true” response. While this has

  18
      The assumption of cancelling income and substitution eﬀects is motivated by estimates of uncompensated elas-
ticities close to zero (Pencavel 1986). Imbens, Rubin and Sacerdote (2001) find smaller but still substantial income
eﬀects using data from a survey of actual lottery participants.
   19
      It is also possible that families are especially flexible at the time a child leaves the household or completes school,
making them particularly responsive to tax incentives.




                                                             15
been raised as a concern in studies of the rich (Slemrod 1995), it is less likely to be a concern

for families in our income ranges as they have little capital income.      Second, families may face

commitments that make it diﬃcult to adjust immediately in response to a tax change.            In this

case, short-run eﬀects might understate long-run impacts. Again, this is unlikely to be problematic

in our case. Because families can anticipate these tax changes in advance, they have time to make

necessary adjustments. In this sense, our estimates should be capturing what would traditionally

be thought of as the long-run response in a world with commitments.          There may, however, be

other reasons why short-run and long-run responses diﬀer. Because the SIPP panels are 2 1/2 to

4 years and we are able to use only 4 years of the tax panel, we are limited in our ability to explore

the dynamics of the eﬀect over a longer time horizon.


6.2   Placebo Tests

A potential concern with these estimates is that families in income ranges close to and away from

the kink may have experienced diﬀerential income trends in the absence of a tax rate change.

This is unlikely to be a problem since our income range is fairly narrow, treatment and control

groups look similar on observables, and we control for base year income. Nevertheless, as a test

of our identification strategy we run the following placebo test.     We take the sample of families

in our income range who did not experience a change in the number of dependents, predict their

tax changes as if they had experienced a loss in dependents and examine their income changes.

Families with predicted tax changes will be those families close to the kink point, allowing us to test

whether our predicted tax change parameter is capturing other characteristics of these families. We

also estimate the eﬀects using simulated tax schedules in which the tax rate discontinuity is shifted

to alternate levels of income. If our estimates are driven by discontinuous changes in taxes arising

from changes in dependents (rather than diﬀerential income trends or other spurious eﬀects), we



                                                  16
should find no response for these groups.

       Tables 6A and 6B shows the summary statistics using simulated dependent changes. In this

sample, families predicted to experience a tax rate change (those near the kink point) have very

similar changes in income to those families predicted to have no change. The diﬀerence between

the groups is small and insignificant. This placebo test shows that our results do not appear to

be driven by families in income ranges near the kink point having diﬀerent income trends from

families in income ranges away from the kink. Restricting the placebo sample to families whose

oldest child is between 16 and 18 in year 2 gives similar results.20

       We then simulate alternative tax schedules and use our methodology to calculate elasticities

under the assumption that the treatment groups faced the simulated schedules (Table 7 ).                         In

particular, we shift the tax schedule to the left by $5,000 and to the right by $5,000. The resulting

elasticity estimates for these simulated tax schedules are not significant.


6.3      Decomposition of the Eﬀects

The tax rate changes we consider aﬀect marginal tax rates at the family level; the elasticity of

family labor income is therefore the measure that best captures the total labor supply response to

the change in the net-of-tax wage rate. In this section, we make use of the detailed labor supply

data in the SIPP to gain a better understanding of the various components that comprise the total

family response. In particular, we examine whether husbands or wives appear to be responding,

and whether the response is on participation, hours, or other margins.                   We run unconditional

regressions of change in labor income on change in tax price for husbands and wives separately and

similar regressions for changes in participation and hours.

  20
    Running our regression analysis on the sample with simulated dependent changes confirms the results of the
summary statistics table (Table 6C ). However, the predicted tax change instrument is weak in this case, since these
families do not experience actual dependent related tax changes. We therefore consider the summary statistics
evidence more compelling.



                                                        17
       These coeﬃcients should not be interpreted as individual elasticities because the tax rate changes

aﬀect both members of the household. Without making strong assumptions about the interaction

of preferences within the household (for example, assuming that the husband’s labor supply is

fixed), we cannot recover the underlying elasticities for each individual. These estimates provide

information about the composition of the aggregate response but should not be compared to existing

estimates of participation and hours elasticities.

       Table 8 presents the results for families in the $35-85K range losing a dependent. We observe

an earnings response for both husbands and wives (columns 2 and 3).                       The responses along

participation and hours margins are more mixed.              Somewhat surprisingly, the aggregate annual

hours response is close to zero (column 4) with the point estimates for wives’ and husbands’ hours

(columns 5 and 6) suggesting oﬀsetting increases for wives and declines for men. However, caution

should be used when interpreting the hours response because reported hours are clustered at 2,080

and 4,160 hours per year (40 hours per week for 52 weeks per year) suggesting that reported hours

may not reflect actual hours.        In columns 7 and 8 the dependent variable is a dummy variable

indicating the individual has exited the labor force.21 These regressions are intended to examine

the participation response. The point estimates suggest that higher net-of-tax wages are associated

with a higher probability of leaving the labor force (for women) and a lower probability for men,

but the estimates are statistically not significant.

       Note that there may be variation in the change in labor earnings that is not captured by partic-

ipation and hours or not reflected because of reporting errors in measured hours or participation.

Changes in family labor earnings may also reflect changes in eﬀort or shifts between wage and

non-wage compensation.

  21
    The sample of individuals not in the labor force is too small to estimate the probability of entering the labor
force.




                                                        18
6.4    Estimates for the EITC Range

We now examine the response to dependent related tax changes for families in other parts of

the income distribution. We focus in particular on families in the phaseout region of the EITC,

restricting the sample to families with base year income between $10,000 and $40,000 (Table 9 ). We

estimate an elasticity of family labor income for families losing a dependent of 0.14 (not significant).

    The downward bias caused by families not understanding the tax rate implications of a depen-

dent change may be severe for this group, particularly since we measure the first year response. As

shown in Figure 1, these families are shifted from one complex tax schedule to another as a result

of dependent changes. It is possible that these families do respond once the change is understood,

but we are not able to examine this with the short panels available in our data. It may also be

the case, however, that the diﬀerence between the EITC and middle-income group responses is a

result of true heterogeneity in elasticities over the income distribution.

    Due to sample size constraints, we are unfortunately not able to estimate stable responses for

higher income groups.


6.5    Estimates from the Tax Panel

We now use our methodology to estimate behavioral responses in the IRS-NBER tax panel. This

allows us to test our methodology and compare elasticity estimates using a data set entirely un-

related to the SIPP data. In addition, using tax panel data we can estimate elasticities of AGI

and taxable income. The elasticity of taxable income captures the full behavioral response to the

tax rate change and, as emphasized by Feldstein (1999), is the relevant parameter for evaluating

the eﬃciency costs of taxation.         We focus on the $35,000-$85,000 income range because sample

sizes other income ranges are too small to estimate stable elasticities.22 We construct the sample

  22
     Note that this is entirely due to data constraints; our methodology could be used to provide estimates for these
income ranges with richer data.


                                                         19
as described in Section 3 and assign returns taxable income of $1 if they report no taxable income

and AGI is positive.

    Table 10 presents these results. Columns 1-3 present the elasticity estimates of wage income,

AGI and taxable income. The elasticity estimate for wage income is 0.71, almost identical to the

SIPP estimate of 0.75. The point estimates of the elasticities of AGI and taxable income are 0.54

and 3.2 respectively.        The estimates are not statistically significant, however, which is perhaps

not surprising given the smaller sample sizes in the tax panel. Nevertheless, the point estimates

indicate substantial elasticities that are quite consistent with the SIPP estimates.

    We then define the sample income range by initial taxable income, rather than earnings. The

bracket kink occurs between $40,000 and $50,000 of taxable income, so we restrict the sample to

those families whose base year taxable income is between $20,000 and $70,000.23                          We find very

similar results for the elasticity of wage income: the point estimate is 0.73 (column 4).                            The

estimates for AGI and taxable income are 0.04 and 1.07, but the standard errors are very large.

    As most of the empirical literature on taxable income elasticities does not distinguish between

life-cycle wealth eﬀects and static income eﬀects, our estimates can be compared to the compensated

elasticities estimated in the tax literature and interpreted similarly.24                 For example, Saez (2003)

and Gruber and Saez (2002), interpret their estimates as compensated elasticities. In this context,

our preferred estimates from both the SIPP and Tax Panel (an elasticity of .7) lie at the high end

of the range of recent estimates of the elasticity of taxable income, and therefore imply significant

   23
      The location of the bracket kink point technically depends on taxable income. These data are not available in
the SIPP. The standard deduction for married couples filing jointly plus two personal exemptions is about $15,000
in 2000.
   24
      In a strict structural framework, our estimated elasticities are intertemporal (marginal utility of wealth constant)
elasticities. Intuitively, intertemporal elasticities measure responses to movements along a wage profile, holding
the marginal utility of wealth constant, and compensated elasticites measure responses to shifts of the wage profile,
holding lifetime utility constant. MaCurdy (1981) shows that the Hicksian (compensated) labor supply elasticity
is bounded above by the intertemporal elasticity and below by the uncompensated elasticity. Our estimates could
therefore be considered to be upper bounds on the compensated elasticity.
   As Saez (2003) mentions, the tax literature generally does not model such intertemporal decisions explicitly.




                                                           20
behavioral responses to taxation and sizable eﬃciency costs of taxation.



7         Conclusion

Our empirical strategy employs anticipated changes in marginal tax rates arising from changes in

dependents to estimate the behavioral response to taxation. This strategy has certain advantages

over strategies that examine the response to legislated changes in tax policy. Most importantly,

the tax rate changes we study are fully anticipated and should induce no income eﬀects. Therefore,

we can interpret our estimates to be pure substitution elasticities. One reason why our estimates

fall on the high side of conventional estimates may be because estimates of substitution elasticities

from static models confound life-cycle wealth eﬀects with intertemporal substitution eﬀects.

         The intertemporal elasticity of labor supply has important implications for understanding ag-

gregate employment and output fluctuations.          If workers respond to changes in wages over time

by reallocating labor across periods, then productivity shocks can generate large cyclical fluctua-

tions (Prescott 1986a). One of the central questions in the debate about these real business cycle

models is whether the magnitude of intertemporal substitution is large enough to explain fluctua-

tions of the size we observe in the United States economy. Our high-end estimates are consistent

with the range of elasticities implied by calibration of real business cycle models to the data on

macroeconomic fluctuations.25

         Most of our estimates of taxable income elasticities are unfortunately imprecise as a result of

data limitations. In theory, however, our estimates of labor income elasticities from the SIPP data

should be lower bounds on the true elasticities of taxable income. The high-end estimates then

imply substantial behavioral responses to taxation.

    25
   There are other points of contention between proponents and opponents of real business cycle models.   See
Summers (1986), and Mankiw (1989) for discussion.




                                                     21
   Exploiting child-related tax rate changes provides a consistent identification strategy for esti-

mating elasticities across the income distribution and over diﬀerent periods of time. There is no

reason to expect a constant elasticity across income groups, and understanding elasticity hetero-

geneity is critical for the design of optimal tax systems. In addition, diﬀusion of asset ownership,

changes in tax law and changes in tax enforcement might all aﬀect the ability of individuals to

respond to tax incentives. As Slemrod (1998) and others have pointed out, it is unclear whether

diﬀering elasticity estimates in the literature are a result of diﬀerences in methodology, diﬀerential

biases across policy experiments, or diﬀerences in behavioral responses at diﬀerent points in time.

We believe that this method has great promise for identifying true heterogeneity in elasticities

across diﬀerent income groups as well potential changes in these elasticities over time.




                                                 22
References
 [1] Altonji, Joseph. ”Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from Micro Data.”
     Journal of Political Economy. 94(3): S176-S215, 1986.

 [2] Auten, Gerald and Robert Carroll. ”The Eﬀect of Income Taxes on Household Behavior.”
     Review of Economics and Statistics. 81: 681-93, November 1999.

 [3] Blomquist, N. Soren. ”Labor Supply in a Two-Period Model: The Eﬀect of a Nonlinear
     Progressive Income Tax.” The Review of Economic Studies. 52: 515-524, 1985.

 [4] Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy. ”Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Ap-
     proaches,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds.
     Amsterdam: Elsavier, 1999.

 [5] Card, David. ”Intertemporal Labor Supply: An Assessment,” in Advances in Econometrics,
     C.A. Sims, ed. Sixth World Congress, 1994.

 [6] Eissa, Nada. ”Taxation and Labor Supply of Married Women: The Tax Reform act of 1986
     as a Natural Experiment.” NBER Working Paper 5023, February 1995.

 [7] Dokko, Jane K. ”The Eﬀect of Taxation on Lifecycle Labor Supply: Results from a Quasi-
     Experiment.” mimeo, University of Michigan, 2005.

 [8] Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes. ”The Earned Income Tax Credit and the Labor Supply of
     Married Couples.” NBER Working Paper 6856, December 1998.

 [9] Eissa, Nada and Jeﬀrey Leibman. ”Labor Supply Responses to the Earned Income Tax
     Credit.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 111: 605-637.

[10] Feenberg, Daniel and Elizabeth Coutts. ”An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model.” Journal
     of Policy Analysis and Management. 12(1): 189-194, 1993.

[11] Feldman, Naomi and Peter Katuscak. ”Should the Average Tax Rate Be Marginalized?”
     mimeo, UCSD, 2005.

[12] Feldstein, Martin. ”The Eﬀect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study of
     the 1986 Tax Reform Act.” Journal of Political Economy. 103(3): 551-572, 1995.

[13] Feldstein, Martin. ”Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax.” The Review
     of Economics and Statistics. 81(4): 674-680, November 1999.

[14] Feldstein, Martin. ”The Eﬀect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study of
     the 1986 Tax Reform Act.” Journal of Political Economy. 103(3): 551-572, June 1995.

[15] Giertz, Seth. ”Recent Literature on Taxable-Income Elasticities.” CBO Technical Paper Series
     2004-16, December 2004.

[16] Goolsbee, Austan. ”It’s Not About the Money: Why Natural Experiments Don’t Work on
     the Rich,” in Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, J. Slemrod
     Ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000b.

[17] Goolsbee, Austan. ”What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from Executive
     Compensation.” Journal of Political Economy. 108(2): 352-378, 2000b.

                                               23
[18] Gruber, Jonathan and Emmanuel Saez. ”The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence and
     Implications.” Journal of Public Economics. 84:1-32, 2002.

[19] Heckman, James and Mark R. Killingsworth. ”Female Labor Supply: A Survey,” in Handbook
     of Labor Economics, vol. 1, O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds. Amsterdam: North Holland,
     1986.

[20] Imbens, Guido W., Donald B. Rubin and Bruce Sacerdote. ”Estimating the Eﬀect of Unearned
     Income on Labor Supply, Earnings, Savings and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey of
     Lottery Players.” American Economic Review. 91(4): 778-794, 2001.

[21] Kimball, Miles S. and Matthew D. Shapiro. ”Labor Supply: Are the Income and Substitution
     Eﬀects Both Large or Both Small?” mimeo, University of Michigan, 2003.

[22] Kopczuk, Wojciech. ”Tax Bases, Tax Rates and the Elasticity of Reported Income.” Journal
     of Public Economics. 89:2093-2119, 2005.

[23] Looney, Adam and Monica Singhal. ”Family Composition and Marginal Tax Rates: An
     Identification Strategy for Estimating Intertemporal Labor Supply Substitution.” National
     Tax Association Proceedings, 2004.

[24] MaCurdy, Thomas. ”An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life Cycle Setting.” Journal
     of Political Economy. 88(6): 1059-85, 1981.

[25] Mankiw, Gregory. ”Real Business Cycles: A New Keynesian Perspective.” The Journal of
     Economic Perspectives. 3(3): 79-90, Summer 1989.

[26] Meyer, Bruce. ”Labor Supply at the Extensive and Intensive Margins: The EITC, Welfare
     and Hours Worked.” American Economic Review. 92: 373-379, 2002.

[27] Meyer, Bruce and Daniel Rosenbaum. ”Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
     Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 116(3): 1063-1113, 2001.

[28] Mulligan, Casey. ”Substitution Over Time: Another Look at Life Cycle Labor Supply.” NBER
     Working Paper 6585, May 1998.

[29] Mroz, Thomas. ”The Sensitivity of an Empirical Model of Women’s Hours of Work to Eco-
     nomic and Statistical Assumptions.” Econometrica. 55: 765-799, 1987.

[30] Pencavel, John. ”Labor Supply of Men: A Survey,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 1,
     O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds. Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986.

[31] Prescott, Edward. ”Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement.” Carnegie-Rochester
     Conference on Public Policy. 25: 11-44, Autumn 1986a.

[32] Saez, Emmanuel. ”The Eﬀects of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel Study of ‘Bracket
     Creep.’” Journal of Public Economics. 87:1231-1258, 2003.

[33] Slemrod, Joel. ”Income Creation or Income Shifting? Behavioral Responses to the Tax
     Reform Act of 1986.” American Economic Review. 85:175-180, May 1995.

[34] Slemrod, Joel. ”Methodological Issues in Measuring and Interpreting Taxable Income Elas-
     ticities.” National Tax Journal. 51(4): 773-788, December 1998.


                                             24
[35] Slemrod, Joel. ”High Income Families and the Tax Changes of the 1980s: The Anatomy of
     Behavioral Response,” in Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation, M. Feldstein and J.
     Poterba, Eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.

[36] Summers, Lawrence H. ”Some Skeptical Observations on Real Business Cycle Theory.” Federal
     Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review. 10(4): 9-22, Fall 1986.

[37] Ziliak, James P. and Thomas J. Kniesner. ”Estimating Life Cycle Labor Supply Tax Eﬀects.”
     Journal of Political Economy. 107(2): 326-359, 1999.




                                             25
   Data Appendix
    This paper uses data from the 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, and 1996 panels of the Survey of In-
come and Program Participation. The SIPP is a nationally representative longitudinal sample of
American households and contains monthly observations over a period of 28 to 48 months.
    The data is processed as follows. The sample is first restricted to married couples for whom
income data is available for both husband and wife. Wage, property income, and employment data
are annualized. Occasionally one or more months of income data is missing; the average values from
non-missing months is imputed for those months but couples observed for fewer than 9 months in a
single year are dropped. (Missing observations arise largely because of marriage or divorce during
the year, the timing of interviews during the calendar, and sample attrition.)
    For each couple, we calculate the number of dependent children as the number of own children
living in their household (or away at school) as of December (or the last month the couple is
observed in the sample, if December is missing) of each year who are under age 19 or under age 24
and a full-time student. Couples with no dependent children at any point throughout the panel are
dropped. Observations where the age diﬀerence between mother and children are unusually large
or small (less than 15 years or more than 40 years) are dropped.
    In addition, we use data from the continuous work history sample or IRS/NBER tax panel. We
focus on the years from 1987 to 1990 and again retain taxpayers filing as Married Filing Jointly.
Income variables, dependent exemptions, filing status, and deductions are included in the data.
    Tax rate variables are calculated using NBER Taxsim. This program takes income and other
variables, including state, year, wages, property income, marital status, number of dependents,
and other variables and produces estimated marginal tax rates. The instrumented marginal tax
rate change between period t and t+1 is calculated by re-estimating marginal tax rates using the
demographic information for period t+1 but the income and other variables as of period t. We
use the period t tax schedule as well to avoid confounding our estimates with responses caused by
changes in policy.
    In the analysis, dollar values are reported in year 2000 dollars, as adjusted by the CPI-U.




                                               26
                                                          Figure 1
                             Federal Marginal Tax Rates by AGI and Number of Dependents (2000)
-40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40
     Marginal Tax Rate

                                   0

                                   0

                                   0

                                   0

                                   0

                                   0

                                   0

                                   0

                                   0

                             10 0

                             11 0

                             12 0

                             13 0

                             14 0

                             15 0
                                 00
                                00

                                00

                                00

                                00

                                00

                                00

                                00

                                00

                                00

                                 0

                                 0

                                 0

                                 0

                                 0
                               00

                               00

                               00

                               00

                               00

                               00
                              10

                              20

                              30

                              40

                              50

                              60

                              70

                              80

                              90                        Annual Income

                                 No Children        1 Child             2 Children        3 Children

Source: Authors calculations using NBER Taxsim assuming joint filing status, wage income, taking the
standard deduction.




                                                              27
                   Figure 2: The Effect of a Change in Dependents on Marginal Tax Rates




                                                                1 Dependent
After Tax Income




                                                                        0 Dependents




                               Control           Treatment            Control



                                            Before Tax Income




                                                   28
                                              Table 1
                                    Summary Statistics: SIPP sample
Income range: $35-85K                  All                No change in                     1 less dependent
                                                          # dependents

Family earnings                          56430                       56682                       55540
                                        (20718)                     (20717)                     (21869)

Age of mother                             38.8                        38.8                        45.4
                                          (7.8)                       (7.5)                       (6.0)

Age of father                             41.0                        41.1                        47.8
                                          (8.3)                       (8.0)                       (6.7)

Non-white (mother)                        .11                         0.11                        0.12
                                         (0.31)                      (0.31)                      (0.32)

Years of school (mother)                  13.1                        13.1                        12.6
                                          (1.7)                       (1.7)                       (1.8)

# Year 2 dependents                       1.75                        1.79                        0.97
                                         (1.06)                      (1.03)                      (1.04)

Observations                             30367                       25848                        1947
Notes: Data: 1990-1996 SIPP panels. Includes married couples with children living in their home with income
between $35,000 and $85,000. See text for details. Family earnings refers to labor income earned by the mother and
father. Standard deviations in parentheses. Dollar figures adjusted to 2000$ using the CPI-U.




                                                        29
                                               Table 2
                                      Summary Statistics: Tax Panel
Income range: $35-85K                    All              No change in                      1 less dependent
                                                           # dependents

Family earnings                          56272                       56395                        56699
                                        (20097)                     (19335)                      (30451)

AGI                                      62601                       62493                       67022
                                        (41097)                     (33257)                     (102365)

Taxable Income                           29913                       30056                        32231
                                        (22402)                     (20772)                      (38591)

# Year 2 dependents                       1.30                         1.26                        1.02
                                         (1.21)                       (1.20)                      (1.14)

Observations                             11733                       10011                         740
Notes: Data: Tax Panel 1987-1990. Includes married couples with children living in their home with wage income
between $35,000 and $85,000. See text for details. Standard deviations in parentheses. Dollar figures adjusted to
2000$ using the CPI-U.




                                                        30
                                              Table 3
                                     Predicted Tax Parameters
                                           SIPP                                   Tax Panel
                               No change in       1 less                 No change in       1 less
                               # dependents     dependent                # dependents     dependent

Marginal tax rate (year 1)          31.6                  31.5               31.6                31.7
                                    (7.1)                 (7.1)              (7.3)               (7.8)

Predicted MTR (year 2)              31.6                  32.3               31.6                32.4
                                    (7.1)                 (7.3)              (7.3)               (7.9)

Taxes paid (year 1)                11875               11845                12380               13130
                                   (4676)              (4743)               (8208)             (19259)

Predicted taxes (year 2)           11880               12456                12380               13742
                                   (4675)              (4890)               (8208)             (19275)

Observations                       25848               1947                  10011                740
Notes: Source: 1990-1996 SIPP Panels and NBER Tax Panel 1987-1990. Tax parameters calculated using TAXSIM.
Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                     31
                                            Table 4
                         Comparison of means: Families losing a dependent
                                        SIPP                                Tax Panel
                            No change in      Change in          No change in       Change in
                               tax rate        tax rate            tax rate           tax rate
Panel A: Changes in Marginal Tax Rates
Marginal tax rate (year 1)   31.8                      28.4                  32.1               28.3
                             (7.2)                     (4.5)                 (7.9)              (6.5)

Predicted MTR (year 2)             31.8                36.6                  32.1               35.7
                                   (7.2)               (6.1)                 (7.9)              (7.6)

Δln(1-τ) (predicted)                 0                 -0.12                   0                -0.11
                                                       (0.09)                                   (0.10)
Panel B: Changes in Earnings
Earnings (year 1)            55811                     55729                57733               56056
                            (13999)                    (9920)              (14102)             (12927)

Earnings (year 2)                  55732               53647                57147               52781
                                  (22374)             (15965)              (31500)             (18643)

Δln(earnings)                      -0.04               -0.09                -0.06               -0.10
                                   (0.33)              (0.43)               (0.39)              (0.33)

 Difference Δln(earnings)                     -0.05                                   -0.04
(Standard Error)                            (.027)+                                  (0.047)

Observations                       1768                    179               664                  76
Notes: Source: 1990-1996 SIPP Panels and NBER Tax Panel 1987-1990. Tax parameters calculated using TAXSIM.
Standard deviations in parentheses. +Denotes statistically significant difference at 10% level.




                                                      32
                                               Table 5
                      Elasticity Estimates of Family Labor Income (SIPP) (IV)
                                    Treatment Group               Alternative Income Ranges
                               (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)

Δln(1-τ)                       0.748        0.754          0.747           0.891          1.040         1.034
                             (0.383)+      (0.384)*       (0.381)*        (0.408)*      (0.535)+      (0.549)+

ln(year 1 fam labor inc)       -0.142        -0.137        -0.182          -0.317        -0.157        -1.266
                             (0.050)**     (0.049)**     (0.052)**        (0.133)*      (0.066)*      (0.627)*

# year 2 dependents                         0.022          0.021           0.048          0.020        0.065
                                           (0.009)*       (0.009)*       (0.015)**      (0.012)+      (0.027)*

Years of Education                                         0.022           0.022         0.024          0.022
                                                         (0.005)**       (0.008)**     (0.006)**       (0.014)

Year dummies                    yes           yes            yes             yes           yes           yes

Constant                       1.489         1.410         1.626           3.120          1.337        13.525
                             (0.544)**     (0.534)**     (0.541)**        (1.447)*      (0.695)+      (6.851)*

Observations                   1940          1940           1940             935          1416           411
Notes: Data: 1990-1996 SIPP panels. The sample consists of married couples who lost a dependent exemption between
years 1 and 2. Columns 1-3 include all families with income between $35,000 and $85,000. The sample in column 4 is
restricted to those families earning between $55,000 and $85,000. Column 5 is restricted to those earning between
$35,000 and $65,000. Column 6 is restricted to those earning between $55,000 and $65,000. Results are robust to
richer controls for base year income and demographic characteristics. Robust standard errors in parentheses. +
significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                       33
                                        Table 6
              Comparison of means: Simulated Change in Dependents (Placebo)
                                                       Placebo Change
                                           No change in               Change in
                                              tax rate                  tax rate
Panel A: Changes in Marginal Tax Rates
Marginal tax rate (year 1)                      31.8                      28.3
                                                (7.2)                     (4.7)

Predicted MTR (year 2)                                          31.8                               36.4
                                                                (7.2)                              (5.8)

Δln(1-τ) (predicted)                                              0                                -0.12
                                                                                                  (0.09)
Panel B: Changes in Earnings
Earnings (year 1)                                               55914                             55255
                                                               (13895)                            (9782)

Earnings (year 2)                                               56999                             55984
                                                               (20848)                           (19562)

Δln(earnings)                                                   -0.01                              -0.02
                                                               (0.29)                             (0.30)

 Difference Δln(earnings)                                                       -0.008
(Standard Error)                                                               (0.006)

Observations                                  21,197                                              2,289
Panel C: Placebo Regressions Using Simulated Dependent Changes (IV)
                                                (1)                                                 (2)

Δln(1-τ)                                                        0.018                             0.002
                                                               (0.085)                           (0.084)

ln(year 1 fam labor inc)                                      -0.061                              -0.093
                                                            (0.011)**                           (0.012)**

# year 2 dependents                                                                               0.002
                                                                                                 (0.002)

Years of School                                                                                   0.018
                                                                                                (0.001)**

Year dummies                                                     yes                                yes

Constant                                                      0.615                               0.725
                                                            (0.120)**                           (0.120)**

Observations                                                   23468                              23468
Notes: Source: 1990-1996 SIPP Panels. Tax parameters calculated using TAXSIM. Standard deviations in
parentheses (Panels A and B); robust standard errors in parentheses (Panel C). + significant at 10%; * significant at
5%; ** significant at 1%.



                                                          34
                                             Table 7
              Tests of the Identification Strategy Using Simulated Tax Schedule
                                                     Placebo Groups
                                        +$5,000                        -$5,000
                                          (1)                            (2)

Δln(1-τ)                                      -0.065                                    0.304
                                             (0.299)                                   (0.337)

ln(year 1 fam labor inc)                      -0.064                                   -0.091
                                             (0.042)                                  (0.040)*

# year 2 dependents                           0.013                                     0.015
                                            (0.008)+                                  (0.008)+

Year dummies                                   yes                                       yes

Constant                                      0.624                                    0.917
                                             (0.458)                                  (0.441)*

Observations                                  1940                                      1940
Notes: Data: 1990-1996 SIPP panels. Includes all married couples who lost a dependent exemption between
years 1 and 2 and had income between $35,000 and $85,000. Columns 1-2 perturb the tax schedule (and the
kink points) up and down by $5,000. Robust standard errors in parentheses. + significant at 10%; * significant
at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                       35
                                                                  Table 8
                                                         Decomposition of the Effects
                                   (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)                         (6)              (7)          (8)
Dependent Variable:                         Δln(Earnings)                          Δln(Hours)                                       Left Labor Force
                                  Total         Wife      Husband        Total        Wife                      Husband             Wife      Husband

Δln(1-τ)                         0.747           0.360           0.411             0.006          0.179          -0.093            0.251          -0.202
                                (0.381)*        (0.665)         (0.464)           (0.242)        (0.503)         (0.313)          (0.192)         (0.125)

ln(Lag Earnings,Hours)           -0.182          -0.280         -0.162            -0.125          -0.295         -0.421
                               (0.052)**       (0.018)**      (0.030)**         (0.018)**       (0.020)**      (0.024)**

# year 2 dependents              0.021          -0.007          0.033              0.009         -0.002           0.005            0.006          -0.005
                                (0.009)*        (0.015)       (0.012)**           (0.006)        (0.012)         (0.007)          (0.005)         (0.003)

Years of School                  0.022           0.033          0.025              0.006          0.009          0.008             0.003          -0.001
                               (0.005)**       (0.008)**      (0.006)**           (0.003)*       (0.006)        (0.004)*          (0.002)         (0.001)

Year dummies                       yes            yes             yes               yes            yes             yes               yes            yes

Constant                         1.626           2.302          1.279             0.906           2.050          3.074             0.008           0.011
                               (0.541)**       (0.195)**      (0.312)**         (0.154)**       (0.170)**      (0.192)**          (0.032)         (0.019)

Observations                      1940           1611            1891              1940           1656            1907              1708           1930

Notes: 1990-1996 SIPP panels. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The samples in columns (2), (3), (5), (5), and (6) are for those individuals who did not
change their participation decision. The sample in columns (7) and (8) are for those individuals who participated in the labor force in the base year.




                                                                             36
                                  Table 9
   Elasticity Estimates For Families in the EITC Phaseout Range (SIPP)
                                                      (1)
                                               lose a dependent

Δln(1-τ)                                                           0.136
                                                                  (0.174)

ln(year 1 wage inc)                                               -0.083
                                                                 (0.043)+

Year dummies                                                        yes

Constant                                                           0.773
                                                                 (0.435)+

Observations                                                       1228
Notes: Data: 1990-1996 SIPP panels. The sample consists of married couples who lost a
dependent exemption between years 1 and 2 and had income between $10,000 and $40,000.
Results are robust to richer controls for base year income and demographic characteristics.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant
at 1%.




                                               37
                                      Table 10
                       Elasticity Estimates (Tax Panel) (IV)
                             (1)                   (2)                                    (3)
                        Δln(wage inc)           Δln(AGI)                            Δln(taxable inc)
Panel A: Income Range Defined by Wage Income

Δln(1-τ)                            0.714                      0.541                      3.199
                                   (0.698)                    (0.627)                    (2.278)

ln(year 1 wage inc)                 0.011                      -0.193                     -0.299
                                   (0.071)                   (0.038)**                  (0.054)**

Year dummies                          yes                       yes                        yes

Constant                           -0.174                      2.106                      3.017
                                   (0.777)                   (0.420)**                  (0.558)**

Observations                 734                                732                        732
Panel B: Income Range Defined by Taxable Income

Δln(1-τ)                            0.813                      0.044                      1.072
                                   (0.573)                    (0.504)                    (1.603)

ln(year 1 wage inc)                -0.043                      0.066                      0.073
                                   (0.029)                    (0.063)                    (0.176)

Year dummies                          yes                       yes                        yes

Constant                            0.407                     -0.757                     -0.789
                                   (0.319)                    (0.706)                    (1.824)

Observations                         735                        734                        734
Notes: Source: NBER Tax Panel 1987-1990. Tax parameters calculated using TAXSIM. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. Panel A includes families with base year wage income between $35,000 and $85,000; Panel B
includes families with base year taxable income between $20,000 and $70,000.




                                                    38
