NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL MOBILITY AND THE
COORDINATION OF MONETARY RULES

Nicholas

Carlozzi

John B. Taylor

Working Paper No. 1212

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1983

This research has been supported in part by a grant from the
National Science Foundation. We wish to thank Matthew Canzoneri,
Ray Fair, Brian Horrigan, David Papell, and Edmund Phelps for useful comments and assistance. The computations reported in the
paper were performed at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
where the authors were economist and visting economist respectively. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those
of the aifthors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, or the Federal
Reserve System.

NBER Working Paper #1242
December 1983

International Capital Mobility and the
Coordination of Monetary Rules

ABSTRACT

The paper develops a two—country model with flexible exchange rates and
perfect capital mobility, for evaluating the alternative macroeconomic policy

rules. Macroeconomic performance is measured in terms of fluctuations in
inflation and output. Expectations are rational, and prices are sticky; wage

setting is staggered over time. The countries are linked by aggregate spending
effects, relative price effects, and mark—up pricing arrangements. The model
is solved and analyzed through deterministic and stochastic simulation

techniques. The results suggest that international capital mobility is not
necessarily an impediment to efficient domestic macroeconomic performance.
Changes in the expected appreciation or a depreciation of the exchange rate
along with differentials between real interest rates in the two countries can
permit macroeconomic performance in one country to be relatively independent

of the policy rule chosen by the other country. The results depend on the
particular parameter values used in the model and suggest the need for further
econometric work to determine the size of these parameters.
Nicholas Carlozzi
J. J. Lowry & Co.
110 Wall Street

New York, NY 10005
(212) 363—2000

John B. Taylor
404 Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
(609)452—5633

International capital mobility is frequently cited by economists as a

serious constraint on domestic monetary policy. Since highly mobile
capital forces a close linkage among interest rates in different countries,

it appears that any one country's interest rate cannot be manipulated
independently in order to achieve an efficient domestic macroeconomic

performance. Although the classic Mundell—Fleming models with flexible
exchange rates show that perfect capital mobility need not reduce the
effectiveness of monetary policy, recent research on exchange rate

overahootng, on the direct nflatonary effects of exchange rate
depreciation, and on the beggar—thy—neighbor contractionary repercussions
of domestic monetary expansion, seems to have reinforced the conventional
reasoning that macroeconomic goals are difficult to achieve under such

circumstances. In reviewing the literature, Tobin (1978) concluded that
capital mobility is such a hindrance to efficient macroeconomic
performance, that we should "throw some sand in the wheels of our

excessively efficient international money markets." By making the
international capital market less efficient, domestic macroeconomic
performance might become more efficient.

The purpose of this paper is to develop a quantitative framework for
evaluating macroeconomic policy rules in a world of flexible exchange rates

and of perfect capital mobility. We begin by defining a criterion for
measuring macroeconomic performance. In early fixed—price demand oriented
models, the natural criterion for macroeconomic performance was real output

stability—policy would be effective or ineffective depending on whether or
not it could be used to stimulate, and thereby stabilize,

2

real output. However, the resurgence of aggregate supply issues and
renewed emphasis on the simultaneous determination of prices and output
have created the need for a broader measure of macroeconomic performance,

one that includes both price and output stability. The static Phillips
curve policy tradeoff—in which macroeconomic performance can be measured
in terms of the level of inflation and output——could serve as such a
measure of macroeconomic efficiency, were it

not

for widely documented

shifts of this tradeoff. An alternative performance measure, in which
macroeconomic performance is measured in terms

of

fluctuations in inflation

and output, is used in this paper.1
The framework for policy evaluation involves the application of this
performance measure to a two—country model in which financial capital is
perfectly mobile, exchange rates are flexible, and expectations are

rational. Aggregate supply is modelled using a staggered price setting
approach, in which there are recurrent supply or price shocks in each

country. We assuma that all the shocks to the model are due to such price
shocks, abstracting entirely from demand shocks. It is assumed that the
two countries are linked by aggregate spending spillovers, relative price

effects, and mark—up pricing arrangements. Each country is assumed to
follow a monetary policy rule that can be characterized by how strongly the

money supply responds to price shocks. The model is solved and analyzed
through deterministic and stochastic simulation techniques which enforce

the rational expectations restrictions. Using these techniques we evaluate
hcw the choice of a monetary policy rule in one country affects the

macroeconomic performance of the other country. This provides a way to

3

assess the importance of capital mobility for macroeconomic
interdependence.

The results of this evaluation suggest that international capital

mobility is not necessarily an impediment to efficient domestic

macroeconomic performance. For certain values of the parameters of our
model and f or certain monetary policy rules, changes in the expected

appreciation or depreciation of the exchange rate along with differentials
between real interest rates in the two countries can permit macroeconomic
performance in one country to be relatively independent of the policy rule

chosen by the other country. The results do not hold universally,

however. Interdependence can become stronger with alternative parameter or
policy configurations. Our results, therefore, suggest a need for
econometric work to determine the size of certain crucial parameters.

The paper proceeds as follows. In Section I we review the aggregate
supply side of the model and show how policy can be evaluated in terms of
output and price variability using a rudimentary quantity theory model of

aggregate demand. In Section II we discuss a more detailed model of
aggregate demand which includes interest rate effects, and we examine

monetary policy in a closed economy version of this model. In order to
achieve macroeconomic efficiency in the closed economy-, policy-makers must

offset the effects of fluctuations in the expected inflation race.

It is

shown that a real interest rate rule automatically provides this offset.
Section III describes the full two—country model and examines the
interaction between the macroeconomic policies of each country.

4

I. AGGREGATE SUPPLY
The aggregate supply side of the model is derived from staggered wage
setting assumptions as modified to incorporate the price linkages that are

important in open economy applications.2 The staggered wage setting
approach has the advantage of incorporating forward—looking (rational
expectations) behavior, while at the same time allowing for realIstic

short—run rigidities that lead to a tradeoff between output and price
stability. These rigidities also guarantee the effectiveness of monetary
policy in stabilizing real output, despite the existence of rational

expectations. Nevertheless, an increase in the rate of money growth is
neutral over the long run, increasing the rate of inflation but not output;

is, the long run Phillips curve is vertical.

that

In general we assume that wages are set for ii periods and that 1/a of

all

workers have their wages determined at

equations of the supply side

for

the start of

each period. The

a single open economy (the home" economy

in this paper) can then be written:

nl -

-

x—_..
wt+i+t....o
n
t+i
t a

(1)

(2)

wI-

(3)

Pt

—
e

L

+

v +

' n—i.
11

i—o

i—o

where

1_5u—J.

i—o

t+i

t

X

+ (l—e)

(e + p)

p is the log of the priâe level,

'

is the log of real GNP relative

to trend, w is the log of the average wage, xt is the log of the contract
wage set in period t to last three periods, e is the Log of the exchange
rate,

and

is a "supply' shock. The hats on

the

variables indicate

5

expectations based on information available through period t.
identify variables external to the

home country

The "stars"

(the rest of the world).

For example, p in equation (3) is the average price level in the rest of
the world.

Equation (1) is the wage determination equatioi; it reflects the
tendency for contract wages to be bid up if aggregate wages or prices are

expected to rise or if aggregate demand, a repesentd by y, is expected
to

rise.3 The distributed leads in quation (1)

because contracts last n periods. The

weights

are equal because workers are asumed t

extend for n periods

on the;e distributed leads

average

future price, wage and

demand conditions over the a future periods of the contract. Parameter
5 represents the relative importance of prices

preserve the long run

neutrality

versus

wages. In order to

of money growth, the weights on prices and

wages together must sum to one, as

is

indicated in the notation of equation

(1). Parameter I measures the sensitivity of wage

adjustment

to demand

pressures. Equation (2) defines the aggregate wage in terms of contract
wages negotiated in the current and previow periods.
Equation (3) is the price equation; it states that prices are set as a

markup on wage costs, w, and the costs of

domestic currency units, (e ÷

p).

inputs denominated in

The effects of exchange rates and

foreign prices on domestic price determination, as represented in (3), are
an important feature of the supply side of the model.

It is through this

channel that foreign price shocks or exchange rate depreciations (increases

in e) have inflationary consequences. An alternative way to model such
external price linkages would be to assume that wages are directly indexed

h

to consumer prices that include the domestic price of imported goods. This
alternative would give somewhat different dynamic responses of wages and

prices to foreign price shocks or exchange rate changes. However, except
for the extreme case of perfect, instantaneous indexing, the effets on the
output—inflation tradeoff would be similar to those obtained in this paper.
At this point it is useful to review briefly how this aggregate supply

framework (with the closed economy assumption I) can be joined with a
rudimentary treatment of aggregate demand to generate a macro policy

tradeoff between output and price stability.4 Consider the simple quantity

equation "

+ Pt

tn

, where

tnt

is

the log of the money supply, and
in which

suppose that monetary policy is driven by the rule tu

a is the accommodation parameter. An aggregate demand relationship
between Pt and

can be derived by substituting the money supply rule into

the quantity equation, resulting in y —(1--a)

Substituting this

aggregate demand relationship into (1), and substituting equations (2) and

(3) into (1), results in a two—sided difference equation in x, involving
both leads and lags. The leads from this equation can be eliminated to

generate a stochastic difference equation in x. The shock

is the

disturbance in this relation. From (3), one can then obtain an
autoregressive moving average, ARNA (n—I, n-1), representation for p in
which the parameters depend on the policy parameter a and the structural

parameters 6 and r

.

The behavior of y follows directly from the

aggregate demand relation. The variances of both Pt and y can then be
calculated from these relationships. The properties of the variances are
such that the variance of Pt increases and the variance of

decreases

7

as

ci

rises.

This traces out a tradeoff curve; a more accommodative policy

(higher.cz) results in more output stability and less price stability.
The tnechanics of this tradeoff and its dependence on 0. can be

explained graphically. Figure 1 illustrates an aggregate supply curve
corresponding to the difference equation for

The supply curve shifts

with lagged movements in p and the shock term c. The

parameter

determines the slope of the aggregate demand curve, also shown in Figure

1. The slope of this curve determines how large the output effects of a
supply shock will be. A steep aggregate demand curve (ci near 1), results
in very small output fluctuations, given the size of supply shocks.

However, a close to I also causes a given shock to the aggregate supply

curve to persist for a long time. A flat aggregate demand curve, as
illustrated in Figure 2, increases output fluctuations while reducing price
fluctuations.

II. AGCR.ECATE ORMAND, INTEREST RATES, AND POLICY RULES

A more explicit model of aggregate demand than the simple quantity
equation is necessary in order to capture the impact of capital mobility on

the output—price stability tradeoff. Our approach to the demand side is
conventional and corresponds closely with that of the Mundell—Fleming

models. We distinguish between the effects of the real and the nominal
interest rate. The real interest rate is assumed to affect expenditures on
investment and consumer durable goods, while the nominal interest rate is

assumed to affect the demand for money. Inflationary expectations, which
determine the differential between the real and the nominal rate of

8

P

AS

AS7

AS

AS 0

AD°

V

AGURE 1
STEEP AGGREGATE DEMAND CURVE

p

AS

3 AS2

ASO

AS

AD°

V

AGURE 2
FLAT AGGREGATE DEMAND CURVE

9

interest,

are formed rationally. Je also allow nominal interest rates to

differ at home and abroad to allow for the expected rate of exchange rate

appreciation, a modification of the Mundell—Fleming model explored by
Dornbusch (1976) and others.

The aggregate demand equations for the home country can be written as:

= —dr

(4)

't

+

tn —D

(6)

rt =it —rt
=

where
iTt

—

+ gy

+

= —bi +ay
t -t

(5)

t

f(e

Pt

is the rate of inflation, rt is the real interest

rate, i is the nominal interest rate, and

supply. Equation (4) is an "IS

type

is the log of the money

equation in which total demand

depends on the real interest rate, terms of trade and foreign demand

(parameters d, f, g, b, and a are positive). Inclusion of the terms of
trade in this way permits short run deviations from purchasing power

parity. The elasticity is positive because exports are stimulated and
imports are reduced by a higher relative price of foreign goods. Equation
(5) is the money demand equation and equation (6) defines the real rate of

interest. As our analysis will not consider demand side shocks, we have
omitted shift terms from these equations. All variables are measured as
proportional deviations from secular trend and therefore have a zero mean.

In a simple quantity model of aggregate demand, the natural way to
write the monetary reaction function is in terms of the money supply, as

was done in the previous section. There are obvious alternatives to money

10

supply rules when interest rates play an explicit role in demand

determination. Interest rate rules in particular, either a nominal
interest rate rule:

(7)

or a real interest rate rule

(8)

rt rt

are possible characterizations of monetary policy. Note that (7) and (8)

as well as the money supply rule (m

o. p) considered in the previous

section can be interpreted as "prices rule" such as those recently
discu8aed as alternatives to "inonetarist" policies. They state that the

interest rate should be increased whenever prices rise above target. In
this model the price target is normalized to zero.

Before turning to the case of a two—country model with capital

mobility, it is useful to consider the analysis of a closed economy.5 To

close the economy we set fagO and L. A reduced form aggregate demand
curve (in p—y space) can be derived by substituting the interest rate and
money response rules into (4) arid (5). This results in the following

alternative aggregate demand equations:

(9)

y — —da +

(10)

yt ——dap

(11)

dTt

rt

— —h(l—cz) Pt + hbIT

11

for the nominal interest rate rule, real interest rate rule, and money rule
respectively, where h

—1

(a +

As is clear from these equations, the rules differ in two ways:
first, in how they affect the slope of the aggregate demand curve, and
second, in how they offset the effect of the expected inflation rate on

aggregate demand. Both the nominal interest rate rule and the money rule
result in aggregate demand equations in which the expected inflation rate

has an impact. This is a disadvantage of these rules since it results in
another source of instability. This instability could be avoided by using
a money supply rule in which the money supply responded to changes in the

expected inflation rate. In other words, the money supply rule could be
written as m

c Pt +

If

the response of the money supply to

expected inflation were exactly equal to the interest rate coefficient in
the money demand equation, that is, if B

—b, then the effect of a change

in the expected rate of inflation would be perfectly offset. The primary
advantage of the real interest rate rule is that it automatically offsets
the effects of shifts in expected inflation on aggregate demand.

The dynamic response of the economy to supply shocks with and without
the inflation offset appears in Figures 3 and 4.

(The parameters used to

generate this and following simulations are reported in Table 1.) The
disturbance generating these responses is a one—period shock to the

contract wage equation. As a result of this shock, output declines and
prices increase over the short run before returning to their initial

levels. The mechanics of wage contracting lead to a maximum decline in

y 101

p 101

--

100

I

100

99

99

.055

R 055

05

('C

T

045.

T

.045.
FIGURE 3
PRICE SHOCK WITHOUT INFLATION OFFSET

V 101 -

P 101

I
99

T

M

99

R .055 -

20

T

05

I

I
045

FIGURE 4
PRICE SHOCK WITH INFLATION OFFSET

19.6

13

real output during the third period following the disturbance, simultaneous

with the peak in the real interest rate. The inflation offset reduces the
magnitude of these output and interest rate effects, while increasing price

and nominal interest rate adjustments. In Figure 4, the behavior of the
money supply illustrates the intervention necessary in order to offset
changes in inflationary expectations.

The importance of offsetting variations in the expected inflation rate

can be Illustrated graphically. Suppose that a monetarist policy iS
adopted with a

0 and without any attempt to offset expected inflation.

If a supply shock shifts the aggregate supply curve upward, as shown in

Figure 5, then output initially will fall and prices will rise. Because
the price effects take time to work through the system of staggered
contracts (in the diagram it is assumed that contracts last 3 periods,

a—3), there is a period of time in which the expected rate of inflation

rises. Without a policy offset to this increase, the aggregate demand
curve will shift to the right, partially reducing the contractionary effect

of the shock. Because the price level eventually returns to its previous
level (or trend path), there is subsequently a period of declining

inflationary expectations. This decline results in an increase in the real
rate of interest and causes the aggregate demand curve to shift back to the

left. The leftward shift in turn causes a large decline in output before
the economy returns to full employment. The responses of prices and output
are shown by the intersections of the various supply and demand diagrams in

Figure 5. The dynamic response patterns corresponding to those price—

14

TABLE I

Parameter Values Used in Model Simulations

Parameter

Value

6

.5

1

1.0

e

.8

(.7)

3.0
d

1.2

f

.1 (.3)

g

.1

b

4.0

a

1.Q

(.3)

Notes

The home and foreign economies are equal in size and are symmetrically
parameterized. The alternative parameter values shown in parentheses are
used in the moderate interaction simulations of the two—country model
reported in Section III. Parameter d is the semi—elasticity of aggregate
demand with respect to the real rate of return. At the equilibrium level
of the real rate, the interest elasticity of aggregate demand is
approximately equal to —.06. Parameter b is the semi—elasticity of money
demand with respect to the nominal rate of return. At the equilibrium
level of this rate, the interest elasticity of aggregate demand equals
—.2. This is a rough average of the estimates reported by' Goldfeld (1973)
and Simpson, et al. (1979).

0

-4

0

-4

output intersections in Figure 5 are shown in Figure 3.

Note that there is

a large increase in the real rate of interest in period 3, the same period
in which the price level peaks and price declines are anticipated in future

periods. This rise in real interest rates causes output to fall sharply in
the same period as is shown in the diagram.6

The pattern of nominal and real interest rate movements is much
different when there is an attempt to offset the effects of the expected
inflation rate on aggregate demand.

En Figure 6 we show the impact of the

same aggregate supply shock when the money stock is increased or decreased

to perfectly offset the effect of shifts in the expected inflation rate on

aggregate demand. In this simulation

—b. The dynamic response

patterns for this alternative policy rule are shown in Figure 4. Note the
smooth patterns of real interest rate movements compared with the wide

swings in Figure 3. For this smooth movement in real interest rates there
is a corresponding irregular pattern for nominal rates. Recall that the
aggregate supply shock first increases and subsequently decreases the

expected rate of inflation. If real interest rates are to move smoothly,
then there must be an increase in nominal rates in the first few periods

after a supply shock, followed by a fall in nominal rates below normal

before returning to their original level. The pattern of the money supply
is also irregular; The money supply is reduced below normal in the first
few periods and subsequently rises above normal.

In terms of failing to offset the expected rate of inflation, nominal

interest rate targeting is always worse than money stock targeting. With
an interest rate target, the expected—inflation induced shifts in the IS

L7

curve translate into larger output fluctuations than with a money supply

target. Using the algebra of equations (9) and (11), this can be seen by
comparing the coefficients of expected inflation (d > hb).

As one should expect in a situation without demand shocks, there are

certain equivalence relationships between the various types of price"
rules. The response of a money supply rule to prices will have exactly the
same effects as an interest rate rule (ignoring the problem of offsetting
expected inflation) if ci
rule (ci —

For example, a monetarist

(1—a) .

0) results in a positively responding interest rate rule with a

response coefficient equal to hid. An interest rate rule which is
0)

completely non—responsive (ci
money supply rule (ci

,

corresponds to a fully accommodative

1)

A nominal GNP rule could also be contemplated within this framework.

+

A nominal GNP rule takes the form

Pt

where

is the response

of nominalGNP to price disturbances. Although nominal GNP rules are
usually discussed as if nominal GNP (or its growth rate) were unresponsive
to prices (ci —

0),

as we will see below this results in very nonaccommo—

dative policy. Clearly, a given nominal CNP rule is equivalent to a real

a—i
r

interest rate rule if ci

d

.

The previous analysis indicates that real interest rate rules

(or

more

generally, monetary rules that offset the effects of expected inflation on
aggregate demand) ought to work better than money stock or nominal interest

rate rules. In order to illustrate this, we have computed combinations in
output and price stability for the closed economy version of the model

using stochastic simulation techniques. These output—price stability

18

points are computed under the assumption that independent and identically

distributed random variables E

continually

shock equation (3). By

stochastically simulating the model for alternative values of the policy
rules, the average fluctuations of output and prices can be computed for
these different rules——measured in terms of the standard deviations of
output and prices.

The results of this exercise are shown in Figure 7. The triangles
indicate output—price stability points corresponding to different monetary

policy rules. iUl of the points indicated by triangles correspond to
policies in which changes in the expected rate of inflation are offset.
Points on the upper left—hand segment of the diagram correspond to

accommodative policies, that is, policies in which the real interest rate

rises only slightly in response to price movements above normal. Points on
the lower right—hand segment of the diagram correspond to less

accommodative policies. For these points, real interest rates are
increased by a larger amount in response to price shocks. The scatter of
the points is due to the uncertainty associated with the stochastic

simulations, and could be eliminated by increasing the size of the

samples.8 Despite the scatter, a downward sloping tradeoff is evident.
Note that the fixed money supply rule and the interest rate rule are well
inside the scatter, supporting our earlier argument that such policies are
inefficient.

Before proceeding with the two country analysis it is useful to
consider the dynamic response of the closed economy to a classic

V

V

I
0.180

I

0.220

E1\

0.260

RATE RULE

NOMINAL INTEREST

MONEY SUPPLY RULE

'Vv ,V1NOMINALGNPRULE
NONACCOMMODATIVE

V

V

I

V

y

0.140

V

I

V

V

ACCOMMODATIVE

0.100

V

FIGURE 7
PRICE VERSUS OUTPUT STABILITY IN A CLOSED ECONOMY WITH PRICE SHOCKS

0.20

0.40

0.60

0.80

1.00—

1.20—

'.0

20

macroeconomic policy shock——an unanticipated permanent increase in the

level of the money supply. The macroeconomic responses to a one percent
increase in money are shown in Figure 8. There is a positive real output
effect which diminishes exponentially to zero in the long run. Prices rise
slowly at first but eventually by the same amount as the increase in

money. Both the real and the nominal interest rate eventually decline, but
the decline in the nominal rate is comparatively small. The nominal
interest

rate returns to the initial level more quickly than the teal

rate. Throughout the simulation, the expected rate of inflation holds the
real interest rate below the nominal rate, making the impact of monetary
policy

on real interest rates larger than its impact on the nominal rate.

The plots in Figure 8 pertain to the closed economy parameter values listed

in Table 1. For other parameter values which we have experimented with (a
small y, for example), the nominal interest rate falls by a larger

amount. The decline in the real rate is always larger than the decline in
the nominal rate, however.

III. MONETARY POLICY IN A TWO-COuNTXY MODEL WITh CAPITAL MOBILITY
We now consider the effects of capital mobility on macroeconomic

performance in a two—country flexible exchange rate world. We have already
summarized in equations (1) through (6) the basic elements of aggregate

supply and aggregate demand for a single open economy. (We now emphasize

that #l, and that neither f nor g equals zero.) To close the system we
need to add a corresponding model for the rest of the world, and to provide
a link between capital markets in the home country and the rest of the

21

Y lOif-

P 101

I

Iuu

99 -

/

r

I

99 —

I .055

R

.055

.05

T

.045 -

FIGURE 8

MONEY SHOCK IN CLOSED ECONOMY

T

22

world. We assume that international capital mobility can be approximated
by the assumption of perfect capital mobility——that is) perfect

substitutability between domestic and foreign interest earning assets plus

instantaneous adjustment of capital flows. Algebraically, the perfect
capital mobility assumption can be written as:

1

(13)

t

i

t

+ e
t+1.

— e

C

In other words, the domestic interest rate is equal to the rest of the
world interest rate plus the expected rate of depreciation of the home
currency.

The aggregate demand and aggregate supply equations for the rest of
the world are given by:

(14)

xt*——n*

n—i

*

V
t+i

—

s n—i

+— 2.
ii

(15)

*
w —_1n—1. x_
t ni_o t

(16)

p*

(17)

y -d'r

(18)

** +ay
**
m*C —p*t ——bi
t
t

(19)

r—i —

* n-el

p

t+t

+_n

*

2. y t+t

+

*
t

*

+
—

(l_6*)

— e)

f*(p + )

÷ g*y

The rest of the world equations (14) through (19), when combined with the
capital mobility equation (13) and home country equations (1) through (6),

form the complete model. How the model is solved depends on the exchange
rate regime. With flexible exchange rates) each country's money supply

23

(rn and tn*) can be set either exogenously or by a policy rule. With fixed

exchange rates the money supply in only one country can be set, either
exogenously or by a policy rule, while the other country's money supply is

determined by the fixed exchange rate objective. No sterilization, in the
usual sense of the word, is possible with perfect capital mobility. We
will focus on flexible exchange rates in this paper.9
The dynamic response of- the flexible exchange rate model to an

unanticipated permanent increase in the home country money supply is shown

in Figure 9. These responses are calculated using the parameter values in
Table I that suggest a low degree of interaction between the two

countries. The effects on prices and output in the home country are much
like those in the closed economy model shown in Figure 8. The increase in
prices is slightly more rapid and the effect on output is slightly

smaller. Both real and nominal interest rates decline, with the real
interest rate declining more than the nominal interest rate. The exchange
rate in the home country depreciates in the first period by the same

percentage as the increase in the home money supply. Hence, to a first
approximation, the exchange rate immediately jumps to its new long—run

equilibrium value. There is some overshooting, analogous to that studied
by Dornbusch (1976), but this is very small in comparison with the size of

the jump to the region of the new equilibrium rate. Despite perfect
capital mobility, monetary policy in the home economy of this two—country
model has many similarities with monetary policy in the closed economy

model. A decline in real interest rates temporarily stimulates output and

/

24

-

P 101

T

T

99 —

I 055 —

05

R .055

SS

S

S

T

E 1 01

045 -

1 .0

101 —

100

P 101

•

•

$

5

055 -

II

R .055

S

S•

S

•05.

T

045_

I•S•

—

99_

99_

05

100

99

.—

•

S

S

T

.045_

AGURE 9
MONEY SHOCK IN TWO-COUNTRY MODEL

I

25

leads to a rise in prices.

In addition, the exchange rate depreciates,

raising the rea,l exchange rate to further stimulate demand and adding to
the rise in the domestic price level.

The impact of the increase in the home money supply on foreign output

is positive but fairly small. This contrasts with the Mundell—Fleming
result that an expansionary monetary policy at home causes contraction in
demand in the rest of the world due to the appreciation of the exchange

rate.1° According to this model, the impact effects of monetary policy
have the same sign at home and abroad. The intuitive reason for this is
found in the price linkage or markup equations. The appreciation of the
exchange rate in the rest of the world tends to reduce the foreign price
level through its effect on import costs. This lower price level translates
into an increase in real money balances in the rest of the world, despite

the fixed nominal money supply. This increase in real money balances can
stimulate demand and can offset the negative effects of the appreciation,
unlike the Mundell—Fletning model where the fixed price level prevents the

real money stock from increasing.

Given our focus on capital mobility, it is interesting to study the

impact of the home monetary expansion on foreign interest rates. Because
the exchange rate jumps almost exactly to the new long—run equilibrium
value and then stays with very little overshooting at that value, there is
only a very small expected appreciation of the home currency after the

first period. Hence, domestic and foreign nominal interest rates cannot
diverge from each other by much. But recall that the nominal interest rate
in the home country declined by only a small amount. Most of the

26

stimulative effects of the monetary expansion came from the decline in real
interest rates as caused by the increase in the expected inflation rate.

Because monetary policy works in this model primarily by reducing the real
interest rate, and because it is nominaL rather than real interest rates

that are linked in this model by capital flows, it is possible for monetary
policy to have powerful domestic effects.

We now go on to examine the output—price stability tradeoff and how
the world economy responds to supply shocks under alternative policy rules.

From the analysis of Section II it is clear that macroeconomic
inefficiencies will result from a monetary policy rule that does not offset
the impact of changes in the expected inflation rate on aggregate demand.
So that we can assess whether capital mobility impinges on macroeconomic
efficiency, we therefore focus on monetary rules for which such an

inflation offset automatically occurs. Equivalently, we limit our analysis

to real interest rate rules. Since there are now two countries, we need to
specify two such interest rate rules. Let these be:

(20)

r rt

(21)

r —

ap

The dynamic response of the model to a supply shock in the home
country when ci

— ct* — .2 is shown in the charts in Figure 10. What is

perhaps most striking about this simulation is the small effect of the

supply shock on the rest of the world. The rise in prices caused by the
supply shock brings forth an increase in real interest rates in the home

27
P 101

M 20.4
bC

I

T

20

T

99

99 —

055 —

R .055 —
19.6

I
E 1.01 —

045

.045 —

1.0 —

y 101

T

P• 101
.99 —

-.

I
M* 20.4 -

1

99

99 -

.055

R .055 -

T

045 —

2C —

19.6-.

.045

FIGURE 10
PRICE SHOCK(WITH OFFSET) IN TWO-COUNTRY MODEL

T

28

country (as called for in (20)), but almost no change in the interest rate

in the rest of the world. Unlike the case of an unanticipated increase in
the money supply, the exchange rate is expected to change by significant

amounts following a supply shock. These expected movements in the exchange
rate permit a divergence between nominal interest rates in the two
countries.

tn the early periods of the simulation, the exchange rate

depreciates and is expected to depreciate, permitting the interest rate to

rise at home relative to abroad. This rise is necessary if real interest
rates are to rise. Later on, the exchange rate appreciates back to the
long run equilibrium value, and the nominal interest rate falls at home
relative to abroad (as it should, because by this time the decline in the
expected rate of inflation has its own negative effects on real interest
rates).

These results suggest that the output—price performance that is
generated by such supply shocks might be surprisingly unaffected by policy

choice abroad despite perfect capital mobility. To test this proposition,
we stochastically simulate the two—country model under parameterizations of

equations (20) and (21) corresponding to different values of a and d'.
These calculations are made under the assumption that supply shocks
continually occur in both countries, that these shocks are unanticipated
and temporary, and that they are uncorrelated between the countries.

In

other words, C and C are serially and contemporaneously uncorrelated
random variables. Only a limited number of policy rule parameterizations

have been examined in.order to save on computation costs." Variances
calculated for a and a* equal to .2 and .6 are reported in Tables 2 and

29

3.

In Table 2, we have computed the variances of output and prices

assuming a low degree of direct interaction between the countries. In
Table 3, the interaction is moderate.12
Tables 2 and 3 indicate in what sense there is relatively little

interaction between the policy rules in the two countries. For example, as
the home country moves from a relatively nonaccomxnodative interest rate

rule to a more accommodative interest rate rule, its output variability

declines and its price var1ablity Lncreases. But the effect of this move
on the other country's variability measure is very small. There Is some
indication that the rest of the world benefits from a more accommodative
policy at home (its performance improves), but the effect is second order.

This relative independence is illustrated by Figure 11, in which the
standard deviations of output and prices under the moderate interaction

parameterization are plotted for a ranging from .05 (accommodative) to .90
(nonacconimodative). These stability pairs are plotted first under the

assumption that foreign policy is nonaccommodative (a

.6) and second

under the assumption that foreign policy is relatively accommodative

(a

.2). Figure 11 suggests a slight positive feedback between the

policy choices of these two nations. When the home nation is interested in
pursuing an accommodative domestic policy, it can achieve more efficient
macroeconomic performance if the foreign nation also adopts an

accommodative policy. And when domestic policymakers prefer a
nonaccommodative response rule, macroeconomic performance is enhanced if a
similar policy is chosen abroad. The results reported in Figure 11.
indicate, however, that the magnitude of this interaction is small.

30

TABLE 2

Two—Country Tradeoffs:
Low

*

r

Interactiona
*
r

= .6

=

.2

.188

.423

.147

.111

= .6

r

=

.188

.181

.147

.144
.1.81

.425

.144

.112

.2
.423

.425

.111

.112

key:

aThe equal size, identical structure and symmetric paranieterization of the two
countries insure that this tradeoff matrix is symmetric. This symmetry is taken into
account in reporting the results for the two countries. The average of the standard
deviations for the two countries are reported for similar policies.

31

TABLE 3
Two—Country Tradeoffs:

Moderate Interactiona

*

r

=

*

.6

r

ci.

=

.2

.158

.344

.155

.122

r = .6
.156

.150

r

.156

.326

.150

.111

= .2
.326

.111

key:

aThe same reporting conventions are followed as in Table 2.

0

I

I

0.100

(Th

0•

0

I

I

0.120

0

I

0

.,o

0

ACCOMMODATIvEFOREIGN POLtCY

NONACCOMMO[)ATIVEFOREIGN POLICY

0.140

I

I
0.160

I

0.180

NONACCOMMODATIVEDOMESTIC POLICIES

ACCOMMODATIVE DOMESTIC POLICIES

4

L0

I
I

i

FIGURE 11
PRICE VERSUS OUTPUT STABILITY IN TWO-COUNTRY MODEL WITH PRICE SHOCKS

0.10

0.20

0.30

0.40

0.50

0.60

0.70

0.80

0.90

1.00

33

IV.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

The purpose of this paper has been to develop and test a quantitative
framework for evaluating macroeconomic performance in a world of perfect

capital mobility. The framework is based on a simulation procedure for

a

two—country rational expectations model with price (or supply) shocks.

The simulation results suggest that if exchange rates are flexible,
capital mobility does not necessarily place constraints on domestic
macroeconomic performance and does not necessarily prevent individual
countries from choosing their own monetary rules without interfering with

other countries in significant ways. This conclusion is dependent on the
particular model structure and parameter configuration we chose to

investigate. Further research is required to determine the robustness

f

such results to widely different parameter and model configurations and to
obtain econometric estimates of the crucial parameters in different
countries. 13

34

FOOTNOTES

1See Taylor (1980), for example.

2Bhandari (1982), Calvo (1983), Dornbusch (1982), Rehm (1982) and
Taylor (1982) have previously used staggered wage—setting models of

aggregate supply in an open—economy framework. See Mussa (1982) and
Liederman (1982) for alternative 'sticky—price" approaches to aggregate
supply in open economy models.

3Because prices are partly influenced by foreign import prices, it is

important to include both wages and prices in the contract determination
equation in order to capture all the dynamic effects of a foreign price
disturbance.

4mis paragraph and the next provide a very brief overview of the
results in Taylor (1980).

5Rehm (1982) has provided an extensive set of deterministic
simulations to illustrate the dynamic properties of a closed economy model

like this one, and has also examined the case of a small open economy.
Calvo (1983) has studied a small, open economy model using continuous time
techniques.

6The dynamic response patterns shown in Figure 3 were computed

numerically for the parameter values shown in Table I using the extended

path algorithm described in Fair and Taylor (1983). The patterns show the
response of the closed economy model to a one unit shock to

in the first

period of the simulations. This corresponds to a temporary unanticipated
contract wage shock, which we refer to simply as a "supply shock" in the
text.

35

7The simulation results reported in the text take advantage of this

correspondence among response rules. The interest rate and nominal GNP
response rule simulations are generated using a money response rule
parameterized to yield the appropriate aggregate demand relations.
8The stochastic simulation results are based on single runs of 500
periods for each parameter configuration.

tn order to ensure stationarity,

the standard deviations are computed using the last 450 observations of
each of these runs.

9This model could also be used to investigate the choice of exchange

rate regimes (fixed versus flexible) using the same stochastic simulation

approach. See Carlozzi (1982) for this type of application using a
different model.
t0See Dornbusch (1980, p. 102) fcr a discussion of this.
]--Johnson (1982) has computed two—country output—inflation tradeoffs

of this type in a model without capital mobility arid with explicit exchange

rate management, and has explored alternative equilibrium concepts in the
choice of rules in the two countries.

12The parameter values for the low and moderate interaction
simulations of the two—country model are reported in Table 1.
t3Structural estimates can be obtained using the econometric

procedures employed by Rehm (1982) to estimate small open—economy models
for Germany and the U.S.

36

&EFERENCES

Bhandari, J.S. (1982), 'Staggered Wage Setting and ExchangeRate Policy in
an Economy with Capital Assets," Journal of International Money and
Finance, 1, 175—192.
Calvo, G.A. (1983), "Staggered Contracts and Exchange Rate Policy," in J.
Frenkel (Ed.) Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics,
University of Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Research,
forthcoming.
Carlozzi, N. (1982), "Economic Disturbances and Exchange Regime Choice,
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Working Paper No. 82—8.

Dornbusch, R. (1976), "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
Political Economy, 84, 1161—1176.

____________ (1980), Open Economy Macroeconomics, Basic Books, New York.
_____________ (1982), "PPP Exchange Rate Rules and Macroeconomic
Stability," Journal of Political Economy 90, 158—165.
Fair, R. and Taylor, J.B. (1983), "Solution and Maximum Likelihood
Estimation of Dynamic Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,"
Econometrica, 51, 1169—1185.
Goldteld, Stephen M., "The Demand for Money Revisited,." Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 3: 1973, 577—638.

Fleming, M.J. (1962), "Domestic Financial Policies Under Fixed and Under
Floating Exchange Rates," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 9,
369—79.
Johnson, R.A. (1982), "Monetary Stabilization and Interdependence in a Two—
Country Model," unpublished paper, Princeton University.
Liederman, L. (1982), "Monetary Accommodation and the Variability of Output
Prices, and Exchange Rates," Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, 16, 47—86.
Mundell, R. (1961), "Flexible Exchange Rates and Employment Policy,"
Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, 27, 509—517.

___________ (1963), "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy Under Fixed
and Flexible Exchange Rates," Canadian Journal of Economics and
Political Science, 29, 475—487.
Mussa, M. (1982), "A Model of Exchange Rate
Economy, 90, 74—104.

Dynamics,"

Journal of Political

37

Rehrn, D.E. (1982), "Staggered Contracts, Capital Flows and Macroeconomic
Stability in the Open Economy," Unpublished Ph.D. dissertatioi.
Columbia University.

Simpson, Thomas D., et al. (1979), 'A Proposal for Redefining the Monetary
Aggregates," Federal Reserve Bulletin, 65, 13—42.
Taylor, John B. (1980), "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,"
Journal of Political Economy, 88, 1—23.

(1982), "Macroeconomic Tradeoffs in an International
Economy with Rational Expectations", in . I-ildenbrand (Ed.) Advances
Ln Economic Theory, Cambridge University Press.

_____________

Tobin, J. (1978), "A'Proposal for International Moxietary Reform," The
Eastern Economic Journal, 4, 153—159.

