                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            HEALTH INSURANCE ENROLLMENT DECISIONS: PREFERENCES
            FOR COVERAGE, WORKER SORTING, AND INSURANCE TAKE UP

                                             Alan C. Monheit
                                          Jessica Primoff Vistnes

                                           Working Paper 12429
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w12429


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       August 2006




No official endorsement by AHRQ or the Department of Health and Human Services is intended or should
be inferred. Financial support by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s Economic Research Initiative on
the Uninsured Program administered by the University of Michigan is gratefully acknowledged. The authors
wish to thank Chao-Sung Yu of Social and Scientific Systems, Bethesda, Maryland for excellent work in
creating the data files used in the analysis and Bobbie Wolfe, participants in the ERIU annual research
conference, Jessica Banthin, Steve Hill and Chris Peterson for helpful comments. Jessica Vistnes did not
receive any funding for her participation in this project. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Alan C. Monheit and Jessica Primoff Vistnes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Health Insurance Enrollment Decisions: Preferences for Coverage, Worker Sorting, and
Insurance Take Up
Alan C. Monheit and Jessica Primoff Vistnes
NBER Working Paper No. 12429
August 2006
JEL No. I1, J3

                                          ABSTRACT


The weak response by the uninsured to policy initiatives encouraging voluntary enrollment in health
insurance has raised concerns regarding the extent to which the uninsured value health insurance.
To address this issue, we use data from the 2001 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey to examine the
association between health insurance preferences and coverage status. We also consider the role of
such preferences in decisions to seek out and enroll in employment-based coverage. We find that
adults with weak or uncertain preferences for health insurance are more likely than persons with
strong preferences to be uninsured and less likely to acquire coverage. Our econometric work
indicates that workers with weak or uncertain preferences are less likely to obtain job offers with
insurance, reinforcing prior evidence that workers sort among jobs according to preferences for
coverage. We also find that workers with weak or uncertain preferences are less likely to enroll in
offered coverage and we estimate the subsidy necessary to compensate such workers for the utility
loss were they to enroll. Our results suggest a dual approach to expanding coverage that includes
both subsidies and educational efforts to inform targeted groups among the uninsured about the value
of health insurance.


Alan C. Monheit
Department of Health Systems and Policy
UMDNJ-School of Public Health
335 George Street, Suite 2200
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
and NBER
monheiac@umdnj.edu

Jessica Primoff Vistnes
Agency for Healthcare Research & Quality
Center for Financing, Access & Cost Trends
540 Gaither Road
Rockville, MD 20850
jvistnes@ahrq.gov
I. Introduction

       Policy initiatives seeking to expand health insurance opportunities for uninsured

Americans remain prominent on the public agenda. Apart from the system-wide reform of the

Clinton Administration’s Health Security Act of 1993, most initiatives over the last two decades

have been incremental in nature, targeting specific groups among the uninsured and relying upon

their voluntary participation.1 Such proposals have typically been introduced with high

expectations of success. However, past evidence from demonstration projects, simulations of

responses by the uninsured to proposed subsidies, and experience with public insurance

expansions suggest that the response by targeted groups may be disappointing. These findings

also indicate that large subsidies may be required to induce participation in private coverage and

that intensive outreach efforts may be necessary to overcome informational and administrative

impediments to enrollment in public coverage (Bilheimer and Colby 2001; Gruber and Levitt

2000; McLaughlin and Zellers 1992; Thorpe et al. 1992; Selden, Banthin, and Cohen 1999;

Marquis and Long, 1995).

       The lack of responsiveness to such coverage initiatives has perplexed researchers and

policymakers alike who justify the value of expanded health insurance along several dimensions.

These include the ‘merit good’ aspect of health insurance; the negative externalities from

underconsumption of medical care; the financing burden on taxpayers and public institutions

       1
          Included among such proposed and enacted legislation are the Medicaid expansions of
the late 1980s and early 1990s, the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) of 1997,
tax credits for the purchase of individual heath insurance in the Health Coverage Tax Credits
program of the Trade Act of 2002, the proposed Fair Care for the Uninsured Act of 2003, and
state premium support programs for employment-based coverage, as well as small group and
individual health insurance market reform. In contrast to these voluntary efforts, Massachusetts
recently enacted an individual mandate requiring all citizens to obtain health insurance.

                                                2
from providing care directly to the uninsured; the impact on health care expenditures from the

provision of services in inappropriate settings; and the implications for the health of the

uninsured from financial barriers to the timely receipt of care.

       From a policymaker’s perspective, the points noted above may be reasonable rationales

for expanded coverage. However, the weak responsiveness of the uninsured, both actual and

simulated, has raised the issue of whether targeted groups value health insurance relative to other

uses of income, or perceive the benefits of public coverage to be commensurate with any direct

and indirect costs of participation. Indeed, in their review of evidence regarding enrollment into

a variety of public programs, Remler, Rachlin, and Gleid (2001) note that “[i]t may well be that

potential recipients do not value health insurance as strongly as policy analysts do -- a possibility

worth exploring in depth.” (p.15). Bilheimer and Colby (2001) also acknowledge that “instilling

awareness of the value of health insurance” is an important component of strategies to enroll and

retain persons eligible for private or public insurance programs. Finally, Peterson (2004) notes

that among the ‘stark lessons’ learned regarding state efforts to expand insurance coverage is that

“because many . . . do not understand or are skeptical about the value of insurance, offering

coverage does not translate into people accepting it” (p. 174).

       While individual valuation of health insurance is fundamental for approaches that would

encourage voluntary participation in private and public health insurance, it also has important

implications for proposals to mandate employment-sponsored health insurance (ESI). As

Summers (1989) has observed, mandated approaches may be more efficient than alternative tax-

based approaches provided that workers fully value the mandated benefits. Thus, understanding

the extent to which targeted populations value health insurance can not only affect the success of

                                                  3
particular policy instruments but may also govern selection of which instrument to apply.2

        Finally, from a methodological perspective, individual tastes for coverage underlie the

demand relationship for health insurance. Such demand estimation requires that tastes for

coverage (or reasonable proxies) be held constant in order to obtain unbiased estimates of price

and income effects. For example, estimates of price effects for enrolling in ESI may be

overstated should workers with strong preferences for coverage sort into firms with more

favorable out-of-pocket premium costs. In empirical work, such tastes are frequently represented

by individual characteristics such as age, gender, race/ethnicity, and educational attainment.3

However, analysts have little sense of whether these commonly used proxies display any

relationship to an individual’s tastes for coverage. More to the point, Pudney (1989) has

cautioned that “. . . not all variation in preferences is likely to be explicable solely in terms of

observed demographic and social factors.” (page 34).

        In this paper, we examine several aspects of the relationship between preferences for

health insurance and decisions to seek out and enroll in ESI. Using self-reported attitudinal

measures from the 2001 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), we consider the extent to

which individuals with weak or uncertain preferences for health insurance are more likely to be

        2
         As another example, efforts to expand access to coverage through reform of the small
group insurance market may not be effective if workers employed by small firms have weak
preferences for coverage.
        3
         For example, Blumberg and Nichols (2004) note that in empirical estimates of the
demand for health insurance, factors such as age, health status, gender, and family status among
others are used as proxies for unobserved aversion to risk. In modeling the decision to
participate in nongroup coverage, Marquis and Long (1995) include income, education, and the
spouse’s employment status as measures . . hypothesized to reflect the family’s aversion to risk
and so the value the family attaches to the purchase of insurance.” (pages 53-54).


                                                   4
uninsured than those with strong preferences. Focusing on workers, we apply econometric

models to examine whether single workers and married couples with weak or uncertain

preferences are more likely than those with strong preferences to sort into jobs without health

insurance and are less likely to enroll in offered coverage. In doing so, we compute the

reduction in out-of pocket premium costs that would be needed to offset the disutility from

enrollment by those with weak or uncertain preferences for coverage.

       Our findings reveal that persons with weak or uncertain preferences for coverage are

more likely to be uninsured than those with strong preferences. Depending on the type of

preference measure used, we find that single workers and couples (with at least one worker)

having weak or uncertain preferences for coverage are less likely than those with strong

preferences to obtain offers of ESI and to enroll. Our results are consistent with a dual approach

to expanding coverage that includes both subsidies and educational efforts to inform targeted

groups among the uninsured about the value of health insurance.

       Our paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide a brief review of research on

the role of health insurance preferences in coverage decisions and outline our analytical

framework. We describe our data and empirical specification in Section III. In Section IV, we

present descriptive tabulations of the prevalence of weak or uncertain health insurance

preferences, their association with health insurance status, and with the offer and take up of ESI.

Our econometric results regarding job sorting and enrollment decisions are presented in Section

V and our conclusions are stated in Section VI.



II. Background and Analytical Framework

                                                  5
Previous research on the role of health insurance preferences

       It has long been recognized that worker preferences for health insurance are likely to

underlie decisions by employers to provide health insurance. For example, early work by

Goldstein and Pauly (1976) first explicitly posited that workers sort among alternative

employment opportunities according to their tastes for health insurance and subsequent work

(e.g., Pauly 1986; Feldman et al. 1997) has also acknowledged such behavior. However, these

studies did not provide empirical tests of the sorting hypothesis. Most recently, workforce

characteristics (such as age, gender, and wage distribution), presumed to impart information

about health insurance preferences, have been used to explore the role of worker preferences in

employer decisions regarding the content of health insurance benefits (e.g., Moran, Chernew,

and Hirth 2001; Bundorf 2002; Gruber and Lettau 2004).

       To date, there have been only a few papers that have explored the role of health insurance

preferences on the employment and health insurance decisions by individuals and households.

Long and Marquis (1992) inferred that weak preferences for health insurance may contribute to

the low take-up rates by young and low-wage workers as they found that the characteristics of

workers who turn down offered coverage resembled those of workers in jobs that failed to offer

coverage. Using a constructed measure of risk tolerance from the Health and Retirement Survey,

Barsky et al. (1997) found that more risk tolerant individuals were less likely to have health

insurance. Additionally, they found that for employed persons, “risk tolerance . . . seems to be

an important factor sorting individuals into jobs with health insurance” (p.556). Using responses

to questions regarding attitudes toward health insurance from the 1987 National Medical

Expenditure Survey (NMES), Monheit and Vistnes (1999) found that weak preferences for

                                                 6
coverage were an important factor in decisions by single wage earners to sort into jobs without

health insurance. Their analysis also suggested the presence of ‘imperfect sorting’ as a sizeable

proportion (29 percent) of such workers failed to obtain jobs consistent with their preferences for

coverage. Hirth et al. (2005), using data from the 2003 Community Tracking Survey, also found

evidence consistent with imperfect labor market sorting. Based on predicted probabilities of

coverage, they estimated that 20.4 percent of workers were ‘mismatched’ with regard to their

health insurance preferences and employer offers of health insurance. Finally, among the self

employed, Monheit and Harvey (1993) applied NMES attitudinal data and found that those with

weak tastes for health insurance were less likely to obtain ESI or to provide such coverage to

wage earners in their employ. Additionally, Barsky et al. (1997) found that the self employed

had high tolerance for risk and on average, were less likely to be insured than wage earners.

Analytical approach

       As noted earlier, our examination of the role of preferences for coverage in health

insurance enrollment decisions focuses on decisions by workers to seek out and enroll in ESI.

First, we consider whether single workers and married couples (with at least one working

spouse) sort among jobs that offer or fail to offer health insurance according to their preferences

for coverage. Next, given the decision to obtain a job that provides coverage, we examine the

role played by preferences and other factors in the decision to take up offered coverage.

       i. Obtaining a job offer with health insurance

       To examine the first process, we apply and extend the simple model of job search for

single workers from our earlier work (Monheit and Vistnes, 1999). In this model, we posit that

when selecting a job, an individual will compare the utility of jobs that offer or fail to offer

                                                  7
health insurance and select the former if its utility exceeds that of a job offer without health

insurance. The utility of each job is characterized by wage income, search costs, expected out-of-

pocket medical expenses (which depend on whether the job provides health insurance), and

preferences for health insurance (which affect the position and shape of the individual’s utility

function). We include search costs in the model as such costs may impede some workers from

obtaining their desired jobs and thus may contribute to imperfect sorting according to health

insurance preferences.

       As shown in Monheit and Vistnes (1999), the above comparison based upon linear utility

functions yields the following estimating equation (subscripts O and N indicate jobs that offer/do

not offer health insurance, and S and W indicate strong or weak preferences):

Prob (job with health insurance) = - (WN - WO) + MN + (TS - TW) - (CO - CN) > (eN - eO).

This probability is negatively related to the gain in wage income between jobs without and with

coverage (WN - WO) and positively related to factors associated with the increase in out-of-

pocket medical expenditures (MN) if the job does not offer coverage.4 This probability decreases

as search costs for a job with coverage increase relative to the costs of finding a job without

coverage (CO - CN). Since workers with weak preferences for coverage (TW = 1, TS = 0) obtain

higher utility from a job without insurance than from one with coverage, they will be more likely

to obtain the former while those with strong preferences will be more likely to obtain the latter.5


4
 We assume that (WN - WO) > 0 as workers bear all or some of the employer contribution to
premium costs associated with health insurance. We also assume that jobs with health insurance
provide full coverage and hence, zero out-of-pocket medical costs.
5
 Our empirical work also considers uncertain preferences for coverage. For ease of exposition,
we present our model in terms of strong and weak preferences.

                                                  8
We assume (eN - eO) to have a logistic distribution and estimate the model as a logit equation.

       This model also guides our empirical specification of job sorting for married couples

using the household as the unit of observation.6 Here we consider whether a household with at

least one working spouse is observed to have a job offer with health insurance and focus on the

role played by spousal preferences for coverage.7 Household utility, which depends upon the

aggregate wage income obtained by the couple, the costs associated with the couple’s job search,

family out-of-pocket medical expenses, and spousal preferences for coverage, is compared

across jobs with and without health insurance that are available to the couple. The household

obtains at least one job with health insurance if the utility from taking such a job for at least one

spouse exceeds that from neither spouse obtaining a job with coverage. This comparison yields

the following decision rule:

Prob (household will obtain a job with health insurance) =

- (WN - WO) + MN +        (TS - TW - TWS) - (CO - CN)] > (eN - eO). This probability is negatively

related to the first term in the bracket (the potential wage gain for the couple from not taking any

jobs with coverage) and positively related to the second term (the household’s exposure to out-

of-pocket medical expenses for households without health insurance). The third term represents


6
 See Monheit and Vistnes (2005) and Monheit, Schone, and Taylor (1999) for analyses of
health insurance decision making that use the household as the unit of observation.
7
 We consider whether the couple obtains a job offer with health insurance (through either
spouse) and enrolls in offered coverage. In doing so, we take the labor supply decisions of each
spouse as given, recognizing this to be the outcome of a complex and interdependent decision
process regarding each spouse’s labor force participation, hours of work, and access to ESI. It is
beyond the scope of our analysis to model such decision making. Consequently, we estimate
reduced form models of the household’s offer and take-up decisions based on exogenous
characteristics of the couple and their family members.

                                                  9
household preferences for health insurance with TS indicating that both spouses have strong

preferences for coverage (positively related to the probability of obtaining coverage), TW

indicating both spouses have weak preferences, and TWS representing households with ‘mixed’

spousal preferences for health insurance (both negatively related to this probability).8 The last

term on the left-hand side is the respective costs to the household of searching for a job with

coverage (increases in such costs reduce the probability of a job with coverage). Assuming (eN -

eO) is logistically distributed, we fit such an equation for the household as a logit model.

       ii. Preferences and the decision to enroll in offered coverage

       To estimate the role of health insurance preferences on the decision to enroll in offered

coverage, we next consider a simple model of insurance participation. For single workers, let

UI(YI, P; T) + eI represent the utility from insurance and UN = UN(YN, M; T) + eN, represent the

utility from not obtaining health insurance. In these equations YI and YN represent income in the

insured and uninsured states, M represents out-of-pocket medical expenses when uninsured

(assumed to be zero when insured), P represents out-of-pocket premium costs, T represents

preferences for coverage, and eI and eN are stochastic error terms. An individual will enroll if

UI(YI, P; T) - UN(YN, M; T) > eN - eI. Expressing this difference as a simple linear function of Y,

P, and the difference in tastes, TS, and TW, we obtain the rule for the probability of enrollment:

P(enrollment) = UI(YI, P; T) - UN(YN, M; T) = Y - P + M + (TS - TW) > (eN - eI).

This probability increases with income, decreases with higher premiums, increases with expected


8
 As in our model for single workers, the preference variables are mutually exclusive. We
hypothesize that compared to both spouses having strong preferences for health insurance,
households in which spouses disagree about the value of coverage (e.g., one spouse with strong
preferences and the other with weak preferences) will experience a reduction in utility from a job
with health insurance and thus will be less likely to obtain an offer of coverage.
                                                 10
medical expenditures, increases for individuals with strong preferences for coverage and

decreases for individuals with weak preferences. Assuming (eN - eI) to be logistically

distributed, coefficient estimates will be derived from a logit equation of the likelihood of

enrollment.

       This framework also motivates our empirical work on enrollment decisions by

households with married couples. In this case, utility is defined for the couple with Y

representing aggregate household income, M representing family out-of-pocket medical care

expenses, and P representing the lowest premium available to the household from the coverage

offered. As before, tastes are represented by whether both spouses have strong, weak, or mixed

preference for coverage. The couple will choose to enroll in offered coverage if:

P(enrollment) = UI(YI, P; T) - UN(YN, M; T) = Y - P + M + (TS - TW - TWS) > (eN - eI).

Households with weak or mixed preferences are less likely than those with strong preferences to

enroll in offered coverage. As with single workers, the probability of enrollment increases with

family income and expected out-of-pocket medical expenditures, and is reduced by higher

premium costs.

       Finally, in both our analyses of individual workers and couples, the marginal effect of a

$1 increase in premiums on enrollment ( *) together with the marginal effect on enrollment due

to the presence of weak preferences ( *) will be used to assess the magnitude of the decline in

out-of-pocket premiums necessary to encourage enrollment.9 Note that each dollar decline in

       9
          Marginal effects are derived from the estimated premium and preference coefficients in
the enrollment equation. As Chernew, Frick, and McLaughlin (1997) note, the estimated price
effect from such an equation can provide an estimate of the subsidy necessary to induce
participation and is equivalent to the compensating variation measure of welfare loss under a
health insurance mandate.
                                                11
                                                                                       *
premium P increases the utility from enrollment relative to non-enrollment by              units (i.e., the

utility gain per dollar price reduction) and persons with weak preferences for coverage
                                                      *                        *   *
experience a decrease in utility from enrolling of    . A price reduction of   /       units will offset

the effect of weak preferences on the likelihood of enrollment by the single worker or couple.

III. Data and Empirical Specification

       The data used in this study are from the 2001 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey

(MEPS), a nationally representative two-year household panel survey sponsored by the Agency

for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). MEPS provides national estimates of the civilian,

noninstitutionalized population’s access to, use of, and expenditures for health care, their health

and health insurance status, demographic characteristics, economic status, and employment and

job characteristics. The survey also includes questions on respondent attitudes toward health

insurance, risk-taking behavior, and the medical care system contained in a self-administered

questionnaire (SAQ) asked of adults around the time of the round 2/4 household interview. The

2001 MEPS includes approximately 14,000 households consisting of nearly 33,500 individuals.

       For this analysis, our full sample consists of 14,420 individuals (workers and non-

workers, excluding full-time students) ages 18 to 64 who responded directly to the SAQ (we

excluded proxy respondents).10 For our analysis of job search and enrollment decisions, we

further limit our sample to single wage earners and couples with at least one working spouse. In

both cases, the sample consists of persons/couples ages 18-54. We constrained the upper age

limit to 54 in order to avoid complications associated with individuals having other ESI through

       10
           Ignoring the proxy constraint yields a sample of 16,151observations. In comparison,
our analysis sample was slightly more likely to be female (53.9 percent to 50.8 percent) and less
likely to have less than a high school education (15.4 percent to 16.5 percent).

                                                 12
a retired spouse or a prior retirement job. For similar reasons, we also excluded 217 observations

with coverage from a job other than their current main job (e.g., through COBRA or another job

held at the same time) or with military coverage (e.g.,TRICARE). The resulting sample of single

wage earners consists of 3,207 persons.11 Finally, we restricted our sample of couples to those

where each spouse individually responded to the SAQ (that is, we excluded couples if one

spouse’s response was reported by a proxy, typically the other spouse). Our resulting sample

consists of 1,954 couples where both spouses responded to the SAQ and at least one spouse was

employed as a wage earner.12 In all analyses of workers our data exclude the self employed.

        All estimates presented have been weighted using the MEPS-SAQ weight and standard

errors have been adjusted for the complex sample design of MEPS. Unless otherwise indicated,

all findings reported in the text are statistically significant at least at the 0.05 percent level.

Health insurance preferences

         Respondents to the MEPS-SAQ are asked whether they agree strongly, somewhat, are

uncertain, disagree somewhat, or disagree strongly with the following four attitudinal statements

regarding health insurance, risk, and the medical care system: 1) I’m healthy enough that I really

don’t need health insurance; 2) Health insurance is not worth the money it costs; 3) I’m more

likely to take risks than the average person; 4) I can overcome illness without help from a

        11
            MEPS included 3,443 unmarried wage earners ages 18-54 with SAQ data who were
not students. Elimination of proxy respondents reduced this to 3,207 wage earners. There were
no statistically significant differences by demographic characteristics such as age, race/ethnicity,
income, and educational attainment between the full sample and our analytical sample.
        12
          There were 2,676 married couples with SAQ data where each spouse was 18 to 54
years of age and both were not students, and at least one spouse was a wage earner. Eliminating
proxy respondents reduced the sample size to 1,954 couples. Compared to all such couples in
the MEPS, our analytical sample exhibited no differences in demographic characteristics.

                                                   13
medically trained person. The first two statements are directly related to an individual’s

preferences for health insurance and capture different aspects of its value. In contrast, the last

two statements provide indirect measures that are likely to be associated with attitudes toward

health insurance. Finally, it is important to note that responses to these attitudinal questions were

obtained independently of survey questions regarding health insurance status (i.e., through a

separate survey instrument) thus mitigating concerns that responses indicating weak preferences

for coverage might be a rationale for lacking coverage.

       Considering each of the attitudinal statements independently, respondents who strongly

or somewhat agree with a specific statement are classified as having weak preferences for

coverage. Those who respond that they are uncertain with regard to a specific statement are

classified as having uncertain preferences, while those who strongly or somewhat disagree with a

specific statement are considered to have strong preferences for coverage.

       For married couples, we consider responses to each of the attitudinal statements by both

spouses in order to characterize the couple’s preferences.13 We classify couples as having

strong preferences for coverage only if both spouses report strong preferences. Similarly, we

classify couples as having weak preferences if both spouses have weak preferences and couples

as having uncertain preferences if both spouses report they are uncertain with regard to the

attitudinal statements. We also consider three separate categories of ‘mixed’ preferences

consisting of couples with weak/strong preferences, weak/uncertain preferences, and


       13
          We assume that the preferences of each spouse are treated equally in household
decisions regarding health insurance. Thus, we do not construct household preference indicators
by applying any weighting scheme to each spouse’s preferences (e.g., counting those working or
contributing higher income to the household as having more input in decision making).

                                                 14
strong/uncertain preferences.

       Finally, we include two additional variables in our specifications that also impart

information about attitudes toward health risk. The first variable is a dichotomous measure of

whether an individual is a smoker. In addition to information on an individual’s health status,

this variable may convey information about attitudes regarding risk-taking behavior with respect

to health. For single workers, this is simply an indicator of whether or not the individual

smokes; for couples, the variable measures whether either spouse is a smoker. The second

variable is another indirect measure of health risk obtained through responses to a question

regarding seatbelt use. For single persons, we include several measures of seatbelt use (whether

the individual uses seatbelts always (the omitted category), nearly always, sometime, seldom, or

never), and for couples, we construct three measures indicating whether both spouses never use

seatbelts, always use seatbelts (the omitted category), or whether there is some combination of

the remaining responses.

Specification of econometric models

       In addition to the variables described above, our empirical models of job search and

enrollment draw upon the following data. In our model of job search, we assume that the wage

differential (gain) from taking a job without health insurance will be positively related to the

costs of health insurance. We proxy variation in health insurance costs through the inclusion of

the worker’s occupation, region of residence, urban or rural locale, and the Center for Medicare

and Medicaid Services’ hospital wage index. Additionally, as in Monheit and Vistnes (1999), we

note that workers receiving more generous health plans (such as older, more experienced, and

better educated workers) may obtain a larger wage gain by taking a job without coverage

                                                 15
compared to other workers. We also assume that out-of-pocket medical expenses (MN) depend

on the health status of individuals, the number of children in the household, and whether any

children or parents are eligible for Medicaid/SCHIP.

       As regards the difference in search costs for jobs with and without coverage, we use

proxy variables such as the county unemployment rate from the Area Resource File (higher

unemployment rates may increase the costs of search for job offers with coverage) and the

proportion of establishments in the worker’s county of residence with less than 10 employees

and between 10 and 19 employees from Department of Commerce’s County Business Patterns

data base (we posit that search costs for jobs with health insurance rise and for jobs without

coverage fall as there are more small employers in the county). Older (presumably more

experienced) and more educated workers/couples may also have easier access to jobs with ESI

than those who are younger or less educated and therefore, have lower search costs for jobs with

insurance offers. In addition, despite limits on insurers’ use of pre-existing health conditions,

workers with health problems may also incur additional search costs to find jobs for which they

may be eligible for coverage.

       A key component of our analysis of enrollment in offered coverage is to assess how the

explicit use of preference measures affects participation in ESI and whether price and income

responsiveness changes when health insurance preferences are excluded. To assess price

responsiveness, we constructed state/establishment size-specific means of employee out-of-

pocket premium costs derived from establishment-level data in the MEPS Insurance Component

(IC). We matched person-level data from the MEPS Household Component to area-specific

estimates (mean values of employee out-of-pocket contributions) from the IC based upon state

                                                 16
and establishment size. For analyses of both single workers and married couples, we examine

the impact of changes in out-of-pocket contributions for single coverage which represents the

lowest price a household confronts in order to participate in ESI. 14

        Since some of the variation in such costs may reflect geographic and firm size differences

in health insurance benefits and payment provisions, we also included variables accounting for

the presence of particular insurance provisions by state and establishment size in preliminary

econometric specifications. However, since such variables were correlated with the premium

data, their inclusion yielded statistically insignificant premium coefficients in our enrollment

equations. In addition, the coefficients on most of the benefit variables were themselves

statistically insignificant. Further, the statistically significant coefficients on the physician co-

payment variable obtained inconsistent signs across the single and married worker enrollment

equations. Consequently, we excluded the benefit variables from our enrollment equations. Thus,

variation in our estimates of premium contributions may reflect some differences in the quantity

or quality of insurance provided. Finally, our models of enrollment decisions include family-

level characteristics, including family income (as a percent of the federal poverty line), the

number of children, and the presence of possible alternatives to ESI, measured by the number of

children predicted to be eligible for Medicaid/SCHIP and whether a parent is eligible.



IV. Descriptive Findings

Prevalence of weak preferences

        14
        For couples with two workers who were both offered coverage, we selected the
employee contribution of the spouse with the lowest single contribution.


                                                  17
       Overall, we find that persons reporting weak preferences represent a minority of all adults

and that the prevalence of such preferences is lowest for the response to the statement ‘healthy

enough, don’t need coverage’ (9.0 percent of adults). We find that over a fifth of respondents

report weak preferences for health insurance based on the other measures. Were we to add the

prevalence of uncertain preferences to these tabulations (so that we consider all adults without

strong preferences for coverage), the tabulations would increase to 14.5 percent with weak or

uncertain preferences based upon ‘healthy enough, don’t need coverage,’ 34.4 percent based

upon ‘health insurance is not worth the cost,’ 35.8 percent for ‘more likely to take risks,’ and

33.8 percent for the ‘overcome illness’ statement.

       In Table 1, we examine the association between health insurance status and preferences

for coverage. In panel A, we consider whether persons with weak or uncertain preferences are

more likely to be uninsured all year compared to persons with strong preferences. For the two

direct preference measures, we find that the former groups are more than twice as likely as the

latter to be uninsured throughout 2001. Persons reporting weak or uncertain preferences in

response to the indirect ‘take risk’ statement had roughly the same likelihood of being uninsured

all year and are seven to eight percentage points more likely to lack coverage than persons with

strong preferences. Finally, we also observe small but statistically significant differences in the

likelihood of being uninsured all year for persons who report weak or uncertain preferences in

response to the ‘overcome illness’ statement compared to those with strong preferences.15


15
   These tabulations raise the issue of whether such attitudes toward health insurance are simply
a correlate of other factors more directly associated with ability to pay or to otherwise obtain
access to coverage. To address this issue, we estimated multinomial logistic regressions with
health insurance status (insured all year, part year, or uninsured all year) as the outcome variable
(results available upon request). We found that adults with weak preferences were more likely to
                                                  18
       Next (panel B), we consider persons uninsured during January 2001 and examine

whether those with weak or uncertain preferences are less likely than persons with strong

preferences to ever acquire coverage during the remainder of the calendar year. For our two

direct measures of health insurance preferences, we find that among such uninsured persons,

32.7 percent of those with strong health insurance preferences (in response to ‘healthy, don’t

need coverage’) acquired coverage compared to only 23.1 percent of those with weak

preferences and roughly a fifth of those with uncertain preferences. Additionally, 34.9 percent of

adults uninsured during January reporting strong preferences (in response to the ‘too costly’

statement) acquired coverage compared to only 24.9 percent of those with weak preferences and

25.2 percent of those with uncertain preferences. In contrast, using the indirect preference

measures, we find no statistically significant differences in the likelihood of acquiring health

insurance between persons with weak/uncertain preferences and those with strong preferences

(in response to the ‘take risk’ statement). However, we find that uninsured adults with strong

preferences (in response to the ‘overcome illness’ statement) are more likely to acquire coverage

than those with weak preferences.

Health insurance preferences, offers of coverage, and enrollment

       In Table 2, we provide descriptive data on whether wage earners with weak or uncertain

preferences for health insurance are less likely to obtain or “sort” into jobs that offer coverage

compared to those with strong preferences, and whether the former groups are also less likely to

enroll in offered coverage. For single workers we examine offers of insurance from the worker’s

current main job and enrollment in such coverage. For couples, we examine whether either

be uninsured all year (relative to being insured all year) compared to adults with strong
preferences, holding age, gender, race/ethnicity, income, education, and health status constant.
                                                 19
spouse received an offer from their current main job and whether either spouse enrolled in such

coverage. To conserve space, and as a prelude to our econometric analysis, we examine the two

direct preference measures and the ‘take’ risk measure. Among single workers and couples, we

find striking evidence consistent with these differences in behavior. Using the direct preference

measures, we find that single workers and couples with weak or uncertain preferences are less

likely to obtain jobs with coverage or to enroll in offered coverage than those with strong

preferences. Using the ‘take risk’ measure, we also find that single workers and married couples

with weak or uncertain preferences are less likely to obtain job offers with health insurance than

their counterparts with strong preferences. However, as regards enrollment, we only find

couples with uncertain preferences to be less likely to take up coverage than those with strong

preferences.

Presence of imperfect sorting

       While the descriptive statistics of Table 2 are consistent with worker sorting by health

insurance preferences, we also find such sorting to be imperfect. For example, using the

‘healthy, don’t need coverage’ measure and considering single wage earners ages 18 to 54 who

either reported strong or weak preferences, we find that 28.2 percent of such workers are

mismatched, having preferences for coverage that are inconsistent with the availability of

coverage at their jobs. Of this total, 18.9 percent of such workers have strong preferences for

coverage and are without jobs that provide insurance, while 9.3 percent have weak preferences

but are offered coverage. Among couples ages 18-54 with at least one working spouse and where

both spouses either report strong or both report weak preferences, we find that only 7.6 percent

are mismatched: Five percent of such couples have strong preferences and obtain jobs that fail to

                                                20
offer coverage while 2.6 percent of couples have weak preferences and obtain jobs offering

coverage. The lower prevalence of such mismatches among couples may reflect the fact that

when both spouses are employed, more opportunities are present to obtain jobs consistent with

the couple’s health insurance preferences.

       As noted in our earlier work (Monheit and Vistnes 1999), such findings, especially for

single workers, raise the issue of whether search costs, human capital, or other impediments to

jobs preclude some workers from obtaining jobs that meet their preferences for coverage.

Despite strong preferences, some workers may lack the requisite human capital to obtain job

offers with coverage, while other workers with weak preferences but substantial human capital

may find it difficult to avoid employment in jobs that do not offer coverage.



V. Econometric Results

       In this section, we apply the empirical models described in Section II to examine the role

of preferences and other factors in decisions to seek out and enroll in ESI. Using logit models,

we first examine the likelihood of obtaining a job offering ESI and next, we model the decision

to enroll in offered coverage. We estimate these models on single workers (Table 3) and on

married couples (Table 4). We present findings for each of the direct preference measures. Since

findings for the indirect preference measures were not as robust, we limit the presentation of our

results to the ‘take risk’ measure.16 We report marginal effects (percentage point changes)

       16
          We fit separate equations for each of the preference measures to avoid any problems
associated with correlation among these measures. For models using the ‘overcome illness’
preference measure, we found no effect of preferences in estimates of insurance offers. In
estimates of the take-up equation, only weak preferences (for single workers p < 0.10) and
combined weak/strong preferences for couples were statistically significant.
                                                21
associated with changes in specific variables as well as the corresponding decline in baseline

offer and enrollment rates.17 Unless otherwise indicated, logit coefficients are statistically

significant at p < 0.05 or better for a two-tailed test.

Single workers

        Results presented in Table 3 indicate that preferences for health insurance play a role in

decisions by single workers to obtain jobs that offer health insurance and to enroll in offered

coverage.18 Considering responses to ‘healthy, don’t need coverage,’ those with weak or

uncertain preferences are 6.15 and 8.43 percentage points less likely to obtain an offer of

coverage than persons with strong preferences. We also find that workers reporting weak or

uncertain preferences in response to ‘health insurance is not worth the cost’ are 4.10 and 6.34

percentage points less likely to obtain jobs with health insurance compared to those with strong

preferences. In addition, we find some evidence that single individuals who report being risk

takers are 2.98 percentage points less likely to obtain jobs with health insurance (coefficient

significant at p < 0.10). Finally, we also find evidence that other measures of attitudes toward

risk are associated with a reduced likelihood of obtaining a job with health insurance. In

particular, we find that single persons who smoke and those who nearly always or seldom use


        17
           Marginal probabilities were obtained for discrete variables by first assuming each
observation to have the characteristic of interest (e.g., parent is eligible for Medicaid/SCHIP),
predicting the probability of any ESI or enrollment and averaging. The same procedure was used
assuming each observation did not have the characteristic of interest. The difference between
predicted mean probabilities with and without the characteristic of interest represents the
marginal effect associated with that characteristic. For continuous variables, the marginal effect
was calculated for each observation and then averaged.
        18
          While the sample and use of preference variables differ somewhat, our findings are
consistent with those from Monheit and Vistnes (1999).

                                                   22
seatbelts are 6.50, 6.44 and 9.65 percentage points less likely to obtain such jobs compared to

non-smokers and those who always wear seatbelts (results reported from the ‘don’t need’

model).

       To put these marginal effects in perspective, we consider their impact as a percent of the

baseline offer rate of 75.2 percent. Having weak or uncertain preferences in response to ‘healthy

don’t need coverage’ yields a decline in the offer rate of 8.18 and 11.21 percent respectively,

while having weak or uncertain preferences in response to the ‘too costly’ measure yields a 5.45

and 8.43 percent decline. By comparison, we find that persons with 12 years of education are

7.15 percentage points less likely to obtain a job with coverage than those with 16 years,

resulting in a 9.51 percent decline in the baseline offer rate. In addition, being a non-smoker or

seldom wearing a seatbelt results in an 8.64 and 12.83 percent decline.

       Other variables in each of the logit equations are consistent with the underlying search

model (full results available upon request). Single workers facing higher search costs for jobs

with health insurance, such as those in fair/poor health compared to adults in excellent, very

good, or good health, those residing in counties with higher proportions of small employers

(establishments with less than 10 employees), and those in counties with higher unemployment

rates are less likely to obtain jobs with insurance. However, the coefficients on the latter two

variables were not statistically significant. Single workers expected to have lower out-of-pocket

medical expenses, such as younger workers, those who have children predicted to be eligible for

Medicaid/SCHIP, or who themselves are predicted to be eligible are less likely to have jobs

offering coverage, while adults expecting to incur higher medical expenditures, such as those

with more children, are more likely to obtain jobs with coverage. Finally, we find that better

                                                 23
educated workers (those graduating or with some years in college) are more likely to obtain jobs

with health insurance, reflecting their lower costs of searching for such jobs, given their human

capital, and perhaps their greater willingness to invest in health.

          We also find evidence that preferences play a role in single workers’ decisions to enroll

in offered coverage. For the two direct preference measures, we find that single individuals who

have weak preferences based on ‘healthy, don’t need coverage’ are 5.87 percentage points less

likely to enroll than those with strong preferences, while those stating that ‘health insurance is

not worth the cost’ are 5.93 percentage points less likely. Note that these changes represent 6.48

and 6.55 percent reductions in the baseline take-up rate of 90.6 percent. Single workers with

uncertain preferences based on either the ‘don’t need insurance’ or ‘too costly’ preference

measures are, respectively, 3.74 and 3.19 percentage points less likely to enroll than those with

strong preferences (both coefficients are significant at p < 0.10). Finally, we find that single

workers who sometimes and never wear seatbelts are less likely than those who always do to

enroll.

          The logit results for all specifications reveal that young adults aged 18 to 24 are less

likely to enroll in offered coverage than those 40 to 54. We also find that single-workers

predicted to be eligible for Medicaid/SCHIP coverage are roughly 14.5 percentage points less

likely to enroll compared to those predicted to be ineligible. Affordability also appears to be an

impediment to enrollment as those who are poor or near-poor, low, or middle income are less

likely to enroll than single workers with high incomes. We also find that college graduates or

those with some college (p < .10 for some college) are more likely to enroll than those with less

education. Finally, we find that higher employee out-of-pocket premium payments for single

                                                   24
coverage are associated with a lower likelihood of enrollment. However, coefficient estimates

are not precisely estimated and fail to obtain statistical significance in all specifications.19

        We fit separate equations for each of the preference measures to avoid any problems

associated with correlation among these measures. When the preference variables are omitted

from each of the offer and enrollment equations, we find negligible changes in the magnitude

and statistical significance of the remaining demographic, health status, income, and premium

variables. This comparison suggests that variables directly assessing preferences for coverage

independently account for differences in the demand for ESI and that demographic and health

status variables may be capturing other factors associated with the ease of access to jobs with

coverage or with an individual s expected use of health services. This finding is also consistent

with the weak contribution of demographic characteristics in explaining variation in preferences

in multinominal logit models of preferences (results available upon request).

Married couples

        Results for married couples, displayed in Table 4, also indicate that weak or uncertain

preferences for health insurance affect job offer and take-up decisions. In these equations, we

specify preferences through several dummy variables indicating whether the couple has weak

preferences (both spouses); whether the couple has uncertain preferences (both spouses); and

whether couples have mixed preferences using the following combinations: weak/strong


19
   In part, our failure to obtain statistically significant premium effects may reflect our method
of constructing the premium variable. Since premiums faced by individual workers are not
available from the MEPS household data, our use of geographic averages reduces the variation in
premiums across such observations, eliminating the possibility that some workers may face zero
out-of-pocket premiums As we report below, our premium effects are more precisely estimated
for married couples. Results for married couples are significant at p < 0.10 or better but attain
significance at the 0.05 level for only one specification (using the ' take risk'preference measure).
                                                     25
preferences, weak/uncertain preferences, or strong/uncertain preferences. The reference group

consists of couples with strong preferences for health insurance.

       We find that couples reporting uncertain preferences in response to the ‘healthy, don’t

need coverage’ statement are 14.03 percentage points less likely to obtain jobs with health

insurance compared to couples who both report strong preferences. Since the baseline offer rate

is 92.1 percent, the marginal effects correspond closely to their percent impact on this rate.

Additionally, we find that couples with a combination of weak/strong preferences are also 4.32

percentage points less likely to obtain job offers with insurance and that those reporting a

combination of uncertain and strong preferences are 5.43 percentage points less likely to obtain

such offers. Further examining the impact of mixed preferences (regressions not shown), we

find that the statistical significance of the former result is driven by the weak preferences of the

wife while that of the latter reflects the husband’s uncertain preferences.

       Using the ‘not worth the cost’ statement, we find households with both spouses reporting

weak preferences to be 2.89 percentage points less likely to obtain job offers with coverage

(coefficient significant at p <0.10), while those where both report uncertain preferences are 6.23

percentage points less likely. We also find couples with a combination of weak/uncertain

preferences to be 6.93 percentage points less likely to obtain a job offer with coverage, while

those with a combination of weak and strong preferences are 3.67 percentage points less likely.

For the latter combination, we lack the statistical power to determine which spouse is driving the

decision. Finally, in response to the ‘take risk’ statement, we find that when both spouses report

being risk takers, the couple is 11.91 percentage points less likely to obtain a job offering

coverage than couples where both spouses are not risk takers.

                                                 26
       Finally, using another indirect measure of risk-taking attitudes, we find that couples who

never use seatbelts are 15.27 percentage points less likely to obtain a job offer with health

insurance (from the ‘healthy, don’t need coverage specification’) compared to those who report

that they always wear seatbelts. Similar results are obtained in the other specifications.

       Our specifications also reveal that a limited number of other variables display statistical

significance and are consistent with the underlying job sorting model. Across all specifications,

we find evidence that couples in counties with higher unemployment rates are less likely to

obtain job offers with coverage. Similar to single workers, couples with higher educational

attainment are more likely to obtain a job offer with coverage as their enhanced human capital is

likely to facilitate job search for this employment-related benefit. Our findings also reveal that

across specifications, households in which children or a parent are predicted to be eligible for

Medicaid/SCHIP are less likely to obtain job offers with coverage, yielding a reduction in this

probability of 2.69 percentage points for an additional eligible child and 6.83 percentage points if

a parent is eligible (results using ‘healthy, don’t need coverage’). Finally, we find that

households in which the MEPS SAQ questionnaire was administered in Spanish are less likely to

obtain job offers with ESI.

       Turning to enrollment decisions, we find that households in which both spouses report

weak preferences for coverage in response to ‘healthy, don’t need coverage’ or both report

uncertain preferences are 4.33 and 4.75 percentage points less likely to take up offered coverage

(the former variable is significant at p < 0.10). Since the baseline take up rate for married couples

is quite high (96.2 percent), these marginal effects correspond closely to their percent reduction

in the likelihood of enrollment. We also find that when both spouses report uncertain

                                                 27
preferences for coverage in response to the ‘too costly measure’, the likelihood of enrollment

declines by 3.47 percentage points and when couples report a combination of weak and uncertain

preferences the likelihood of enrollment declines by 3.79 percentage points. Couples with a mix

of weak and strong preferences (coefficient significant at p < 0.10) are 2.56 percentage points

less likely to enroll than couples where both spouses report strong preferences (a result driven by

the husband’s weak preferences for coverage, p < .10).

        Estimated coefficients on employee contributions to single premiums on enrollment by

couples are more precisely estimated than for single workers. In each equation, premium effects

are negative and statistically significant at least at p < 0.10. Using ‘healthy, don’t need

insurance’ as the preference measure, we find that a $100 increase in employee premium

contributions reduces the probability of enrollment by 0.598 percentage points (similar results

are obtained for specifications using other preference variables).

       As noted earlier, the ratio of the marginal effect on enrollment from a $1 change in the

out-of-pocket premium to the effect of not having strong preferences can be used to compute the

premium subsidy necessary to offset the reduction in enrollment due to weak or uncertain

preferences. Applying the marginal effects for premiums and for preferences using the ‘healthy

don’t need coverage’ measure, we estimate that a subsidy of $768 would be required to

compensate couples for the loss of utility associated with enrolling in health insurance when both

spouses have weak preferences for coverage, and a subsidy of $844 would be required for

households where both spouses have uncertain preferences. By comparison, using estimates from

the ‘too costly’ specification, we find that a subsidy of $579 would be required when both have

uncertain preferences. Comparable to the latter estimate, we estimate a subsidy of $633 for

                                                 28
couples with a combination of weak and uncertain preferences. Finally, note that the differences

in subsidy estimates primarily reflect differences in the magnitude of the marginal impact of the

different preference measures across the specifications.

       Finally, as with single workers, we also find evidence in all specifications that

affordability may be an impediment to enrollment as poor/near poor, low income, and middle

income couples are less likely to enroll in offered coverage than those with high incomes. In all

specifications, couples with children eligible for Medicaid/SCHIP or who are themselves eligible

are less likely to enroll in ESI. Having an additional child eligible for Medicaid/SCHIP or a

parent eligible reduces the likelihood of take up by 1.58 and 5.34 percentage points, respectively.



VI. Conclusions and Implications

       Concern over the weak response by the uninsured to initiatives encouraging voluntary

enrollment in health insurance has led policymakers and researchers to question whether the

uninsured value health insurance and, thus, whether policy initiatives ought to foster an

awareness of the value of coverage. In this paper, we have addressed this issue by examining the

role played by preferences for health insurance in decisions by individuals and married couples

to seek out and enroll in ESI. Our descriptive tabulations reveal that adults with weak or

uncertain preferences for coverage are more likely to be uninsured than those reporting strong

preferences. Our econometric work also reveals that single workers and married couples with

weak or uncertain preferences are less likely to obtain jobs with health insurance than those with

strong preferences. These findings are consistent with earlier work on job sorting for single

workers (Monheit and Vistnes, 1999). We also find evidence that single workers and married

                                                29
couples with weak or uncertain preferences are also less likely to take up offered coverage.

        Since our estimated premium coefficients for single workers are not statistically

significant, we cannot provide estimates of the premium subsidy for this group to compensate

them for the disutility associated with enrollment in offered coverage. Our estimates of the

premium subsidy necessary to compensate married couples generally exceed the minimum out-

of-pocket premium costs necessary to obtain any health insurance coverage (i.e., single

coverage). We also find that affordability of coverage is likely to be a factor in enrollment

decisions as individuals and families with incomes less than four times the federal poverty line

are less likely to enroll than those with high family incomes. Finally, we find little change in the

contribution of demographic and health-related characteristics when the preferences are omitted

from the specifications.

       Our findings also suggest that persons with weak and uncertain preferences for coverage

represent a sizeable portion of the workers who were uninsured throughout 2001. Among

workers aged 18-54 who were uninsured all year, 31.4 percent reported weak or uncertain

preferences in response to ‘healthy, don’t need coverage,’ and 54.6 percent reported weak or

uncertain preferences in response to the ‘not worth the cost’ measure. 20 However, our findings

should not be interpreted as ignoring the importance of ability to pay as impeding enrollment in

ESI. Among uninsured workers ages 18-54, those with weak preferences tend to be

economically vulnerable. Three-quarters have completed 12 years of schooling or less and 49.8




       20
         As noted above, since we exclude proxy respondents, our estimates cannot be
considered nationally representative. However, our examination of samples with and without
proxy respondents revealed only small differences in selected demographic characteristics.
                                                 30
percent have incomes less than twice the poverty line.21

       Our findings suggest that there may be a considerable gap between the perceptions of

policymakers and some of the uninsured regarding the social and private value of health

insurance. The equity and efficiency considerations noted in our introductory section may not

resonate with some of the uninsured. Apart from human capital considerations, such individuals

with weak or uncertain preferences for health insurance select jobs without coverage, perhaps

valuing wage income with certainty over the uncertain yield of health insurance benefits,

especially when the latter entails out-of-pocket premium contributions, deductibles and co-

payments, and excludes valued services or restricts the choice of providers.

       Finally, our results also shed light on the relative merits of encouraging enrollment

through mandatory versus voluntary approaches. As regards the former, our findings suggest

that some of the uninsured are likely to experience welfare losses should mandatory provision of

health insurance benefits be imposed without premium or income subsidies to offset required

premium contributions. Alternatively, our finding that weak/uncertain preferences reduce the

likelihood of enrollment for some workers, apart from considerations of income, suggests that

reliance on ‘voluntarism’ should also be accompanied by educational efforts to inform targeted

uninsured groups about the merits of health insurance. Such educational efforts should not

merely be restricted to informing targeted groups about the presence of a new program, but

provide more generic information regarding the purpose of health insurance, its attendant costs,

and its likely impact on improving timely access to services and the quality and continuity of


       21
          These tabulations are based upon responses to ‘healthy, don’t need coverage’ and
estimates are nearly identical when responses to the ‘not worth the cost measure’ are used.

                                                31
care. Such an information exchange might focus on health plan design, soliciting feedback on

valued benefits or aggressively marketing low-cost catastrophic coverage to the young and

unmarried. Thus, a dual approach which would provide a combination of subsidies and

educational efforts to those most likely to exhibit weak or uncertain preferences for coverage

might prove more effective than one limited to either component.




                                                32
                                              References

Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997.

       “Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach to the

       Health and Retirement Survey.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 537-580. May.

Bilheimer, Linda T. and David C. Colby. 2001. Expanding Coverage: Reflections on Recent

       Efforts.” Health Affairs 20, 1: 83-95. February.

Blumberg, Linda J. and Len M. Nichols. 2004. “Why are so Many Americans Uninsured?” in

       Catherine G. McLaughlin (ed.) Health Policy and the Uninsured. Washington DC: The

       Urban Institute Press.

Blumberg Linda J, Len M. Nichols, and Jessica Banthin. 2001. “Worker Decisions to Purchase

       Health Insurance.” International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 1:305-

       325.

Bundorf, M. Kate. 2002. “Employee Demand for Health Insurance and Employer Choice of

       Health Plans.” Journal of Health Economics. 21: 65-88.

Chernew, Michael E., Kevin Frick, and Catherine G. McLaughlin. 1997. “The Demand for

       Health Insurance by Low Income Workers: Can Reduced Premiums Achieve Full

       Coverage?” Health Services Research 32 (4).

Chernew, Michael E, Kevin Frick, and Catherine G. McLaughlin. 1997. “Worker Demand for

       Health Insurance in the Non-group Market: A Note on the Calculation of the Welfare

       Loss.” Journal of Health Economics 16: 375-380.

Cooper Philip F and Jessica Vistnes. 2003. “Workers'decisions to take-up offered health

       insurance coverage: Assessing the Importance of Out-of-Pocket Premium Costs.”

                                               33
       Medical Care. 41(7), Supplement, pp III-35-III-43.

Feldman, Roger, Bryan Dowd, Scott Leitz and Lynn Blewett. 1997. “The Effect of Premiums on

       the Small Firm’s Decision to Offer Health Insurance.” Journal of Human Resources

       32(4):635-636.

Goldstein, Gerald and Mark V. Pauly. 1976. “Group Health Insurance as a Local Public Good.”

       in Richard Rossett (ed.) The Role of Health Insurance in the Health Services Sector. New

       York: Neale Watson Academic Publications for the National Bureau of Economic

       Research. pp. 73-110.

Gruber, Jonathan and Larry Levitt. 2000. “Tax Subsidies for Health Insurance: Costs and

       Benefits.” Health Affairs January/February 19(1): 72-85.

Gruber, Jonathan and Michael Letteau. 2004. “How Elastic is the Firm’s Demand for Health

       Insurance?” Journal of Public Economics 88: 1273-1293.

Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2004. “Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job

       Mobility.” in Catherine G. McLaughlin (ed.) Health Policy and the Uninsured.

       Washington DC: The Urban Institute Press.

Hirth, Richard A., Reagan A. Baughman, Michael E. Chernew, and Emily C. Shelton. 2006.

       “Worker Preferences, Sorting, and Aggregate Patters of Coverage?” Unpublished

       Manuscript, Economic Research Initiative on the Uninsured, February 9.

Long, Stephen H. and M. Susan Marquis. 1992. “Gaps in Employment-Based Insurance: Lack of

       Supply or Lack of Demand?” in U.S. Department of Labor, Pension and Benefits

       Administration, Health Benefits and the Workforce, (Washington, D.C.: US Government

       Printing Office): 37-42.

                                              34
Marquis, M. Susan and Stephen H. Long. 1995. Worker Demand for Health Insurance in the

       Non-group Market.” Journal of Health Economics 14: 47-63.

McLaughlin, Catherine G. and Wendy K. Zellers. 1992. “The Shortcomings of Volunteerism in

       the Small-Group Insurance Market.” Health Affairs Summer 11(2): 28-40.

Monheit, Alan C. and P. Holly Harvey. 1993. “Sources of Health Insurance for the Self

       Employed: Does Differential Taxation Make a Difference?” Inquiry 30 (Fall): 293-305.

Monheit, Alan C. and Jessica Primoff Vistnes. 1999. “Health Insurance Availability at the

       Workplace: How Important are Worker Preferences?” Journal of Human Resources 34,

       4 (Fall 1999): 770-785.

Monheit, Alan C., Barbara Steinberg Schone, and Amy K. Taylor. “Health Insurance Choices in

       Two-Worker Households: Determinants of Double Coverage.” Inquiry 36: 12-28.

Monheit, Alan C. and Jessica Primoff Vistnes. 2005.”The Demand for Dependent Health

       Insurance: How Important is the Cost of Family Coverage?” Journal of Health

       Economics 24: 1108-1131.

Moran, John R., Michael E. Chernew, and Richard A. Hirth. 2001. “Preference Diversity and the

       Breadth of Employee Health Insurance Options.” Health Services Research. 36 (5): 911-

       934.

Pauly, Mark V. 1986. “Taxation, Health Insurance, and Market Failure in the Medical

       Economy.” Journal of Economic Literature 24(2): 629-675.

Peterson, Mark A. 2004. “Editors Note: Insurance Coverage and the States.” Journal of Health

       Politics, Policy and Law, Vol 29, No. 2 (April): 173-175.

Pudney, Stephen. 1989. Modelling Individual Choice: The Econometrics of Corners, Kinks, and

                                              35
       Holes. Oxford, U.K.: Basil Blackwell, Ltd.

Remler, Dahlia K., Jason E. Rachlin, and Sherry A. Glied. 2001. “What Can the Take-Up of

       Other Programs Teach Us About How to Improve Health Insurance Programs?” NBER

       Working Paper # 8185. March.

Selden, Thomas M., Jessica S. Banthin, and Joel W. Cohen. 1998. Medicaid’s Problem

       Children: Eligible but not Enrolled. Health Affairs 17 (3): 192-200.

Summers, Lawrence. 1989. Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits.” American

       Economic Review 79(2): 177-182.

Thorpe, Kenneth E., Anne Hendricks, Deborah Garnick, Karen Donelan, Joseph P. Newhouse, et

       al. 1992. "Reducing the Number of Uninsured by Subsidizing Employment-Based Health

       Insurance," Journal of the American Medical Association, (267): 945-948.




                                               36
Table 1. Uninsured persons and health insurance preferences, 2001.

a. Percent uninsured all year by health insurance preferences (Population in thousands:
17,930)
Preference         ‘Healthy           ‘Health insurance    ‘More likely to take     ‘Overcome
measure            enough, don’t      is not worth the     risks than the           illness without
                   need health        cost’                average person’          medical care
                   insurance’                                                       system’
                                      Percent uninsured all year (standard error)
Weak               26.8              20.9                 19.6                      16.7
preferences        (1.44)             (0.89)              (0.85)                    (0.87)
Uncertain          30.3              24.2                 18.1                      17.8
preferences         (1.89)            (1.27)              (0.94)                    (1.31)
Strong             11.7              9.8                  11.3                      12.2
preferences        (0.44)            (0.46)               (0.50)                    (0.50)
b. Percent uninsured in January 2001 who acquire coverage during 2001 (Population in
thousands uninsured on January 1: 24,937).
Preference       ‘Healthy             ‘Health insurance    ‘More likely to take     Overcome
measure          enough, don’t        is not worth the     risks than the           illness without
                 need health          cost’                average person’          medical care
                 insurance’                                                         system
                            Percent acquiring coverage (standard error)
Weak              23.0              24.9                  28.5                      25.6
preferences       (1.97)            (1.75)                (1.96)                    (1.88)
(agree)
Uncertain         20.3              25.1                  26.9                      28.2
preferences       (2.67)            (1.90)                (2.04)                    (2.18)
 Strong          32.7            35.0                     31.6                      31.8
 preferences     (1.35)          (1.67)                   (1.50)                    (1.39)
 (disagree)
Source: 2001Medical Expenditure Panel Survey.




                                               37
Table 2. Percentage of single persons and couples who are offered health insurance and
take up offered coverage according to health insurance preferences.
              Healthy enough, don’t Health insurance is not More likely to take
              need coverage             worth the cost           risks
              % offered % taking        % offered % taking       % offered % taking
              coverage     up offered coverage       up offered coverage       up offered
                           coverage                  coverage                  coverage
Single
workers
Weak          68.3         85.6         70.9         85.3        71.4          89.2
preference    (2.9)        (2.5)        (2.0)        (2.0)       (1.8)         (1.6)
(agree with
statement)
Uncertain     59.6         83.9         63.4         87.3        71.6          88.8
preferences (3.5)          (3.5)        (2.5)        (2.4)       (2.4)         (2.0)
Strong        78.1         91.8         79.6         92.9        78.4          91.8
preferences (1.0)          (0.8)        (1.0)        (0.7)       (1.1)         (0.8)
(disagree)

Couples
Both weak     85.0         85.9         89.7        93.7         74.3         94.5
preferences   (4.2)        (5.2)        (2.1)       (1.6)        (4.7)        (2.4)
(agree)
Both          66.2         81.9         76.6        87.5         91.1         92.0
uncertain     (9.5)        (9.5)        (5.1)       (4.3)        (2.5)        (2.7)
preferences
Both strong   94.9         97.1         95.5        98.2         94.5         97.5
preferences   (0.6)        (0.5)        (0.6)       (0.4)        (0.8)        (0.5)
(disagree)




                                           38
Table 3: Selected Coefficients from the Logit Estimates for Single Workers


Independent Variables      Healthy, Don’t Need          Not Worth the Cost          Take Risk


                         Probability of taking a job that offers health insurance


                           Model 1                    Model 2                       Model 3


Preferences: Weak          -.4030**                   -.2767**                      -.2017*
                           (.1658)                    (.1186)                       (.1207)

Preferences: Uncertain     -.5398***                  -.4172***                     -.1227
                           (.1893)                    (.1391)                       (.1391)

Education: < 12 years      -.6597***                  -.6830***                     -.6863***
                           (.1588)                    (.1563)                       (.1561)

Education: 13-15 years     .4231***                   .4185***                      .4329***
                           (.1613)                    (.1618)                       (.1613)

Education: 16 years        .4933**                    .4773**                       .5052**
                           (.2106)                    (.2124)                       (.2102)

Education: > 16 years      .5064*                     .5272**                       .5451**
                           (.2670)                    (.2683)                       (.2661)

Individual is a smoker     -.4332***                  -.4098***                     -.4018***
                           (.1128)                    (.1129)                       (.1114)
Nearly always wears        -.4221**                   -.3940**                      -.4028**
seatbelts                  (.1644)                    (.1626)                       (.1652)

Sometimes wears            -.0520                     -.0485                        -.0658
seatbelts                  (.1852)                    (.1840)                       (.1836)

Seldom wears seatbelts     -.6129***                  -.6053***                     -.6161***
                           (.2373)                    (.2254)                       (.2299)

Never wears seatbelts      -.4611                     -.4340                        -.4711
                           (.2949)                    (.2860)                       (.2915)

No. of children            -.7184***                  -.7373***                     -.7201***
predicted eligible for     (.1688)                    (.1679)                       (.1676)
Medicaid/SCHIP
Any parent predicted
                           -1.4209***                 -1.4328***                    -1.4292***
eligible for
                           (.2548)                    (.2631)                       (.2589)
Medicaid/SCHIP




                                                   39
     T
     Table 3 (continued).
                                                            0.1873                     0.1849
     Pseudo R-Squared            0.1886

     Number of                   3207                       3207                       3207
     Observations

     Independent Variables       Healthy, Don’t Need          Not Worth the Cost       Take Risk


                                     Probability of enrolling in offered coverage

                                 Model 1                    Model 2                    Model 3


     Preferences: Weak           -.7072***                  -.7628***                  -.2965
                                 (.2448)                    (.2019)                    (.2067)

     Preferences: Uncertain      -.4834*                    -.4538*                    -.2293
                                 (.2680)                    (.2495)                    (.2508)

     Income: Poor/near           -2.4165***                 -2.4110***                 -2.3941***
     poor                        (.3245)                    (.3275)                    (.3223)

     Income: Low income          -1.6405***                 -1.5919***                 -1.6395***
                                 (.2820)                    (.2766)                    (.2745)

     Income: Middle              -.6803**                   -.6661**                   -.6972***
     income                      (.2677)                    (.2666)                    (.2639)
     Nearly always wears         -.0593                     -.0847                     -.0177
     seatbelts                   (.2769)                    (.2679)                    (.2763)

     Sometimes wears             -.4966**                   -.4696*                    -.5027**
     seatbelts                   (.2464)                    (.2402)                    (.2432)

                                 -.4856                     -.4111                     -.4446
     Seldom wears seatbelts
                                 (.4191)                    (.4382)                    (.4336)

     Never wears seatbelts       -.9254**                   -.8945**                   -.9151**
                                 (.3789)                    (.3762)                    (.3756)

     Any parent predicted
                                 -1.3596***                 -1.3702***                 -1.3390***
     eligible for
                                 (.4416)                    (.4350)                    (.4264)
     Medicaid/SCHIP

     Single Out-of-Pocket        -.0006                     -.0006                     -.0006
     Premium                     (.0007)                    (.0007)                    (.0007)
                                 0.1868                     0.1914                     0.1810
     Pseudo R-Squared

     No. of Observations         2292                       2292                       2292
Source: MEPS-Household Component, 2001. *, **, *** Indicates significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively. Other variables in the models are described in Section III of the paper.



                                                         40
Table 4: Selected Coefficients from the Logit Estimates for Couples with at least One Working Spouse

Independent Variables        Healthy, Don’t Need           Not Worth the Cost       Take Risk

                       Probability that couple obtains a job offer with health insurance

                             Model 1                    Model 2                     Model 3

Preferences: Both weak       -.1063                     -.5429*                     -1.5139***
                             (.4192)                    (.3271)                     (.3690)

Preferences: Both            1.6991**                   -1.0065**                   -.4767
uncertain                    (.7621)                    (.4496)                     (.3736)

Preferences: Mixture of      -.7091**                   -.6618**                    -.0245
weak/strong                  (.3290)                    (.3345)                     (.3009)

Preferences: Mixture of      -1.0537                    -1.0912***                  -.5946
weak/uncertain               (.7721)                    (.3911)                     (.4265)

Preferences: Mixture of      -.8526**                   -.0075                      -.1789
strong/uncertain             (.3449)                    (.3660)                     (.3497)

Highest Education of         -.4752*                    -.5998**                    -.5827**
Spouse: < 12 years           (.2826)                    (.2903)                     (.2705)

Highest Education of         .7144**                    .6786**                     .6196**
Spouse: 13-15 years          (.2979)                    (.2824)                     (.2817)

Highest Education of         .2791                      .2460                       .2351
Spouse: 16 years             (.3425)                    (.3363)                     (.3496)

Highest Education of         .2430                      .1706                       .1602
Spouse: > 16 years           (.4674)                    (.4584)                     (.4567)

Couple seatbelt use:
                             -.0514                     .0252                       -.0329
other
                             (.2439)                    (.2455)                     (.2430)
Couple never wears seat      -1.7257**                  -1.8750***                  -1.9859***
belts                        (.7064)                    (.6807)                     (.6838)
Parent eligible for          -.9531**                   -.8073**                    -.8162**
Medicaid/SCHIP               (.3851)                    (.389)                      (.3506)
                                                        0.2721                      0.2798
Pseudo R-Squared             0.2751

Number of                    1954                       1954                        1954
Observations




                                                      41
     Table 4 (continued): Selected Coefficients from the Logit Estimates for Couples with at least One Working
     Spouse

     Independent Variables      Healthy, Don’t Need           Not Worth the Cost      Take Risk

                                  Probability couple of enrolls in offered coverage

                                Model 1                    Model 2                    Model 3



     Preferences: Both weak     -1.0784*                   -.6727                     -.3110
                                (.6143)                    (.4164)                    (.6046)

     Preferences: Both          -1.1555**                  -1.1277**                  -.4979
     uncertain                  (.5870)                    (.4874)                    (.5203)

     Preferences: Mixture of    .3396                      -.9022*                    -.6454
     weak/strong                (.5523)                    (.5469)                    (.4050)

     Preferences: Mixture of    .1490                      -1.2001**                  .1098
     weak/uncertain             (1.0009)                   (.5069)                    (.5360)

     Preferences: Mixture of    -.2200                     -.8156                     -.0489
     strong/uncertain           (.5412)                    (.6327)                    (.5135)

     Income: Poor/near poor     -1.9333**                  -1.7791**                  -1.8726**
                                (.7626)                    (.7288)                    (.7435)

     Income: Low income         -1.9111***                 -1.7709***                 -1.9200***
                                (.6891)                    (.6862)                    (.6764)

     Income: Middle             -1.1058*                   -1.0072*                   -1.0978*
     income                     (.5989)                    (.5774)                    (.5903)

     Any spouse smoke           -.9884***                  -.9298***                  -.8912***
                                (.2890)                    (2892)                     (.2830)

     No. of children eligible   -.4663***                  -.4319**                   -.4279**
     for Medicaid/SCHIP         (.1807)                    (.1727)                    (.1754)


     Any parent eligible for    -1.2460**                  -1.2785**                  -1.2311**
     Medicaid/SCHIP             (.5189)                    (.5253)                    (.5207)


     Single Out-of-Pocket       -.0019*                    -.0021*                    -.0022**
     Premium                    (.0011)                    (.0012)                    (.0011)
                                                           0.3165                     0.3081
     Pseudo R-Squared           0.3109

     Number of                  1737                       1737                       1737
     Observations
Source: MEPS-Household Component, 2001. *, **, *** Indicates significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively. Other variables in the models are described in Section III of the paper.


                                                         42
