                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            COHORT CROWDING: HOW RESOURCES
                             AFFECT COLLEGIATE ATTAINMENT

                                               John Bound
                                               Sarah Turner

                                          Working Paper 12424
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12424


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




Seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, the University of Western Ontario, the University of
Michigan, the University of Maryland, the University of California-Berkeley, Syracuse University, Cornell
University, and Harvard University (in a much earlier draft) have provided many helpful comments. We are
grateful to Michael Baker, Angelo Melino and David Lam for helpful suggestions, to Charlie Brown,
Caroline Hoxby, Bill Johnson and Alan Krueger for comments on an earlier draft, to C. Lockwood Reynolds
for research assistance, and to N.E. Barr editorial assistance. Partial funding for this research was obtained
through the National Bureau of Economic Research, Program on Non-Profits and from the Mellon
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by John Bound and Sarah Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Cohort Crowding: How Resources Affect Collegiate Attainment
John Bound and Sarah Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 12424
August 2006
JEL No. I23, H52

                                            ABSTRACT


Analyses of college attainment typically focus on factors affecting enrollment demand, including the
financial attractiveness of a college education and the availability of financial aid, while implicitly
assuming that resources available per student on the supply side of the market are elastically
supplied. The higher education market in the United States is dominated by public and non-profit
production, and colleges and universities receive considerable subsidies from state, federal, and
private sources. Because consumers pay only a fraction of the cost of production, changes in demand
are unlikely to be accommodated fully by colleges and universities without commensurate increases
in non-tuition revenue. For this reason, public investment in higher education plays a crucial role in
determining the degrees produced and the supply of college-educated workers to the labor market.
Using data covering the last half of the twentieth century, we find strong evidence that large cohorts
within states have relatively low undergraduate degree attainment, reflecting less than perfect
elasticity of supply in the higher education market. That large cohorts receive lower public subsidies
per student in higher education explains this result, indicating that resources have large effects on
degree production. Our results suggest that reduced resources per student following from rising
cohort size and lower state expenditures are likely to have significant negative effects on the supply
of college-educated workers entering the labor market.


John Bound
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
jbound@umich.edu

Sarah Turner
University of Virginia
Ruffner Hall, Room 294B
405 Emmet Street
Charlottesville, VA 22903-2495
and NBER
sturner@virginia.edu
            Cohort Crowding: How resources affect collegiate attainment

        Analyses of college enrollment and college completion rates typically focus on

demand-side factors including the financial attractiveness of a college education and the

availability of financial aid. Implicit in this line of research is the assumption that

colleges and universities adjust supply fully with changes in demand. However, there is

good reason to believe that supply is not even close to perfectly elastic. The higher

education market in the United States is dominated by public and non-profit production,

and colleges and universities receive considerable subsidies from state, federal, and

private sources. Indeed, Winston (1999) estimates that student fees cover only about 12%

percent of total educational costs at public colleges and universities in the U.S. Parallel

estimates of the average share of costs covered by student tuition and fees at private

colleges and universities are substantially higher, but still less than 50%, and much lower

at the most selective institutions. Because consumers pay only a fraction of the cost of

production, changes in demand are unlikely to be accommodated fully by colleges and

universities without commensurate increases in non-tuition revenue. For this reason,

public investment in higher education plays a crucial role in determining the degrees

produced and the supply of college-educated workers to the labor market.

        Significant public subsidies for college education brought about the

transformation to “mass higher education” in the post World War II decades with the

founding of community colleges and dramatic growth in public four-year colleges

(Goldin, 1999). Resources for higher education were especially plentiful in the two

decades following World War II, a period sometimes referred to as the “Golden Years”

of higher education. One study sites an average annual growth rate of 8% in education



                                               2
and general expenditures per student during the decade of the 1960s (Cheit, 1971). The

reach of public subsidies during this period extended to capital projects as well as current

expenditures, with the number of colleges rising from 1,886 institutions in 1955 to 2,573

in 1970, a rate of almost 1 new institution per week (Finn, 1978).1 Fortunes for colleges

reversed dramatically at the end of the 1960s and through the 1970s, however. The

aggregate link between higher education resources and collegiate attainment is

unmistakable: the proportion of the population completing a BA rose from about 17% for

those born in 1930, representing college-going in the early 1950s, to about 29% for those

born two decades late in 1950. It would be hard to imagine this dramatic change in

attainment without a corresponding increase in public support for higher education. After

the 1951 birth cohort, collegiate attainment declined and then stagnated, before rising

again with cohorts born in the 1960s.

        The link between public funding for higher education and collegiate attainment in

the aggregate time series provides circumstantial evidence that changes in collegiate

resources per student affect student outcomes. The interpretation of this time series

evidence is, however, open to question -- it is possible that expenditures may have been

responding to increases in the demand for a college education rather than the other way

around. This paper uses variation in the size of the college-age cohorts within states to



        1
           The period from 1950 to 1970 brought about an enormous expansion in the “capital stock” of the
college and university system. Federal and state support were integral in building the physical capital of
colleges and universities, in addition to providing subsidies for operating expenses.. For example, the
contribution from federal government sources to plant fund accumulation increased from $12.3 million
dollars in 1950 to $333.7 million in 1966, while state funds increased from $285.2 million dollars in 1950
to $738.7 million in 1966. These data are from Table 129 of the 1972 Digest of Education Statistics, with
the Department of Education Surveys “Financial Statistics of Institutions of Higher Education” providing
the original source. In addition to the direct grants from the federal government over this interval, the
federal government also provided access to substantial (subsidized) loan funds through the Housing Act
until 1969.


                                                    3
generate plausibly exogenous variation in the availability of higher education resources

per student and to measure the effects on collegiate attainment

       Because only part of any observed change in current expenditures is likely to be

exogenous and expenditures translate to resources with long lags, direct assessment of the

effect of resources per student on degree outcomes using measures of current

expenditures or state appropriations is not appropriate. As an alternative, we focus on the

effects of “crowding out” brought about by relatively large cohorts within states vying for

a limited number of spaces in the higher education sector. Increases in the college-age

population shift out the higher education demand function. Yet, in the absence of

complete per capita adjustment in educational subsidies, increasing enrollment demand is

likely to reduce educational resources per student in aggregate. When an increase in

cohort size is not accompanied by a proportionate increase in resources, large cohorts are

essentially “crowded out” of the higher education sector. To this end, plausibly

exogenous variation in cohort size leads to a test of how the availability of resources at

the college and university level affects collegiate attainment.

       Within state and year, we find a strong negative association between cohort size

and college completion rates. Our preferred estimates suggest that a 10% increase in the

size of the college-age population leads to a 4% decrease in college completion rates

within states. Whether the reductions in college completion rates among large cohorts

are caused by declines in the college-preparedness of large cohorts on the demand side of

the higher education market or limitations in the adjustment of colleges and universities

is important to the understanding of the ‘production’ of education and the determinants of




                                              4
the supply of college-educated workers.2 We present compelling evidence that limited

adjustment among colleges and universities on the supply-side of the higher education

market is the primary cause of the relative reduction in attainment (“crowding out”)

among large cohorts.

         The first section of this analysis sets forth the defining characteristics of the

market for higher education in the context of a rudimentary but illustrative model. The

high degree of public subsidy, the mixed market of public and non-profit providers, and

the differentiated nature of the product in higher education lead to adjustments along both

quality and quantity dimensions in response to demand shocks. As a result, the predicted

change in undergraduate degree attainment is ultimately less than proportionate to the

change in cohort size, which can be thought of as a direct measure of the effect of

resources on collegiate attainment. The second section turns to the measurement of

variation within states over time in cohort size and the effect of this variable on collegiate

attainment. The third section focuses more directly on the nature of adjustments in higher

education by type of institution and the link between current revenues available to higher

education and cohort size. In the fourth section, we assess the empirical strength of the

alternative explanation that larger cohorts may have lower demand for college if college

preparedness (e.g., pre-collegiate achievement) is also connected to cohort size; but we

find such demand-side factors account for little of the reduction in college completion

among large cohorts. The basic finding is that the incomplete adjustment of resources in

response to population changes leads to a substantial reduction in collegiate attainment

rates.

         2
          That within-state growth in cohort size is negatively related to collegiate attainment is an
established result in the empirical literature (Card and Lemieux (2000) also record this relationship using



                                                      5
        The conclusion is clear: resources matter in the production of higher education.

Changes in the funding for public colleges and universities have a large impact on both

the quantity and the quality of college graduates in the country. Reductions in state

appropriations limit the flow of resources to higher education and reduce collegiate

attainment, ultimately lowering the long-term supply of college-educated workers in the

labor market.


I. The Market for Higher Education and Responses to Demand Shocks

        Subsidies in the University Marketplace

        The substantial levels of private and public subsidies in the market for higher

education have fundamental effects on the “quantity” of collegiate attainment and the

“quality” (or resource intensity) of this product. State colleges and universities expanded

markedly in the immediate post-war years and are integral to the overall production of

college education in the United States. The share of undergraduate degrees awarded by

public institutions has increased from about 50% in 1947 to about 65% in the 2003-2004

academic year, while the share of total college enrollment (including enrollment at sub-

baccalaureate institutions) is even higher at about 79% in the fall of 2004.

        State colleges and universities provide the majority of higher education

enrollment opportunities to their residents at a steep discount in price, made possible

through substantial public subsidies. Table 1 summarizes the role of state appropriations

in the current revenue stream of colleges and universities. Notably, state and local

support accounted for 57.5% of current revenues at the public community colleges and

more than 36% of revenues at comprehensive four-year institutions. Although the share


Census and CPS data).


                                             6
of state support (30%) is somewhat lower at public research universities, the levels tend

to be higher, and these institutions also rely on a range of other non-tuition revenues,

including resources from private donations and research support from the federal

government. Overall, the data in this table show that tuition payments fall far short of

covering total educational costs.3

         As shown in the final columns of Table 1, there are substantial differences in

tuition prices between in-state and out-of-state tuition charges4 and between private and

public institutions. For this reason, public colleges and universities within a potential

student’s state of residence are the institutions determining the choice set for students

likely to be at the margin of college enrollment and completion. Private institutions,

particularly the selective colleges and research universities, also rely heavily on non-

tuition sources of revenue, including donations and income from endowment.

Nevertheless, the selective private institutions with substantial subsidies enroll a very

small share of the undergraduate population.5

         Non-tuition revenue affects the tradeoff between enrollment and resources per

student faced by colleges and universities and is critical to explaining how these

institutions respond to changes in the demand for higher education. We develop a model

that applies to a range of colleges and universities, including open-access institutions,

         3
           Estimates by Winston mentioned earlier place the degree of subsidy even higher because
conventional statements of revenues and expenses for colleges and universities fail to account for capital
costs (both depreciation and the opportunity cost of funds), which account for an average of 25% of
educational costs.
         4
           For 2005-2006, the average ratio of in-state tuition to out-of-state tuition at state flagship
universities was .37, amounting to an average tuition price difference of $10,558; in states where there is
considerable demand for out-of-state students, differences between in-state and out-of-state undergraduate
charges are much larger, with differences of $19,882 and $18,388 in Colorado and Michigan, respectively
for 2005-2006 (Washington State Higher Education Coordinating Board, 2006).
         5
           While the state-level is the appropriate unit of analysis for the consideration of the collegiate
attainment of students likely to be at the margin of degree attainment, the most competitive level of



                                                     7
flagship universities, and private colleges. Variation among institutions in mission and

objectives, as well as resources, produce somewhat different predicted behavioral

adjustments by type of institution.

         Theoretical Motivation

         On the supply side of the market, colleges and universities combine their own

resources with the energies of their students to produce collegiate attainment. University

revenues, representing the sum of tuition, fees, and public and private subsidies, are used

to purchase inputs like faculty, libraries and dormitories. The essential choices made by

the colleges and universities are the number of students to admit and enroll and the level

of resources to invest per student, subject to the university’s own budget constraint and

the level of student demand, which is a function of the quality (or resource intensity) of

the education offered. Generating more money either through tuition revenues or

subsidies implies having more resources to spend on instruction. When the non-tuition

share of revenues does not vary proportionately with the number of students, enrolling

more students necessarily implies spreading these resources more thinly. In short, with

the presence of non-tuition revenue, colleges and universities face a quality-quantity

tradeoff in response to an increase in the number of students wishing to enroll at the

prevailing price.

         Student demand varies, as usual, with price – the higher the price, ceteris paribus,

the lower the share of the population attending college. Demand also varies with the

subsidy per student (L/n, where L is the total non-tuition revenue and n is enrollment), as

students would clearly prefer to pay a given price to attend an institution with more


colleges and universities (e.g., Stanford University, Harvard University) define a highly integrated and
national market that is unlikely to include students at the margin of college enrollment (Hoxby, 2000).


                                                     8
resources devoted to their education.6 We introduce the inverse demand function

  L n
T( ,    ) , which is positive in the first argument and negative in the enrollment rate
  n pop

                                       n 7
among college-age students (              ).
                                      pop

         Much about the behavior of colleges and universities can be inferred from the

non-distribution constraint, which applies to both public and private non-profit

institutions of higher education and requires that there be no residual shareholders.8 Most

                                                  L n
generally, the nondistribution constraint is: nT ( ,    ) − nc(q ) + L = 0 ,9 where c(q)
                                                  n pop

reflects per-student costs as a function of quality (or resources), with c’(q)>0 and total

costs of n c(q). It follows that the per-student cost of the quality of education provided is

simply equal to tuition plus the per-student subsidy (L/n). Although the presentation of

tuition revenue as endogenous (determined by the inverse demand function for college

enrollment) may capture the circumstances of some private institutions, it is unlikely to



         6
            Comparison of tuition levels among private institutions makes this point clear. In 2005-2006,
Tufts University had tuition and required fee charges of $32,621 while Harvard University posted tuition
and fees of $32,092. With an endowment of $25.4 billion at Harvard relative to the Tufts endowment of
$845 million, it should be no surprise that demand revealed by application behavior is greater at Harvard
than at Tufts.
          7
            This inverse demand curve should be thought of as institution specific. Institution-specific
demand is not infinitely elastic with respect to either tuition levels or quality because individual institutions
have considerable market power.
          8
            This model builds on Hansmann’s (1981) effort to illustrate the potential quality-quantity choice
for a performing arts organization when private donations depend on the quality of the presentation.
Implicitly we are assuming constant returns to scale, which we think of as a reasonable assumption for the
long run. Also, we focus only on the choices surrounding undergraduate education, though one might
rightly consider other educational outputs such as research or graduate education.
          9
            In some states, a component of state funding for higher education depends on enrollment. For
simplicity, we have ignored this fact. What is important is the L rises less than proportionately with n and
this is always true. The model explains the response of students and college administrations to changes in
the size of the college-age population. Additionally, one might imagine that the cost of producing a given
level of quality, c, would depend not just on the level of quality produced, but also on enrollment rates – as
enrollment rates rise, selectivity falls. Letting c be a function of q and n/pop, rather than just q, would
complicate without changing the basic story.


                                                        9
apply to public colleges and universities where state legislators and governors have

considerable sway in the determination of tuition.10

         The nonlinear constraint showing the tradeoff between enrollment and resources

per student provides much of the intuition for analyzing the institutional adjustment to a

demand shock. The constraint, illustrated in Figure 1 for the case in which tuition is

determined exogenously, is nonlinear and asymptotes at the level of quality equal to

tuition, as the number of students enrolled goes to infinity.11 At low levels of enrollment,

the price of expansion is high as the relative change in per-student resource subsidy is

substantial. At higher levels of enrollment (and lower levels of quality), the quantity-

quality tradeoff is less pronounced as per-student subsidy becomes a tiny piece of the cost

of education for any individual student.

         Universities face a choice in the production of college education, implicitly

weighing a tradeoff between the quantity variable (or the output of the enrollment

decision) and the resources spent per student. How colleges and universities weigh this

tradeoff depends on their specific “mission” (e.g., the University of Michigan has been

given different objectives by the state than Central Michigan University) and their initial

levels of endowment or fixed subsidy. We assume that institutions maximize an objective

function that includes both quantity (n) and quality (q) components – U(n,q) subject to

the constraint nT − nc (q ) + L = 0 .


         10
             A survey of State Higher Education Executive Officers finds that legislatures in 10 states
explicitly set tuition in practice or in statute (Christal, 1997). In other states, tuition determination is
generally the responsibility of governing boards or state higher education authorities, with these authorities
often composed of political appointees (Kane, Orszag, and Gunter, 2003).
          11
             The basic “shape” of the constraint would be the same with the endogenous treatment of tuition
though the slope would be steeper and the function would “flatten” at a greater rate. With tuition fixed, the
                                                                       ∂c(q ) − L      1       L
slope of the constraint is − L / n , while endogenous tuition yields
                                 2
                                                                             = 2 T1 +     T2 − 2 .
                                                                        ∂n    n       pop     n


                                                     10
       There is no reason to believe that the objective function is the same across all

universities or that all universities and colleges have access to generous non-tuition

revenues. Some institutional leaders may have ambitions to upgrade quality while others

may find rewards (or requirements from the state) in maximizing enrollment. How

quality and enrollment adjust to changes in demand, driven by population variation or by

changes in subsidy, brought about by state fiscal shocks will depend on the objective

function governing the behavior of the university and the level of subsidy available to the

university. At one extreme, potentially representative of the public research universities,

institutions weigh the tradeoff between quantity and quality directly and choose to

operate at the tangency between the institutional indifference curve and the

nondistribution constraint (illustrated in the top panel of Figure 1). In such a situation,

enrollment may be independent of student demand (with the demand function crossing

the constraint at or to the right of the tangency). Shifts in demand do not change the

optimal enrollment-quality choice of the institution, but rather lead to or exacerbate the

condition of excess demand.

       In the alternative case where institutions simply maximize enrollment, the level of

enrollment (and the quality of the collegiate experience) is determined at the intersection

of the demand function and the constraint in quality-enrollment space. Without

compensating increases in subsidy (L), which would shift out the constraint, the shift in

demand occurs along a function with declining resources per student, leading to a less

than proportionate increase in enrollment demand. This is illustrated in Figure 1 (bottom

panel); along the downward sloping part of the constraint, the change in enrollment will

be less than the shift in demand. What is more, quality (resources per student) declines as




                                              11
quantity (enrollment) increases along the constraint. Note that, in addition to the decline

in enrollment, this decline in resources per student will have a negative effect on

collegiate attainment so long as resources are an input in the collegiate production

process.

       The implication of the model is clear: unless resources increase to match changes

in demand, increases in cohort size are likely to lead to lower proportional levels of

college enrollment and completion. Increases in cohort size will lead to reductions in the

share of the cohort receiving BA (undergraduate) degrees because colleges and

universities must trade resources per student, which include substantial subsidies, for

larger enrollments. The extent to which institutions respond to changes in cohort size

with adjustments in resources per student, tuition price, and enrollment will depend

significantly on the mission and control of the college and university. In this section, we

highlight the circumstances of public institutions because they enroll the largest share of

higher education students and are central to the market; yet, for reasons given, the basic

insights apply more broadly to all non-profit colleges and universities.

       While the magnitude of the response to an increase in cohort size in terms of

collegiate output – measured by degrees awarded – will vary with institutional

                                   ∂ ln BA
circumstance, the model predicts            < 1 at the state level in the presence of non-
                                   ∂ ln Pop

tuition revenues that are invariant to cohort size. The strength of this effect will depend

on where the institution begins on the budget constraint (e.g., on the steep portion where

the quantity / quality tradeoff is high) and how resources contribute to the transformation

of enrollment to degree attainment.




                                             12
II. Cohort Size and College Completion within States

         Our empirical approach begins with the measurement of the relationship between

cohort size and college completion within states. States are a natural unit of analysis

because public institutions of higher education are largely under the control of state

governments. By looking at changes within states over time, we abstract from broad

national changes. While aggregate adjustments in cohort size may affect the returns to

college, within-state variation in cohort size should not affect returns in the presence of

nationally integrated labor markets.12

         The empirical analysis in this section focuses on the measurement of the elasticity

of college completion, defined as the log of BA degrees awarded, with respect to cohort

size. The state is the unit of analysis and all specifications include state and year fixed

effects. Thus, regression estimates of collegiate attainment of a cohort on cohort size

examine whether the collegiate outcome of a cohort differs when that state and cohort’s

population changes at a rate different from the national norm.

         Given our interest in how cohort size affects the resources available to those

considering college attendance, it is natural to measure cohort size at a point when

individuals would typically attend college (age 18). We would then like to be able to

calculate the fraction of these cohorts that eventually receive a BA degree. Such data do

not exist. Measures are available from colleges and universities enumerating the number

         12
            Larger cohorts may experience somewhat lower returns to education if the substitution between
younger and older workers among the college educated is less than complete, thus reducing incentives to
complete college in aggregate. A long research literature (e.g., Welch, 1979; Stapleton and Young, 1988)
focuses on the question of how adjustments of the labor market to relatively large cohorts affect incentives
to invest in education for relatively large cohorts. Using Census data, we find no evidence of variation in
state-specific college/high school wage differentials with cohort size. In addition, while state specific
cohort size is (negatively) associated with state specific unemployment rates, we also find no evidence of
any association between unemployment and college completion rates (see also Card and Lemieux, 2000;




                                                     13
of degrees conferred each year (we refer to this as “institutional data”). Alternatively, the

decennial Census allows researchers to calculate degree completion by state of birth, but

does not identify state of residence at age 18. Using both sources of data allows us to

check the potential effect of the differences between the two data sets on our estimates of

crowding.

         We begin with the presentation of results based on institutional data and then turn

to results employing Census data. Finally, we discuss possible explanations for the

differences between the two sets of results. In the main, results using Census and

institutional data tell a very similar story: increases in cohort size are not accompanied by

commensurate increases in collegiate attainment.



Results Based on Institutional Data

         Table 2 begins the empirical analysis with the estimation of the elasticity of

college completion, defined as the log of BA degrees awarded, with respect to cohort

size, defined as the size of the population age 18 within the state four years earlier.13

Estimates are presented for two periods: 1954-1996 and 1967-1996. Columns (1) and (2)

show that the elasticity of college completion at all institutions with respect to cohort size

is significantly less than one, varying from .71 to .62 depending on the period of

observation. In addition, the estimate in column (3) for the effect of cohort size at age 18

on the number of degrees awarded by public institutions is broadly similar to the estimate




Fitzpatrick and Turner, 2006). These estimates suggest that the primary effect of variation in state-specific
college-age population size on college completion rates cannot be working through labor market incentives.
         13
            Thus, for example, we related BA’s produced in Michigan in 1990 to the size of the 18 year old
population in the state in 1986. The choice of this four year lag was dictated by the fact that 22 is the
modal age at which individuals receive their BA in the U.S.


                                                     14
of overall effect (.59 vs. .62) over the period for which this distinction is possible.14

Another variable of interest in measuring higher educational attainment is enrollment.

Enrollment represents an “input” to educational attainment while degrees awarded are an

outcome. For this reason, we regard degrees received rather than enrollment as our

primary outcome and would expect effects of cohort size on enrollment to be more muted

than the effects on degree completion. Using measures of total enrollment presents a

story similar to the regressions for degree outcomes. With the log of total enrollment as

the outcome in columns (4)-(6) of Table 2, estimates of the elasticity with respect to

cohort size are larger for enrollment (0.89 and 0.79), while still appreciably less than one

in all of the specifications.

         Figure 2 plots per-year cohort size and BA production from 1950 to 1995 for

selected states. (Similar figures for all states appear in the appendix). It is important to

note that while the regressions we reported in Table 2 took out year effects, much of the

observed variation in these figures represents the growth and decline of the overall size of

the college-aged population. For each of the states shown, the 1950s and 1960s saw a

very dramatic rise in both cohort size and the number of individuals receiving BA

degrees. However, around 1970 BA production leveled off and remained approximately

constant in the subsequent 25 years, despite an expansion in cohort size through the

1980s and a drop in cohort size thereafter. The figures give the strong impression of

capacity constraints and the absence of full elasticity in supply. During the 1950s and

1960s many states were investing heavily in higher education. As a result, capacity,


         14
           Following Fortin (2003), one might be concerned that the market adjustments in states with
smaller private higher education sectors would be different from those in states with larger private higher
education sectors. Interacting cohort size with an indicator for states with public higher education
enrollment below the median does not yield a significant effect.


                                                     15
enrollments, and BA production expanded rapidly. Starting in the 1970s, investments

leveled off and capacity and enrollments remained relatively fixed.

       The pattern observed in Figure 2 suggests that, while BA production might not

have dropped much during periods when cohort size was shrinking, it would increase

during periods when cohort size was increasing. This kind of asymmetric pattern of

adjustment might arise if it were politically harder to shrink than to expand higher

education. To check on this notion, we re-estimated our regression models using the

period before and after 1970. The point estimates suggest that, if anything, crowding out

(i.e., the less-than-proportional increase in BA production relative to cohort size) was

more severe before 1970s than it was after, though the difference was not statistically

significant. More generally, our results do not depend on the period or set of years

chosen for analysis.

       Still, there are a number of reasons why the institutional measure of BA

production regressed on cohort size at age 18 might tend to exaggerate the magnitude of

cohort crowding. It would not be too surprising to find that being born into a large (state-

specific) cohort would tend to increase the odds that a person went out of state to attend

college or temporarily postponed going to college. In either case our estimates based on

the institutional data, would overstate the magnitude of the effect of cohort size on

college completion (crowding). The Residence and Migration survey, which has been

conducted periodically by the Department of Education since the 1940s, provides some

information on enrollment by state of residence and college. We estimate the elasticity of

total enrollment at the state level with respect to population [0.61 (0.11)] and the

elasticity of enrollment of state residents with respect to population [0.62 (0.08)]. If




                                              16
increased out-of-state enrollment were a substantial part of the response to cohort

expansion, we would see larger elasticities (closer to 1) for enrollment of state residents

than for total enrollment in the state. Yet, the elasticities for these two measures are

virtually identical. The available empirical evidence does not support the notion that

relatively large cohorts of college students are “absorbed” by neighboring states. In fact,

it appears that the enrollment behavior of state residents is closely tied to in-state college

opportunities, with elasticities very close to the estimates using the full panel of BA

degree data in Table 2.15

         In addition, it seems plausible that time to degree may tend to rise with cohort

size. If college-age individuals in large cohorts face fewer resources, they may find

college less attractive, and marginal students might delay college enrollment.16 What is

more, fewer resources might translate into slower progress while in school. Empirically,

calculations using the Current Population Survey suggest that increasing cohort size does

increase the age at degree receipt17, though the magnitude of this effect is by no means

large enough to explain the overall effect on completion rates. One concern is that, in the

institutional measures of degree attainment, increases in time to degree will tend to bias

estimates of the effect of cohort size on the number of BAs produced per cohort; yet,

such errors should be offsetting as time to degree expands and contracts with cohort


         15
             Focusing on just the flagships schools, we do find that out-of-state enrollment tends to fall in the
face of large cohorts; however this effect is small enough and the flagship schools represent a small enough
share of total enrollment, that this pattern hardly shows up when we combine data on all colleges and
universities.
          16
             If shifts in population size occurred at fairly high frequency, individuals who are part of
particularly large cohorts might find it optimal to postpone college for several years. However, this kind of
substitution is unlikely to be plausible in large scale as, as we will see, most of the movements in cohort
size observed occur at relatively low frequency. Moreover, such inter-temporal adjustment would likely
reduce the number of years over which an individual would get the benefits of a college education, thus
reducing the return to the degree.
          17
             Falaris and Peters (1992) find similar patterns using NLS and PSID data.


                                                       17
size.18 All in all, we doubt these inter-temporal substitution effects have much effect on

our estimates.

         We should note that with the census data we can directly measure cohort

completion rates. As a result, effects of cohort size on the location or timing of degree

completion will not affect our estimates of the relationship between cohort size and

degree completion.

Results Based on Census Data

         An alternative way to measure the effect of cohort size on degree completion

employs Census micro data on BA completion rates, organized by state of birth withbirth

cohort size as the relevant demographic variable.19 Using alternative data sources serves

to underscore the reliability of our results while necessarily answering somewhat

different questions. Table 3 presents estimates of the effects of cohort size (measured in

terms of year and state of birth) on degree completion using Census data, along with

         18
              A simple example will illustrate. Suppose that the fraction of a cohort ultimately receiving a BA
remains constant, but cohort size grows at a rate of 1% per year. Also suppose that, as a result of the
increase in cohort size, the age at which individuals typically receive their BA rises from 22 to 23 years
over a 10-year period. During this period we would observe an approximate 10% increase in the size of the
population, but only a 9% increase in the size of the number of BAs. As a result, we would underestimate
  ln(BA) / ln(Pop) by about 10% – or estimate crowd out when none exists. This example might make it
seem as if the data we are using will lead us to overestimate crowd out effects. However, if one runs this
thought experiment in reverse, one sees that during periods of declining cohort size (and decreased time to
degree), we will tend to overestimate ln(BA) / ln(Pop). Since the variables we use in our regressions are
all deviations from year and state means, some states will be experiencing increases in cohort size (relative
to the mean), while others are experiencing decreases in cohort size, and the bias introduced by the fact that
we are using period rather than cohort measures will tend to cancel out.
           19
              Note that when we use Census micro data organized by state and year of birth to measure the
college completion rates, the regression estimates with the dependent variable specified as a completion
rate (ln[BA/N]) are not equal to the specification in levels (ln[BA]) minus one. The reason is that that the
denominator in the measure of the completion rate, a measure of cohort size calculated from the micro data,
is not identical to the population measure from Vital Statistics sources. What we observe in the data is a
negative correlation between the error (the difference in the measures) and the measure of population from
the Vital Statistics source. While the simple correlation between the population measure from the Vital
Statistics and the population measure from the Census micro data is 0.996, a regression of the Census
measure on the Vital Statistics measure (both measured in logs), produces a coefficient of .952 (.0127). The
result is that regression estimates using the Census micro data in levels will produce estimates suggesting a




                                                      18
estimates of the effects on degrees conferred using the institutional data for comparison.

Because the dependent variable for the Census-based estimates is the cohort share

(fraction with a BA) while for the institutional-based results it is the number of BAs,

subtracting one from the latter results will put these two estimates on the same footing.

Regressions of the share of the population born in each state and year with a BA degree

on cohort size (this time measured with cohort size at the year of birth) show a substantial

decline in college completion shares with changes in cohort size. The magnitude of the

estimated decline when using the Census data is somewhat smaller than the magnitude of

the decline when using the institutional data – that is -0.26 or -0.24 versus -0.34 or –0.29,

but the differences between the point estimates are not qualitatively important, nor are

they statistically significant.20

         To address the potential concern that the identification of the effect of within-state

changes in cohort size on degree attainment is entirely a reflection of broad demographic

shifts, we add state-specific linear trends to the baseline specification. Results are

reported in the even-numbered columns of Table 3. While including state-specific trends

in the specifications using Census data tends to weaken the evidence for “crowding out,”

doing so in the specifications using institutional data strengthens it, though perhaps

implausibly (even columns, bottom row of Table 3). Understanding the large difference

between the results based on the institutional data and the Census data with the inclusion

of state-specific trends would certainly seem to be important. Possible explanations


lower elasticity of completion with respect to population than related estimates with the dependent variable
specified as a completion rate.
         20
            These estimates are quite similar to those presented in Card and Lemieux (2000). Depending on
the specification and cohorts used in their regressions, they estimate a 10% increase in cohort size is
associated with a decline in college completion of between 0.4 and 0.8 percentage points for men and
between 0.3 and 0.6 percentage points for women. To convert these estimates into elasticities, one needs to




                                                    19
include differences between the two in the timing of the cohort-size variable and the

potential for significant measurement error in the state-specific measure of population at

age 18.

          Given our maintained hypothesis that the primary reason for the association

between cohort size and college completion rates involves cohort crowding at colleges

and universities, the right measure of cohort size is the cohort size during the typical

college going years. Cohort size at birth can then be thought of as an error-ridden proxy

for cohort size 18 years later. Under the assumption that the variable we wanted to

include in these regression was the size of the population in a person’s state of residence

when the person was in high school, we use Census data to calculate the magnitude of the

attenuation bias associated with using the size of the population in the person’s state of

residence at birth. To do this we use data on 15-17 year olds in the 1960-1990 Census

and regress the log of current state-specific cohort size on the log of the person’s state

specific birth cohort size, controlling for state and year effects. The coefficient on the

birth cohort variable in these regressions is 0.56 (0.10), implying a downward bias if

44%. Once state specific trends are included in the regression, the coefficient drops to

0.30 (0.06), implying a downward bias of 70%. We use these estimates to adjust our

Census-based estimates, with corrected estimates reported in the second row of Table 3.

These corrected results are remarkably consistent across specifications and years – the

estimates imply that a 10% increase in state specific cohort size reduces college

completion rates by about 4%. The corrected Census based estimates are also similar in




divide by the average fraction receiving a BA in these cohorts – somewhat more than 0.2 for men and
somewhat less than 0.2 for women.


                                                   20
magnitude to the estimates based on institutional data that do not include state-specific

trends.

          Because including state-specific trends eliminates more than 80% of the variation

in our key explanatory variable, one natural hypothesis is that the introduction of state-

specific trends seriously exacerbates the impact of measurement error in our cohort size

measures on outcomes. The intercensal estimates of cohort size at age 18 are based on

imputations that, importantly, involve Census estimates of migration flows, which may

reflect divergence from the actual level of the population within a state in a given year.21

Gauging the direct effect of these errors on our estimates would be difficult if not

impossible. Notably, the Vital Statistic data that we use to construct the birth cohort size

variables used in our analysis of Census data does not suffer from the same kind of

measurement error problems generated by imputation.

          Regressions that use institutional measures of degree attainment (without state-

specific trends) produce estimates of the effect of cohort size on college completion that

are close to the ones we obtain using Census data adjusted for the imperfect link between

cohort size at birth and the size of cohorts at the time of college entry. With this

adjustment, Census-based estimates produce nearly the same estimated elasticity of

college completion with and without state-specific trends, and these point estimates

actually suggest slightly more crowding than those estimates relying on institutional data.

Overall, these results are consistent with the interpretation that the “crowding” that

matters occurs at the collegiate level.

          21
          Some evidence on the magnitude of the errors introduced by the census imputations comes from
comparing estimates based on imputations to estimates based on actual enumerations. Comparisons
between Census projections of the college-age population in each state in 2000 benchmarked to the 1990




                                                 21
Understanding the Variation in our Population Measures

        Geographic shifts in the location of economic activity in the U.S. generate

migration across states, with regions in the South and West growing much more rapidly

than those in the North East and North Central, and generate much of the variation in the

cohort size measures. Geographic mobility of adults of childbearing age and those with

children generates changes in the size of the pool of potential college-age students

within-states some years later. Indeed, the within-state-and-year correlation between the

size of the 18-year old population and employment (both measured in logs) is 0.72 (the

correlation between the size of the birth cohort and employment is 0.67).

        To get a perspective on the time series properties or our population measures, we

employ Fourier decomposition following Baker, Benjamin, and Stanger (1999), and we

find the vast majority of the total variation in the data in the low frequency range.22

Indeed, with either population variable, over two-thirds of the variance occurs at the

lowest two frequencies identified in the data (frequencies corresponding to periods of 44

and 22 years), before state specific trends are taken out. Even with the inclusion of state

specific trends, three-fifths of the variation occurs as the lowest two frequencies.

        State-specific shifts in the size of the college-age population tend to be slow and

steady and are, as a result, highly predictable. The predictable nature of changes in the

size of the college-age population within states and the observation that growing states

may experience less budgetary pressure would, at the surface, mitigate against findings of


enumeration to counts from the 2000 enumeration show an average gap of roughly 4%, with some errors
being as large as 20%!
         22
            With 43 years of data (1954-1996), we employ the Fourier decomposition to divide the measure
of cohort size into 22 orthogonal components at varying frequencies (from 0 to ) according to:




                                                  22
substantial crowding out at the postsecondary level. That such effects exist, given the

nature of the variation in cohort size, point to the importance of substantial capital

subsidies in higher education and the limited degree of supply-side adjustments at those

institutions like research universities.



III. Cohort Size and Collegiate Supply-Side Responses

          To understand the mechanism behind the limited adjustment of collegiate

attainment with increases in cohort size, we consider the potential supply-side

adjustments of colleges and universities. Potential margins of adjustment include price

(tuition) and resources per student, with changes in these avenues potentially differing by

type of institution.

          Tuition adjustments

          For public institutions, tuition covers such a small fraction of total costs and there

is such an unusual link between political actors at the state level and public colleges and

universities that tuition (price) may not serve as a plausible channel for adjustment to

demand shocks and other market forces. Indeed, the evidence from regressions of the

tuition charged to in-state students by public colleges and universities on cohort size

points clearly in the other direction: a 10% increase in cohort size is associated with a

2.7% decrease in tuition at the state comprehensive schools and 4.2% decrease at flagship

institutions. As in previous specifications, these regressions include state and year fixed

effects. Since there were secular increases in tuition at state schools over the period under

study, the right way to think about these results is that they suggest that tuition rose less


          21
                               k (t − 1)               k (t − 1)
LnPop =          (ξ k cos(2π             ) +γ k sin(2π           )). The parameters   k   and   k   are estimated in a regression for
          k =0                    43                      43



                                                                     23
rapidly in states that experienced population growth over the period in question.23 It is

only among the non-research private institutions that we see a positive link between

tuition and cohort size.

         Non-tuition revenue sources

         Beyond tuition levels, we consider the relationship between cohort size and other

sources of revenue, including federal support and appropriations from state sources. Not

surprisingly, variation in federal support to colleges and universities is quite inelastic

with changes in cohort size, with an elasticity of about 0.27 (0.19), net of state and year

fixed effects for the interval from 1950-1996. State appropriations demonstrate a bit

more adjustment to cohort size, with an elasticity of 0.58 (0.11).24 This estimate is

remarkably similar to the estimates we report in Tables 2 and 3 of the effect of cohort

size on college completion rates, which is consistent with our notion that the source of

these effects is college resources.25 While we do not have a full series, it seems

implausible that private philanthropy would adjust perfectly to changes in cohort size.

Given the overall enrollment elasticities in Table 2, it is clear that non-tuition revenue

sources per student decline in the face of increases in cohort size.

         Differences by type of institution




each state, leading to the estimate of each of the 22 Fourier components for each state and year.
          23
             When state employment is included in the regression, the effect of cohort size on tuition
approaches zero, with increases in state employment having a substantial negative effect on tuition prices.
These results would seem to confirm the notion that states tend to raise tuitions when state economies are in
trouble and state budgets are tight.
          24
             The measures of state appropriations used in these regressions are from the Department of
Education’s institutional survey of college and university finances which extends from 1950 to 1996.
Measures of state appropriations from state-based finance surveys, which are available only after 1960, are
strongly correlated and yield a slightly smaller elasticity with respect to cohort size.
          25
             As these estimates suggest, a regression of the log of the number BA degrees awarded on the
log of state appropriations (including state and year effects), using cohort size as an instrument, yields an
estimated coefficient that is close to and not statistically distinguishable from 1.


                                                     24
        Variation in relative adjustments in resources and enrollment across institution

types is to be expected from the differences in the objective functions of colleges and

universities. Community colleges and four-year institutions with modest admission

requirements tend to place “access” at the center of their mission, attempting to provide

enrollment opportunities for all applicants who meet minimum qualifications. At the

other extreme, research universities and liberal arts colleges are likely to emphasize the

role of student quality and resources per student as they make choices at the margin

between quality and quantity. These considerations suggest that we should find

substantial accommodation among two-year institutions to changes in cohort size and

little accommodation (and, perhaps, a ratcheting up of selectivity) among universities.

        The regression results in Table 4 show the elasticity of enrollment and BA

completion with respect to cohort size (measured at age 18) by type of institution. In the

public sector, we distinguish community colleges, flagship institutions (the highest

ranked public university in the state), and other four-year institutions. In addition to

presenting the total for all private institutions, we distinguish the unique and highly

subsidized set of research universities and liberal arts colleges. At one extreme, cohort

size has a coefficient that is close to 1 at the two-year colleges, indicating that at these

institutions enrollment levels fluctuate markedly with changes in cohort size. Among

public institutions awarding at least a BA degree, the flagship institutions are much less

responsive in degrees awarded and enrollment to changes in cohort size than the other

four-year institutions. At the other extreme, the elasticity of enrollment with respect to

cohort size is close to zero at the private liberal arts colleges and universities. (If these

institutions are in fact operating in a national rather than regional market, then they would




                                               25
not face demand shocks at the state level – e.g., if there is a 10% population shock in

New Jersey, the change in applications to Princeton would be appreciably less than the

change in applications to Rutgers.)

        The likelihood of completing college differs markedly with the institution where

an individual starts in the higher education pipeline, even after accounting for

composition differences between the student bodies. Perhaps the most visible margin of

differences in completion rates occurs between the two-year and four-year institutions.

Reynolds (2006) finds that college students starting at two-year schools with the intention

of completing a BA and observable characteristics paralleling students at four-year

schools are much less likely to complete the BA than their peers beginning at four-year

schools.26 The probability of completing a BA is 0.48 for men, relative to 0.62 among

students starting at four-year institutions, and 0.59 for women, relative to 0.76 among

students starting at four-year institutions. It follows that part of the effect of cohort size

on college completion rates works through the effect of cohort size on the nature of the

institutions students attend, with larger cohorts pushing a higher share of college students

to community colleges and open-access four-year institutions which tend to be more

limited in resources per student than state flagship universities.

IV. Changes in College Preparedness and Compositional Changes

        Within states, large cohorts are less likely to complete college than relatively

small cohorts. As discussed, adjustments on the supply side of the market provide one

explanation for this result. An alternative explanation is that changes in the demand for

college may be reduced among relatively large cohorts if college preparation is also




                                              26
linked to cohort size. At issue in this analysis is whether results we attribute to

adjustments on the supply-side of the higher education market are instead related to

demand-side explanations. Two related concerns surface. First, relatively large cohorts

may be distinguished by adverse demographic or economic shocks that have direct

effects on collegiate attainment. For example, if big cohorts are distinguished by low

parental education or large family size, such “compositional effects” might account for

reduced college completion rather than crowding out on the supply side of the market.

Secondly, membership in a relatively large birth cohort may dilute educational resources

at the elementary and secondary levels, which would also reduce college preparedness.

Both types of effects imply that the change in college demand may be far less than a

change in cohort size.

        To understand how compositional factors such as race, parental education, and

family size are tied to cohort size, we examined 16 year-olds (as 18 year-olds are less

likely to appear with their parents in the data) and their parental characteristics by state

for the 1970, 1980, and 1990 decennial Census enumerations. Regressions of a particular

parental demographic characteristic (e.g., share black or number of children) on the size

of the 16-year-old population in a state and Census year, with year and state fixed effects,

provides an indication of how changes in cohort size are tied to observed demographic

characteristics. More children in a family imply fewer resources per child, and

educational attainment—both formal and informal—is likely to be negatively affected by

a decrease in the time and financial resources available to each child within the family

(Becker, 1981; Willis, 1973). Similarly, other family characteristics such as maternal

        26
           Reynolds’ finding using matching estimators echoes earlier work using regressions to adjust for
observable differences between those starting at two and four year schools (Rouse (1995), Leigh and Gill



                                                   27
education, family structure, and race may affect the educational resources available

outside of schools.

         For the most part, we find effects that are not statistically significant and

economically small. This applies to measures of family size, parental education, and

ethnicity. When we weight by state size, the only significant effect is on Hispanic

ethnicity, with a coefficient of .27 indicating that a 2.7% increase in the share of college-

age students of Hispanic origin would follow a 10% increase in the size of the 16-year-

old population. Even with the upper end estimates of the effect of Hispanic origin on

college completion, these compositional effects could not explain a sizable share of the

reduction of college completion with increases in cohort size.27

         Individuals in relatively large cohorts may also face diminished resources in

elementary and secondary schools, with these resource effects reducing college

preparedness and completion. Examination of the link between resources per student at

the primary and secondary levels and cohort size helps to place this question in

perspective. First, resources per student are negatively affected by increases in cohort size

at the elementary and secondary levels. Using data for the 1970 to 1995 period, we find

that variation in K-12 enrollment and in average daily attendance is linked to lower levels

of teachers per student, with coefficients -0.18 (0.06) and -0.16 (0.05) respectively which

represent elasticities from the log-log specification.28


(2003), and Sandy, Gonzales and Hilmer, forthcoming) community.
          27
             Additional evidence suggests that the increase in the fraction of the population that is Hispanic
can explain little, if any, of the crowd out effects we estimate. The association between population growth
and the growth in the share of the population that is Hispanic largely reflects secular trends in the
Southwest, trends that are controlled for in our specifications that include state-specific trends.
          28
             Because it is not possible to distinguish enrollments and class size accurately at the grade level,
year and state aggregates over all elementary and secondary (K-12) enrollment form the variables of
interest. Data are from Statistics of State School Systems (1998) for 1970-1995. Average Daily Attendance
is from Table 13, Fall elementary and secondary enrollment is from Table 10, and teachers per student is


                                                      28
          What effect might these changes in resources available to K-12 students have on

college achievement? While an increasing number of research papers find a significant

effect of class size on student achievement (e.g., Krueger, 1999), most of these estimates

measure the effect of lower class size in a single year on achievement. Because we are

interested in the cumulative effects of class size on educational attainment, existing

estimates of the effect of class size on test scores do not provide an appropriate basis for

inference. Instead, following Card and Krueger (1992), we use the average of the

potential pupil-teacher ratio faced by the student in a state. Using measures of collegiate

attainment from Census data, we find significant effects of the teacher-student ratio for

all Census years examined.29 The estimated effect of teacher-student ratio on college

completion for the 1926-1975 birth cohorts in the 2000 Census is large – 0.46 (0.15),

with both collegiate attainment and resources measured in logs. Such evidence is

indicative of reductions in college preparedness associated with resource declines in large

cohorts, but likely represents an upper bound of the causal effect of the teacher student

ratio on attainment because state-level changes in the student-teacher ration are likely

correlated with other policy changes affecting attainment, including lengthening the

school year and investing in higher education.30 Still, combining the effects of enrollment

on resources and resources on degree attainment

            ∂ ln BA           ∂ ln Teachers / Student
(                           ×                         ), suggests that the effect on college
    ∂ ln Teachers / Student           ∂ ln Pop


derived from the Pupil-Teacher Ratio reported in Table 24. The specifications used to estimate these
numbers include state and year effects; adding state specific trends had little impact on the estimates.
          29
             The dependent variable is the share of college graduates in each state and birth cohort, measured
in logarithmic form. Pupil-teacher measures were provided by Alan Krueger and reflect the potential
resources available to students in the K-12 years. All regressions include state and year fixed effects.




                                                     29
completion operating through resources is likely to be quite modest (0.07 to 0.08). While

demand-side effects are plainly not zero, and the impact of cohort size on precollegiate

academic achievement is an interesting question in its own right, these effects are plainly

too small to explain the entire effect of cohort size or resources on collegiate

attainment.31

         Some additional evidence indicates that the cohort size effect on college

preparedness is not the major factor behind the strong negative association between

college completion rates and cohort size. Using data from the College Board’s Annual

Survey of Colleges, which includes institution-level characteristics of the undergraduate

class and admission process from 1986-2000, we found that a 10% increase in a within-

state cohort size was associated with a roughly 1.1 (0.4) percentage point rise in the

fraction of college students with a GPA of 3.0 or better, and a 2.9 /2.7 (0.8/0.7)

percentage point rise in verbal/math SAT scores. Given problems with these data,

including considerable missing data and a relatively short time horizon, we do not want

to overemphasize these results, but they are certainly consistent with the notion that the

dominant factor effecting the negative association between cohort size and college

completion rates is educational crowding out rather than lack of college preparedness.




         30
             See Loeb and Bound (1996) for a more extensive discussion of this issue. In similar fashion
Hanushek, Rivkin and Taylor (1996) argue that state level aggregation is likely to exacerbate omitted
variable bias, leading to an overstatement of causal effects.
          31
             An alternative way to measure the effects of cohort size on college preparedness is to measure
the effect of cohort size on test scores directly. Unfortunately, NAEP scores provide only a limited number
of state-specific observations over time. SAT scores at the state level may suffer from changes in the
selection of the test-taking population over time. Using data on SAT scores at the state level from 1971 to
2000, regressions of test scores on the log of cohort size with state and year fixed effects yields a
coefficient of -43.27 (18.12), implying that a 10% increase in cohort size would lead to a within-state
decrease in scores of less than 4.5 points overall. These effects are modest in magnitude, though indicative
of some reduction in college-preparedness with cohort size. More surprising is the link between the share of



                                                    30
V. Conclusion

         In this paper we have documented substantial cohort crowding effects on college

completion rates – our estimates suggest that a 10% state specific increase in the size of

the college age population leads to a 4% decline in the fraction attaining a BA. Neither

growth in out-of-state enrollment nor expansion of private enrollment is sufficient to

“absorb” the effects of cohort size on enrollment and attainment at public colleges and

universities. The available evidence suggests that this crowding out effect occurs because

public colleges are unable to absorb the increased demand for college education, as

public resources do not increase sufficiently. While it might seem plausible that large

cohorts would reach college age less well prepared to continue their education than small

cohorts, our estimates suggest that neither the effects of declines in school quality in the

elementary and secondary years nor the effects of changes in the composition of the pool

of potential college students associated with large cohorts are nearly large enough to

produce the observed negative relationship between cohort size and college completion.

         On the supply side of the market, the reduction in college completion with cohort

size occurs on two margins. Among institutions, those with the greatest non-tuition

resources per student, such as flagship universities, are the least likely to increase

enrollment to accommodate relatively large cohorts; still, these universities have the

highest levels of college completion. To the extent that the distribution of enrollment

shifts away from these resource-intensive institutions, the college completion rate will

fall. Within public institutions, those that expand to meet population-related shifts in




eligible seniors taking the exam and cohort size, which is positive and significant. One explanation is that
colleges increase requirements for standardized tests with relatively large cohorts.


                                                     31
demand may face reductions in resources per student, further reducing attainment of

enrolled students.

         While it is plain that the well-known cyclical variation in state funding for higher

education may have deleterious effects on public colleges and universities, it is the more

sustained depletion in resources per student accompanying relatively large cohorts that

has the significant impact on collegiate attainment and the supply of college-educated

workers to the economy. In the coming decade, many states are facing large increases in

the college-age population, with serious questions about the capacity of state colleges to

meet enrollment demand for these cohorts.32 Adding to the demographic pressure on

higher education resources created by increasing cohort size are persistently tight state

budget circumstances in which higher education competes with entitlement programs and

the rising cost of healthcare (Kane, Orszag, and Gunter, 2003).

         The impending collision of large cohorts and limited public resources in higher

education is not just a predicament for colleges and universities, but a potential crisis in

economic growth for decades to come if the flow of college-educated workers to the

labor force is further curtailed. Because tuition is a small enough part of the total

revenues of higher education, it would take enormous increases in tuition to provide the

necessary resources for colleges and universities to expand and maintain quality, with

such a shift adversely affecting the level and distribution of enrollment. At issue is how

colleges and universities, particularly in the public sector, can raise resources from non-

tuition sources to expand the pool of collegiate opportunities without diluting quality.


         32
            For example one report estimated that the number of students seeking to enroll at California’s
public colleges would rise by 36% between 2000 and 2010. Former University of California President
Clark Kerr has dubbed this projected increase in demand “Tidal Wave II” as nearly three-quarters of the
projected growth is strictly attributable to population growth (Schmidt, 1999).


                                                     32
While states have, historically, been central to the development of infrastructure and the

provision of subsidy in higher education, the current fiscal constraints and restrictions

against deficit funding may limit the capacity of states to make investments in human

capital through public colleges and universities.




                                             33
                                       References

Baker, Michael, Dwayne Benjamin, Shuchita Stanger. 1999. “The Highs and Lows of the
Minimum Wage Effect: A Time-Series Cross-Section Study of the Canadian Law.”
Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 17, No. 2. (April), pp. 318-350.

Becker, Gary. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Card, David and Alan Krueger. 1992. “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to
Education and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States.” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 100, No. 1, (February) pp. 1-40.

Card, David and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return
to College for Younger Men?” Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 116 No. 2 (May),
pp. 705-746.

Card, David and Thomas Lemieux. 2000. “Dropout and Enrollment Trends in the Post-
War Period: What Went Wrong in the 1970s?” in (J. Gruber, ed.) An Economic Analysis
of Risky Behavior Among Youth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 439-482.

Cheit, Earl. 1971. The New Depression in Higher Education. Berkeley: Carnegie
Commission on Higher Education.

Christal, Melodie. 1997. “State tuition and fee policies, 1996-1997.” Denver: State
Higher Education Executive Officers.

Falaris, Evangelos M. and H. Elizabeth Peters. 1992. “Schooling Choices and
Demographic Cycles.” The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 27, No. 4. (Autumn), pp.
551-574.

Finn, Chester. 1978. Scholars, dollars, and bureaucrats. Washington: Brookings
Institution.

Fitzpatrick, Maria and Sarah Turner. forthcoming. “Blurring the Boundary: Changes in
the Transition from College Participation to Adulthood.” In Sheldon Danziger and
Cecilia Rouse, eds. The Economics of the Transition to Adulthood. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.

Fortin, Nicole. 2003. “Higher Education Policies and Decelerating Wage Inequality:
Cross-State Evidence from the 1990s.” Mimeo, June.

Goldin, Claudia and Larry Katz. 1999. “The Shaping of Higher Education: The
Formative Years in the United States, 1890 to 1940.” The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 13, No. 1 (Winter).


                                           34
Goldin, Claudia. 1999. “A Brief History of Education in the United States.” NBER
Historical Paper 119.

Graham, Hugh and Nancy Diamond. 1997. The Rise of American Research Universities.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

Hansmann, H. 1981. “Nonprofit Enterprises in the Performing Arts.” Bell Journal of
Economics Volume 12, No. 2, pp. 341-361.

Hanushek, Eric; Steven G. Rivkin, Lori L. Taylor . 1996. “Aggregation and the Estimated
Effects of School Resources.” The Review of Economics and Statistics. Vol. 78, No. 4.
(Nov.), pp. 611-627.

Hoxby, Caroline. 2000. “The Effects of Geographic Integration and Increasing
Competition in the Market for College Education.” Mimeo.

Kane, T. and C. Rouse. 1995. “Labor Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year Colleges: Is
a Credit a Credit and Do Degrees Matter?” American Economic Review Vol. 85 No. 3,
pp. 600-614.

Kane, T.; Peter Orszag and David Gunter. 2003. “State Support for Higher Education,
Medicaid, and the Business Cycle.” Mimeo.

Krueger, Alan. 1999. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114, No. 2 (May), pp. 497-532.

Leigh, Duane and Andrew Gill. 2003.“Do community colleges really divert students from
earning bachelor's degrees?” Economics of Education Review, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 23-30.

Loeb, Susanna and John Bound. 1996. “The Effect of Measured School Inputs on
Academic Achievement: Evidence from the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s Birth Cohorts.”
The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 78, No. 4. (November), pp. 653-664.

Poterba, James. 1997. “Demographic Structure and the Political Economy of Public
Education.” Journal of Public Policy and Management 16 (January) pp.48-66.

Reynolds, C. Lockwood. 2006. “Estimates of the Effect of Two Year College Attendance
Using Matching Methods.” University of Michigan (mimeo).

Rouse, Cecilia. 1995. “Democratization or Diversion? The effect of Community Colleges
on Educational Attainment.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 13 (April), pp.
217-224.




                                          35
Sandy, Jonathan, Gonzalez, Arturo and Hilmer, Michael J. forthcoming. “Alternative
Paths to College Completion: The Effect of Attending a Two-Year School on the
Probability of Completing a Four-Year Degree” Economics of Education Review.

Schmidt, Peter. 1999. “Applications to California’s Public Colleges Predicted to Rise by
36% by 2010.” The Chronicle of Higher Education. October 1.

Stapleton, David C. and Douglas Young. 1988. “Educational Attainment and Cohort
Size.” Journal of Labor Economics v6 n3 330-61.

Washington State Higher Education Coordinating Board. 2006. “2005-2006 Tuition and
Fee Rates: A National Comparison.”
http://www.hecb.wa.gov/research/issues/documents/2005-
06TuitionFeesNationalComparison.pdf

Welch, Finis. 1979. “Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom Babies'
Financial Bust.” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 87, No. 5, Part 2: Education and
Income Distribution. pp. S65-S97.

Winston, Gordon. 1999. “Subsidies, Hierarchy and Peers: The Awkward Economics of
Higher Education.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 13, No. 1.

Willis, Robert. 1973. “A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility Behavior.”
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 2, Part 2: New Economic Approaches to
Fertility. (March - April), pp. S14-S64.




                                           36
Figure 1: Public university adjustment to changes in cohort size absent changes in
subsidy
a. Quality maximization
 Resources per student [c(q)]




                                University indifference
                                curve and q,n maximum                 Demand shifts in response
                                                                      to change in cohort size




                                             Student Enrollment [n]



b. Enrollment maximization
Resources per student [c(q)]




                                                          Student demand increase inproportion
                                                          to change in cohort size ( p)




                                   Change in
                                   enrollment ( e)

                                            Student Enrollment [n]




Notes: Collegiate demand is drawn holding tuition constant, with the assumption of exogenous
tuition setting.




                                                                                     37
Figure 2: State-specific trends in cohort size and BA degrees conferred

                                         12                                                                                         13.2                                                              10                                                                                                   11



                                                                                                                                    13                                                                9.8
                                                      Ln BA, CA                                                                                                                                                     Ln BA, IA                                                                              10.9
                                        11.5
                                                      Ln Pop 18, CA                                                                                                                                                 Ln Pop 18, IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                      9.6
                                                                                                                                    12.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10.8
 Ln BA Degrees (Institutional Counts)




                                                                                                                                                              Ln BA Degrees (Institutional Counts)
                                         11                                                                                                                                                           9.4
                                                                                                                                    12.6




                                                                                                                                           Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                      9.2

                                        10.5                                                                                        12.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                       9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10.6
                                                                                                                                    12.2
                                         10                                                                                                                                                           8.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10.5
                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                      8.6
                                         9.5
                                                                                                                                    11.8                                                                                                                                                                   10.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      8.4


                                              9                                                                                     11.6                                                              8.2                                                                                                  10.3
                                              1950    1955       1960   1965   1970       1975       1980   1985   1990   1995   2000                                                                   1950       1955       1960    1965    1970       1975        1980    1985     1990     1995     2000
                                                                                      Year When 22                                                                                                                                                   Year When 22



                                        10                                                                                          11.4                                                                11                                                                                                      12.2



                                        9.8                                                                                                                                                           10.8                                                                                                      12.1
                                                                                                                                    11.3
                                                     Ln BA, LA                                                                                                                                                       Ln BA, MI
                                                     Ln Pop 18, LA                                                                                                                                                   Ln Pop 18, MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                      10.6
                                        9.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                    11.2
 Ln BA Degrees (Institutional Counts)




                                                                                                                                                               Ln BA Degrees (Institutional Counts)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      10.4
                                        9.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     11.9
                                                                                                                                    11.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      10.2
                                                                                                                                           Ln Population 18




                                        9.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.8
                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                         9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.7
                                                                                                                                    10.9                                                               9.8
                                        8.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                       9.6
                                                                                                                                    10.8
                                        8.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       9.4
                                                                                                                                    10.7
                                        8.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                       9.2                                                                                                      11.4


                                        8.2                                                                                         10.6
                                          1950       1955        1960   1965   1970      1975        1980   1985   1990   1995   2000                                                                       9                                                                                                11.3
                                                                                      Year When 22                                                                                                          1950    1955       1960    1965    1970        1975       1980     1985     1990     1995     2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Year When 22


                                         12                                                                                         12.8                                                              11.5                                                                                                 12.4

                                                     Ln BA, NY                                                                                                                                                     Ln BA, PA
                                                     Ln Pop 18, NY                                                                                                                                                 Ln Pop 18, PA
                                                                                                                                    12.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12.3
                                        11.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                    12.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12.2
 Ln BA Degrees (Institutional Counts)




                                                                                                                                                              Ln BA Degrees (Institutional Counts)




                                         11
                                                                                                                                    12.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                      10.5
                                                                                                                                           Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12.1

                                        10.5                                                                                        12.4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                    12.3
                                         10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           11.9
                                                                                                                                    12.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                       9.5
                                         9.5
                                                                                                                                    12.1                                                                                                                                                                   11.8




                                              9                                                                                     12                                                                      9                                                                                              11.7
                                              1950    1955       1960   1965   1970       1975       1980   1985   1990   1995   2000                                                                       1950    1955       1960   1965    1970       1975        1980    1985     1990     1995     2000
                                                                                      Year When 22                                                                                                                                                    Year When 22




                                                                                                                                  38
Table 1: Distribution of revenues, enrollment and tuition by type of institution

                                                                                                                       Share of
                                                                                                         Undergr.      1st time
                                                      Current Fund Revenues (1996)                      Enr. Share     students           Tuition
                                       State     Federal    Private    Endow.    Tuition      Aux.      (% of Total)   in-state     In-state    Out-of-
                                      & Local                                                & Other       1996         1996                     State


Community Colleges                      57.5%      11.7%        1.0%      0.1%       20.2%       9.5%           37%        92.7%        1,814        4,362


Other Public                            36.3%      10.7%        4.0%      0.4%       18.3%     30.2%            33%        81.5%        2,725        6,981


Flagship Public                          29.0%      14.8%       6.4%      1.3%       17.2%     31.4%             9%        72.0%        3,493        9,998


All Private                               2.8%     10.3%        9.1%      5.1%       41.9%     30.8%            21%        54.2%                    12,881


              Research I Private          2.3%     16.1%        9.5%      5.7%       22.9%     43.5%             2%        23.6%                    19,814


              Liberal Arts Colleges       1.4%       3.0%       9.1%     10.5%       55.5%      20.5%            2%        43.2%                    17,648

Notes: Data are from authors’ tabulations using U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System (IPEDS), “Finance, 1996-97”, “Residence and Migration” and “Fall Enrollment, 1996" surveys.




                                                                           39
Table 2: Regression of BA degrees conferred and enrollment on measures of cohort size

                               Dependent Variable: Ln (BA)             Dependent Variable: Ln (Total Enrollment)
                               All Institutions       Public Only             All Institutions       Public Only
                          All Years       Late Years  Late Years         All Years       Late Years  Late Years
                         (1954-1996) (1967-1996) (1967-1996)           (1954-1996) (1967-1996) (1967-1996)
                             (1)              (2)         (3)               (4)              (5)         (6)
 A. No Weights
 Ln Pop 18                   0.71           0.62          0.59             0.89           0.79          0.66
                            (0.07)         (0.09)        (0.08)           (0.15)         (0.18)        (0.16)
 B. Avg Pop Wt
 Ln Pop 18                   0.63           0.56          0.54             0.82           0.63          0.49
                            (0.09)         (0.08)        (0.08)           (0.11)         (0.18)        (0.20)


Notes: Degree attainment and total enrollment measures are from institutional measures of degrees conferred. Population data are from single
year of age tabulations of the Department of Census. Each specification includes a full set of fixed effects for states and individual years. See
Data Appendix for details.




                                                                         40
Table 3: Regression of BA degrees per capita on cohort size,
Comparison between Census and Institutional data

                                     1990 Census                             2000 Census
                               1954-87 Degree years                    1954-96 Degree years
                              1932-1965 Birth cohorts                 1932-1974 Birth cohorts
                                (1)            (2)                      (3)            (4)

 Census-based share born in state with BA on year of birth population variable
 Ln Pop Coefficient            -0.26           -0.11                   -0.24           -0.13
                               (0.05)          (0.03)                  (0.03)         (0.05)

 Ln Pop Coef.
 [Corrected]                   -0.46           -0.37                   -0.43           -0.43
                               (0.12)          (0.10)                  (0.12)         (0.13)



 Institutional BA / Pop 18 on population 18 variable
 Ln Pop Coefficient            -0.34           -0.97                   -0.29           -0.80
                               (0.09)          (0.09)                  (0.07)         (0.08)

 State Trends                   No              Yes                     No             Yes



Notes: Each specification includes a full set of fixed effects for states and individual years. In the
top row, Columns (1)-(2) use observations by year and state of birth from the 1990 Census and
Vital Statistics measures of birth cohort size; Columns (3)-(4) use observations by year and state
of birth from the 2000 Census and Vital Statistics measures of birth cohort size. The second rows
present estimates accounting for the extent to which the birth cohort population is a flawed
measure of cohort size at college going-based on individual-level regressions of population on
birth cohort size for those 15-17 in the 1960-1990 Census enumerations; standard errors
calculated using the delta method. The third row corresponds to results in Table 2, with the
difference that the dependent variable is measured as the log of the ratio of BA degrees to cohort
size rather than the log of the number of BA degrees.




                                                   41
Table 4: Effects of cohort size on BA completion and enrollment by type of institution,
1968-1996

                                      Ln Undergraduate
                                          FTE Enr                  Ln BA
                                        on Ln Pop 18            on Ln Pop 18



 Community Colleges                          0.82
                                            (0.37)

 Other Public                                0.56                    0.82
                                            (0.13)                  (0.22)

 Flagship Public                             0.20                    0.28
                                            (0.07)                  (0.05)

 All Private                                 0.99                    1.20
                                            (0.42)                  (0.45)

            Research I Private               -0.07                   -0.19
                                            (0.36)                  (0.45)

            Liberal Arts Colleges            0.26                    0.71
                                            (0.17)                  (0.17)

Notes: Data on degrees conferred and enrollment by type of institution are tabulated from
institution-level data from the HEGIS/IPEDs. Enrollment data are aligned with the population
age 18 in the state in the concurrent year; BA data are aligned with the population age 18 years
old in the state 4 years prior, in accordance with the expectation of a four-year modal time to
degree. See Data Appendix for further details. Each entry and associated standard error is the
coefficient on the log of the population measure in a regression that also includes state and year
fixed effects.




                                                42
Data Appendix

       The primary sources of data for this analysis are: institutional surveys of colleges
and universities, the decennial Census files, the decennial Census publications,
population estimates by the Census Bureau, and standard measures of labor markets
characteristics.

Population data

       Population measures by state and age are primary to our analysis. There are two
sources for our population measures: age-specific estimates from the Census bureau and
measures of birth cohort size from the Vital Statistics tabulations.

         Measures of birth cohort size for each state from 1928 – 1975 were entered from
vital statistics data distributed by the National Center for Health Statistics. The original
data came from birth registrations. (These are the cohorts that would have been 22
between 1950 and 1997).

        For the most recent three decades, data on population by state and single year of
age are available through the Bureau of the Census website. For the years between
Census enumerations, these numbers are estimates which take into account mortality and
migration. See: http://eire.census.gov/popest/topics/methodology/stage98.txt for a
discussion of this methodology. For the years before 1970, we combine data on the state
and single year of age enumerations published in the U.S. Census Bureau State Volumes
for 1950 (Table 51), 1960 (Table 94), and 1970 (Table 19) and the total population in
each state and year for single years from 1950-1970. Because the population measures
between census enumerations are estimates, measurement error is a logical concern as
discussed in the text.

College enrollment and BA degree outcomes

        The primary measures of collegiate attainment are collected from federal surveys
of colleges and universities. The degree data are based on the annual “Earned Degrees
Conferred” survey conducted by the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES),
which records degrees awarded in the 12-month academic year from July to June.33 The
enrollment data are from the “Fall Enrollment” surveys which record the number of
students enrolled in classes in the fall. Through 1986, these surveys were part of the
larger NCES Higher Education General Information Survey (HEGIS), which was
subsequently redesigned as the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System
(IPEDS) collection.



         33
            In 1960-61, the survey began to separately delineate first professional and baccalaureate
degrees. Prior to this point, the two were combined, reflecting the fact that in the early part of the century
first professional programs were concurrently undergraduate degree programs at some institutions.


                                                      43
        Historical data (primarily in the years prior to 1966) were entered from published
tabulations in the government document publications under the titles “Earned Degrees
Conferred” and “Opening Fall Enrollment.” Machine-readable data are employed after
1966 (1967 for enrollment), which allows for the distinction of institutions by control
(public/private) and Carnegie Classification.

       Another source of data from institutional collections is the Residence and
Migration Survey conducted periodically by the Office of Education and later the
Department of Education. Data for the following years are available: 1949, 1958, 1963,
1968, 1972, 1975, 1979, 1981, 1984, 1986, 1988, 1992, 1994, and 1996. This survey
records first-time freshman enrollment by state of residence and state of attendance.

         In addition to the data which record degrees awarded and enrollment in each year
and state by colleges and universities, the decennial Census enumerations record college
attainment to individuals by state of birth and age (or, implicitly, year of birth). As
discussed in the text, the Census data are conceptually different from the institutional data
in that they do not record the year or state of degree receipt. As is well known, the form
of the Census question on educational attainment changed to a degree-based question
from an item that recorded years of attainment with the 1990 Census. When we employ
data from the 1970 and 1980 enumerations, we treat completing 16 years as equivalent to
BA degree receipt.

Higher education finance variables

        Each year as part of the institutional reporting to the federal government, colleges
and universities complete a survey of institutional finances in which they report basic
income and expense items, including the sources of revenues and expenses. We are
particularly interested in distinguishing sources of public support from tuition and fee
revenue, while also measuring the total level of educational expenditures. For this
purpose, we focus on the state appropriations variable.

         State appropriations are those monies received from or made available to an
institution through acts of the state legislative body, except institutional fees and other
income reappropriated by the legislatures to the institution (i.e. tuition and fees collected
by the institution and returned to the institution in the form of appropriations are
subtracted as they already appear as tuition and fees). This line item also includes Federal
aid received through State channels and regional compacts. We have compared the
measures of state appropriations with data reported from state governments on
appropriations and found these measures to be highly correlated. Data from state
governments are compiled annually since 1960 by the Center for the Study of Education
Policy at Illinois State in the Grapevine series. These data differ slightly from measures
reported by institutions in that they also include state funds to non-collegiate higher
education institutions such as the administrative boards coordinating higher education.

        Data on tuition and fees, measured as a price, are available from 1970 to the
current year. There are two sources for these data, which provide measures that are highly



                                             44
correlated. First, the Department of Education collects data on tuition and fees at the
institution level as part of the Institutional Characteristics section of the annual
HEGIS/IPEDS surveys. In addition, the Washington Higher Education Coordinating
Board conducts an annual survey of tuition and fees at public institutions, which includes
data from 1972-73 to the present.

Labor market variables

        Labor market variables used in the analysis include the state specific
unemployment rate, personal income and manufacturing wage bill. State-specific
unemployment rates are available from 1970 through the Bureau of Labor Statistics
[http://www.bls.gov/lau/staadoc.htm]. The personal income and manufacturing wage
measures are from the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis,
Regional Accounts Data and are available from 1958 to 2001
[http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/regional/spi/default.cfm#s2, the manufacturing wage bill is
the s07 series, industry code 400].

        In addition, we compute the state- and age-specific measures of the college wage
premium in the 1970, 1980, and 1990 Census enumerations. The adjusted average
relative wage measures are computed as the return to exactly a BA Degree (or 16 years of
completed education) from state-specific hourly wage regressions with a full set of
controls for demographic and labor force characteristics including, race, sex, and part-
time status.

Primary-secondary school quality measures

         Measures of school quality experienced for students of different states and ages
are from the data assembled by Card and Krueger (1992; see Appendix A of this paper)
for the analysis of the effects of school quality on earnings. The original source for these
data is the Biennial Survey of Education in the United States and related materials. The
specific measures employed in this analysis were the pupil-teacher ratio, average term
length, and average teacher salary from academic year 1919-20 to academic year 1965-66
(coded by C-K as 1920-1960 for even years). To provide a single measure of school
quality for each single year birth cohort, we averaged the potential school quality
experienced from ages 6 to 17 within a state. In examining the contemporary relationship
between school resources and enrollments, we used data from Statistics of State School
Systems (1998) for 1970-1995, which records data on enrollments and resources (both
expenditures and class size).




                                            45
Appendix Graphs: State-specific trends in cohort size and degrees conferred
                               Alabama                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Arizona
                                                                                                                                                   P                                                 B                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P BB
                      9.9594                                                                                                                   PP P P P                                          B               11.239                                            9.84278                                                                                                                                               BP              10.9456
                                                                                                                                                                                             B           BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                                                                    PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P BP
                                                                                                                                           P                                             B                                                                                                                                                                                                          P PP P P         P         PP
                                                                                                                                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PPB      B
                                                                                                                                                                         P                                                                                                                                                                                                             PP      PP                  B
                                                                                                                                   P            B BB B                           BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B B BB
                                                                                                                                           B BB     B BB
                                                                                                                                                         B                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P       B
                                                                                                                               P B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P        B B
                                                                                                                              P B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                             P                                                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                          PP                  BB                                                             P                                                                                                                                                                                      BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                 BB                                                                      P
                                                                                                                                                                                                     P                                                                                                                                                                      PB B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                 P                                                               P                                                                                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                              BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B BP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B B
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                               P P                                                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P P PP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                         P                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                          P               B                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B
                                                                                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BBPP P
                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B
                                              P                                                       P
                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B
                                                                                          BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                      P                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P
                                                  P       P                           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B BBPP
                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B     P
                                                                 B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B       P
                                                          PB B B
                                                      B B BP P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B       P
                                 B                               PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B
                                      B           B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                          B
                                              B                           P                                                                                                                                                                                                     BBBB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PP
                     8.48177                                                                                                                                                                                     10.7051                                           7.36771                                                                                                                                                               9.35314
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                        1985             1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                  1985       1990     1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Year When 22

                               Arkansas                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      California

                     9.11592                                                                                                                                    P PP                                         B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10.6528                                           11.6174                                                                                                      P PP           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PB B B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13.0158
                                                                                                                                               P       P   PP                                    B   BB                                                                                                                                                                  P P PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P                               P
                                                                                                                                                   P                     P                   B                                                                                                                                                                                         P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P               B BB PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PB                                      P
                                                                                                                                                                                         B                                                                                                                                                                      B PP            B BB
                                                                                                              BB
                                                                                                                                           P                    B                B
                                                                                                                                                                                     B                                                                                                                                                                         B BB B BB B BB
                                                                                                                      B BB B P        BB                            BB B B                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P P
                                                                                                                             B     BB                                                            P                                                                                                                                                      PP B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P P
                                                                                                                             P                                           P
                                                                                                                               BBB                                                           P
                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                         P                                                       P       P           P                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                          P                P                                                         P                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PP
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ln Population 18
                                                                                                      B       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                            P                     P
                                                                                                                          P                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PP
                                                                                              P                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PB
                                                                                          B   B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P
                                              P                                           PB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BB
                                                                                      B
                                                  P                                                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B
                                                      P                           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BP
                                                                              B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                          P           B               P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BBB
                                                              B
                                                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B
                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                 B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B               B
                                      B           B               PP              P                                                                                                                                                                                                 B     B P
                                          BB                              PP                                                                                                                                                                                                            B PP
                     7.82285                                                                                                                                                                                     10.075                                            9.78313                                                                                                                                                               11.765
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                        1985             1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                  1985       1990     1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Year When 22




                               Colorado                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Connecticut
                                                                                                                                                            P                                    B BB B                                                                                                                                                                                              PP          B
                     9.91472                                                                                                                        P                                                            10.9577                                           9.62971                                                                                                             PPP              P       B B                      10.9636
                                                                                                                                               PP P             P                            B                                                                                                                                                                          B                         PP          B
                                                                                                                                                                    PP                                                                                                                                                                                                         PP               P     B             BB
                                                                                                                                           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B       BB                            B            B
                                                                                                                                       P     BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PBB              BB B BB BP B
                                                                                                                                        P B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B
                                                                                                                        P       BB B BB B B       P                                                                                                                                                                                                             B                      B                    P
                                                                                                                          B   B                PP                                                                                                                                                                                                       P               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                    BPB BB BB             PP P                                                                                                                                                                                                              P                                                 PP P
                                                                                                                 BB                                 P                                                                                                                                                                                                         B
                                                                                                                    P
                                                                                                               BPP                                    PP                                                                                                                                                                                                    B P PP
                                                                                                              BP

                                                                                                          BP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B                                                                    P
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PP
                                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B                                                                                P
                                                                                                B
                                                                                              B
                                                                                              P PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                       B
                                                                                      BP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B
                                                                                  BP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B

                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                   B P
                                                              BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                 P PP
                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                 B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B PP P
                                              P               PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PP B
                                      B                   P
                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B          B
                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B
                                          B       PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B            PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BB
                     8.22577                                                                                                                                                                                     9.81184                                           8.34806                                                                                                                                                               10.0771
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                        1985             1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                  1985       1990     1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Year When 22

                               Delaware                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Florida
                                                                                                                                               PP P                                                      BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                P BB
                     8.39412                                                                                                                               PP                             B B                    9.47907                                           10.7423                                                                                                                                  PPP          P BB            12.0471
                                                                                                                                           P                                             B B                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PP PB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PP
                                                                                                                                       P                        P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PB
                                                                                                                                                                             BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                      P P PP
                                                                                                                                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                                           B B BB B PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                                  P                 BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                                       BBB             P                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P                    B       BBB   B
                                                                                                                                  BB                                                             P                                                                                                                                                                 P       B                            B
                                                                                                                                                                             P                                                                                                                                                                                            B B
                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                              P                                                  P
                                                                                                                                                                                             P                                                                                                                                                                  BB B B BB
                                                                                                                          B                                                              P                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                     P               P                                                                                                                                                        BP
                                                                                                                      BP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BP
                                                                                                          PP
                                                                                                                  PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PBP
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PB P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                  B                                                                                      P
                                                                                                              B                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                          PP      BB
                                                                                                  P P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BB
                                                                                          BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P
                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P PB
                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P     B
                                                                          PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                      P
                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B
                                                                      PB          P                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                 B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BB B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B BP B
                                                         P
                                                    B B BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B                       P
                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B
                                          B       PP P P                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B       P
                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PP
                                              B
                                              P
                      5.9162                                                                                                                                                                                     8.36869                                           8.39004                                                                                                                                                               10.5238
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                        1985             1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                  1985       1990     1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Year When 22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              46
                               Georgia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Idaho
                                                                                                                                                                                                P    B                                                                                                                                                                                                      P                                                   B
                     10.2154                                                                                                                            PP
                                                                                                                                                           PP                                     BB            11.5873                                           8.40939                                                                                                                               P                                                           9.82666
                                                                                                                                                   PP                                           B                                                                                                                                                                                                               P                                       BB
                                                                                                                                              PP                        P                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                            B                                                                                                                                                                                                   P                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                    P                                                                                                                                                                                       P                       P
                                                                                                                                          P                                             P
                                                                                                                                      P                                     P           B                                                                                                                                                                                               P                               P                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                             PB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BP
                                                                                                                                                                               P                        P                                                                                                                                                                       PP
                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                              B                             BB                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                             P                             PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BB P
                                                                                                                            P              BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BB          B BBPB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P P
                                                                                                                                        BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BB                                               B          P
                                                                                                               P          B          BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B          B       B       B
                                                                                                                       P B B BB B BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BB              PB B                     B
                                                                                                           P           B P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                   B
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                                   P       P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ln Population 18
                                                                                                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PB          PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B BP
                                                                                             P
                                                                                           PPB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B
                                                                                                       P
                                                                                           BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B               P
                                                                                   B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BB
                                                                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                               P                   B       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                           BB          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BP   P
                                   BB               B                              P                                                                                                                                                                                           BB                     P    P
                                                   PP          P       P       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P P P P
                                           B                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BP
                                               BB          P               P                                                                                                                                                                                                           BP
                      8.4855                                                                                                                                                                                    10.929                                            6.77194                                                                                                                                                                                           9.03181
                               1950            1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                   1985                1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                           1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                           Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Year When 22

                               Illinois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Indiana

                     10.8824                                                                                                                  PP P PP                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                B BB B          12.2971                                           10.3562                                                                                                                   P P PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BBB         11.612
                                                                                                                                        P           B
                                                                                                                               P                 BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P                            P                           B
                                                                                                                       BB PP            B PB B B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PP                                                      B
                                                                                                                                       B BP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                     B    B BB
                                                                                                                         PP         BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P                                  P B BB B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B B
                                                                                                                               B BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BB                               B B P
                                                                                                                   B                         P                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BB                      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B                B BB B                                  P
                                                                                                                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                           PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B             P
                                                                                                                       P                                                    P                                                                                                                                                                          PP          P                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                P                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                P                                                                                                                                                                      B                                                                            P                   P
                                                                                                           B       P                                                                        P                                                                                                                                                                  P                                                                            P
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                                                                                                    PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                    P
                                                                                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                            P                                                                                                                     B BB
                                                                                               PB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BP
                                                                                           B B PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B    PP
                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B                       P
                                                                                   B
                                                                                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BB
                                                                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BP
                                                                   B                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                           BB          BB                                                                                                                                                                                                      B                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                   B                                   PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                   P
                                                       B                       P
                                               P               PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                             B P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B       P           P
                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                             P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BB
                                           BB P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P
                     9.51959                                                                                                                                                                                    11.5736                                           8.98695                                                                                                                                                                                           10.8758
                               1950            1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                   1985                1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                           1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                           Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Year When 22




                               Iowa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Kansas
                                                                                                                                                        P                                       B BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                      P                                           BBB
                     9.78953                                                                                                                      PPP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                10.9609                                            9.6073                                                                                                                   PP                                                      B               10.763
                                                                                                                                                                        B BB                                                                                                                                                                                                        P               PP
                                                                                                                               P              P             P         BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                      P       P                                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                    B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                         P         B                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BB B P                                    P
                                                                                                                B   P PP         B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P                                     BB                          B
                                                                                                               B BB          B BB P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B BB B BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B        B           B
                                                                                                             B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B                    B                                   P       BB
                                                                                                                    B B B BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                       B             P                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B           P
                                                                                                           B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                  P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                        P                                                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                           PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                   B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B       B                                                                                                    P
                                                                                           B                                                                                P                                                                                                                                                              B                                                                                                    P
                                                                                       B                           P                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                   B                                                                                            P               P                                                                                                                              B                                                                                                            P
                                                                                           P                                                                                                P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                                                                                        P                                                                                                                                                  P                                                                                            P
                                                                                               P                                                                                    P                                                                                                                              B       B           P
                                                                   B       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BB          B                                                                                                                                        P
                                                               B       B                                                                                                                            P                                                                                                                                          P                                                                                                            P
                                                           B                                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                   B           P                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PP
                                                   P
                                                   B
                                       B                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B                 P P
                                                               P       PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P                   PP P
                                                       P           P               P
                                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B                   PP
                                           B                                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                       BB          P
                      8.3582                                                                                                                                                                                    10.4265                                           8.27359                                                                                                                                                                                           10.1845
                               1950            1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                   1985                1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                           1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                           Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Year When 22

                               Kentucky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Louisiana

                     9.59383                                                                                                                      P P PP P                                      B BB B          11.1794                                           9.79752                                                                                                                  PPP P           BB B B                                                   11.3535
                                                                                                                                              P                                             B                                                                                                                                                                                            P     P         B
                                                                                                                                                                P                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PP          BP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B BB               BB BB B BB
                                                                                                                           BB                                       P                   B                                                                                                                                                                                         BB       BB
                                                                                                                   BB                     P                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B          P PB B B
                                                                                                                                   B BP                  BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                      BB                                                                                                                                                                                                       BB               P
                                                                                                               B                            B B BB B B P                                                                                                                                                                                                   B                                          P
                                                                                                                                     PB B B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PP
                                                                                                           B                       P
                                                                                                                           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                               P                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B               P                                                                    PPP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                       P                                                    P                   P
                                                                                                           PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BP
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                P           P       P                                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PP
                                                                                                                                                                                        P                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                                    P
                                                                                                   B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BB
                                                                                   B BB                                                                                                                 PP                                                                                                                         B
                                                                                      PB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PP
                                                                                               P                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                               P                                                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                           B BB                                P
                                                                           B                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                               BB
                                                   P       B           B               P
                                                                                                       P                                                                                                                                                                                           BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                       B
                                                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                           P
                                                                                   P                                                                                                                                                                                           B       B                                   PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                   B           P       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                   B
                                                                   P           P                                                                                                                                                                                                           P           P       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                       BB B                                P                                                                                                                                                                                                       B               P       P
                     8.21148                                                                                                                                                                                    10.6521                                           8.22067                                                                                                                                                                                           10.6435
                               1950            1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                   1985                1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                           1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                           Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Year When 22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             47
                               Maine                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Maryland
                                                                                                                                                           P                                    B BB                                                                                                                                                                             PPP                 B BB B B
                     8.69551                                                                                                                      PPP          PP                           B                   9.99063                                           9.98308                                                                                                            PPP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PP                                                                      11.3128
                                                                                                                                                                                                            B                                                                                                                                                                 PP                   B
                                                                                                                                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P                P BB
                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                       B B BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                                                                   B                                                                                                                                                                                                      P    B           B BP
                                                                                                                                     P            BB       BB            P
                                                                                                                                                                             B                                                                                                                                                                                          B BB B B B BB B BB
                                                                                                                              B B BP B                 B                                                                                                                                                                                                   P                                    P
                                                                                                                          B       PB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P               BP                         PP P P
                                                                                                                  BB
                                                                                                                                                                            P                   P                                                                                                                                                              PBPP
                                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                              B                                                                 P           P                                                                                                                                                                  B                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                          B                                                                         PP              P                                                                                                                                                  B                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                              P
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                          P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P
                                                                                                      B               P
                                                                                                                  P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B
                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                            P                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                          B
                                                                                          PBPB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PB
                                                                                      B
                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BB
                                                                                                  P                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BP
                                              P                           B
                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                              B       B               P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B       P
                                                  P               B                                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                        BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PP
                                                          B               P                                                                                                                                                                                                        B                   BB          P
                                                      P
                                                      B
                                                          P PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B       PP
                                  B               B                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                        B                       P
                                      BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                              PP                                                                                                                                                                                                       B     PP
                     7.27932                                                                                                                                                                                    9.41632                                           8.17019                                                                                                                                                                                        10.3581
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                       1985             1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                        1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Year When 22

                               Massachusetts                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Michigan

                                                                                                                                              PP P         P                            BB                                                                                                                                                                                                     PP                                          B
                     10.7156                                                                                                                           P                            B                           11.6668                                           10.7301                                                                                                                       P P                                      BB BBB                  12.1513
                                                                                                                                                  B                                             BB                                                                                                                                                                                         P                  B
                                                                                                                                 P       P    BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P         P
                                                                                                                               P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P                             B
                                                                                                                                      BB B BB                                                           BB                                                                                                                                                             B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                              P B
                                                                                                                                   BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B       PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B                    BB B BBP BB
                                                                                                                          P P BB B         PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BB               B         B
                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B   BB           P
                                                                                                                          BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                        B                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                          PP          P                           P    PP                                                                                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                      B                             PP                                                                                                                                                                                                 BP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P                                                                                         P
                                                                                                                  P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P                                                         P               P
                                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P                                                                 P       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ln Population 18
                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                                                                                    P                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P
                                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BB                                                                                                                    P
                                                                                          P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B      P
                                                                                              P
                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                  P P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                          BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                   B                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B BB
                                                                                  BP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                            P                                                                                              B
                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                              P               BB
                                                                                  P                                                                                                                                                                                                                B               PP
                                                          B               B
                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PP
                                                      B
                                                                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                                B                           PP
                                                  P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B                   P
                                  B               B       PP          PP
                                      BB B                        P                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BP
                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BP P
                     9.46816                                                                                                                                                                                    10.9412                                           9.25158                                                                                                                                                                                        11.3541
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                       1985             1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                        1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Year When 22




                               Minnesota                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mississippi
                                                                                                                                                           P                                BBB                                                                                                                                                                                                      P       P                                   BB
                     10.1161                                                                                                                                                                                    11.3293                                           9.27547                                                                                                                                                                                B       10.8599
                                                                                                                                                  PPP                                   B               B
                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PPP       P       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P                       B               B
                                                                                                                                              P                P                    B                                                                                                                                                                                      BB              P
                                                                                                                                                             P      B                                                                                                                                                                                                               P                                    P
                                                                                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                BB
                                                                                                                                  P PP P                 B B BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BB           B        BB          B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B               B
                                                                                                                       BP                              B       P                                                                                                                                                                                           BB                              BB B                  B                   B           P
                                                                                                                      B B                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B                       B
                                                                                                                  B               B BB B BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P                                             B           P
                                                                                                              B                                                         P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B                   P                                                             P
                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                          P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                            PP
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                          PP          P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ln Population 18
                                                                                                      B                                                                         P       P
                                                                                                                                                                                    P                                                                                                                                                                      P                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B BB            P
                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                        P                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                                                                                                    P                                                                                                                              B                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                          BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PP                                                                                                             BB                      P
                                                                                      BP      P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                  B               P                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P                                                   P
                                                                  B           B                       P
                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                              B
                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                                                            PP
                                                          B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                      B       PB                                  P                                                                                                                                                                                            B           B                       P       P
                                                                      PP                                                                                                                                                                                                               B                       P
                                               P                  P
                                          B               PP                  P
                                              B       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B                                   P
                     8.67009                                                                                                                                                                                    10.5989                                           7.90839                                                                                                                                                                                        10.3439
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                       1985             1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                        1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Year When 22

                               Missouri                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Montana
                                                                                                                                                           P                                   BB B                                                                                                                                                                                            P P PP P PP                                                   B
                      10.237                                                                                                                  PP P P                                        BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.477                                            8.43858                                                                                                                                                                                        9.61454
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B                                 BB                                          BB
                                                                                                                                          P                    P                                                                                                                                                                                                   B                                    B P BB                               BB
                                                                                                                                                                                    BB                                                                                                                                                                         B                       PP          B  B
                                                                                                                                      P     PB B BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P           BBB                               B BB
                                                                                                                               P       BB B B                                                                                                                                                                                                              B                   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P       BB
                                                                                                                          BB       B B
                                                                                                                           PPB BB B B         P                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P                                             P
                                                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B
                                                                                                                  B                                                     P                                                                                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                              B           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B                                                                         P
                                                                                                          B                                                                                     P                                                                                                                                      B BB            P       PP
                                                                                                              P
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                            P               P                                                                                                                                                                     P                                                              P
                                                                                                          P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                      B                                                                         P       P                                                                                                                                          B                                                                                                     PP                  P
                                                                                                                  P                                                                                 P                                                                                                                                  P                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                                                                                    P                                                                                                                                          B               P                                                                                                         P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P                                                                                                         P
                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                                                                          BB                                                                                                            P                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                      BP                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                  B           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B
                                                                                                  P                                                                                                                                                                                                    B
                                                                          BB
                                                              BB                                      P
                                                                      B               P                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B                                    P
                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P PP
                                  B
                                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                      P           P                                                                                                                                                                                                B           B                               P
                                                  P
                                                  B                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P
                                      B                           P
                                          BB          PPP
                                                                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                         PP P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BB
                     8.70384                                                                                                                                                                                    10.8413                                           6.77537                                                                                                                                                                                        8.97335
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                       1985             1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                        1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Year When 22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             48
                               Nebraska                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nevada
                                                                                                                                                               P                                           BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PB B P
                     9.22079                                                                                      B                               PP P P                                                               10.3369                                           8.13652                                                                                                                                         PP                 P BP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9.63835
                                                                                                                      BB                                                                           BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                              B               B               P                    P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P               PP PB
                                                                                                                                      PP                                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P                      P
                                                                                                          B                   P                                                            B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                                  P                             PB B BB
                                                                                                                                                                B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P                          B
                                                                                                                                                             BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PP
                                                                                                                                      B                    B      P                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P        BB B B                              BB
                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                          P               B       BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P        B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B B        B
                                                                                          BB                          P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B B B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P   B   B BB
                                                                                             B
                                                                                                                                                                               P                                                                                                                                                                              PP B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                      B                   PP
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P       P
                                                                                                                  P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ln Population 18
                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                                                                                   P                   P                                                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                              B                                                                                                        P           P                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                               P           P
                                                                          B                   P                                                                                            P                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                  P                                                                                                                P                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                          P                                                                                                                    P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BBB
                                                                  BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                              B
                                                                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PP B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P P
                                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B     B P

                                                  PB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                          P       P                   P
                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P
                                  B               B                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B
                                                                          P                                                                                                                                                                                                          BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B             BP
                                      B                       P                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                          BB                                  P                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
                     7.79482                                                                                                                                                                                           9.74946                                           5.11199                                                                                                                                                                                         7.53102
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                           1985                1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                         1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Year When 22

                               New Hampshire                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       New Jersey
                                                                                                                                                               P        B BB B                                                                                                                                                                                        P                   BB         B PP
                     8.94377                                                                                                                                       P   BP                                              9.79996                                           10.1589                                                                                                  BB         BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B BB B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BB                                               11.8154
                                                                                                                                                           P         B                                                                                                                                                                                                        B                        PB P        B
                                                                                                                                                    P B     P B BB B P                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PPP       BB      B
                                                                                                                                                          PB P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P        BB
                                                                                                                                                  P                  P                                                                                                                                                                                                    B                 PP     P        B
                                                                                                                                                        B B     P PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P                 P
                                                                                                                                              BP BB                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                               P       B
                                                                                                                                                B                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P               P                                                          PP P
                                                                                                                           B BP  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                          BP B P                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                      B                                                                                        P                                                                                                                                                          PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                          P P                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                              B




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ln Population 18
                                                                                                              P       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                          B       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P B                                                                                                                         P

                                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B     PP

                                                                                                  B
                                                                                          BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                          PP
                                                                                  BB              P                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B               P
                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                              P                   B       B       P
                                                      BBB
                                                       P              B                                                                                                                                                                                                              B                 B
                                  B                                       PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PP    P
                                                  B
                                                  P                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PP B        PP
                                          B                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B              P
                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B    B
                                              B       P           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B  PP
                     7.26333                                                                                                                                                                                           8.82513                                           8.66785                                                                                                                                                                                         10.984
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                           1985                1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                         1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Year When 22




                               New Mexico                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          New York
                                                                                                                                                                       P                                   BB B                                                                                                                                                               PPP                   BB
                     8.70748                                                                                                                                   PP          P                                           10.1932                                           11.4964                                                                                                    P                  BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B                                                              12.6937
                                                                                                                                                                                                       B                                                                                                                                                                           P PP           B
                                                                                                                                                           P                   P                   B                                                                                                                                                                       PP            P
                                                                                                                                           PP P                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PP                     BB
                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                           B                                                                                                                                                                                                           P B B BB B B B BB B B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PB
                                                                                                                                                        BB                                                                                                                                                                                                             BB        B
                                                                                                                      B           B      P B
                                                                                                                                        BB            B                                                                                                                                                                                                       P               B
                                                                                                                                        P B B BB BB B P      PP     P                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BP                       P
                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                                                B       P P       P
                                                                                                                  B                                      P      P                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                              B                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P                                 PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B B
                                                                                                          BP
                                                                                                          P                   P
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                  PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                      B              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PP P
                                                                                            PB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B
                                                                                          BB
                                                                                             P
                                                                                          P    P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BB                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                  BP
                                                                           P
                                                                          PB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                  P               P
                                                                P
                                                              B BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                              P B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B
                                                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BB
                                  B                   PB                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P                       P
                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B           B               P       PPP
                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PP
                                            B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B
                                          BBP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BP P
                     7.01031                                                                                                                                                                                           9.29271                                           10.2844                                                                                                                                                                                         12.0947
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                           1985                1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                         1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Year When 22

                               North Carolina                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      North Dakota
                                                                                                                                                  P        PP                                              BB B                                                                                                                                                                                         PP                                           B
                      10.398                                                                                                                          PP           P                                   B               11.6663                                           8.46695                                                                                                                    P                                            B       BB              9.52289
                                                                                                                                              P                                                    B                                                                                                                                                                                            P            PP                                                  BB
                                                                                                                                          P                                                    B                                                                                                                                                                                            P                            B B BB B B
                                                                                                                                                                       PP                              P                                                                                                                                                           B BB                                              B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                      P                                                BB                                                                                                                                                                         B B P                 P                BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                                              PP                                     B
                                                                                                                                                              B BB B
                                                                                                                                                                   P                               P                                                                                                                                                          B                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B B           BB                   P
                                                                                                                      PP             B BB B                BB
                                                                                                                              B B BB                                                           P           P                                                                                                                                                                                BB
                                                                                                                          B                                                        PP                                                                                                                                                                     B                                                                  P
                                                                                                              PP                                                                           P                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                          P       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B               P                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ln Population 18




                                                                                                          B                                                                                                    P                                                                                                                              PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                      B
                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B                       P                                                                              P
                                                                                        BBB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                         P                                                                                                                                                                                                        P                   B
                                                                                      B    P                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P       P
                                                                                      P               P                                                                                                                                                                                               P                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P                                                                                                                                                  P
                                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                              BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                          B       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                          B           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P                                                                                                                                  PP
                                                  PB                          P                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B                   P           P
                                                   P
                                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                  B       B       B       P
                                                              P                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                      B                           P
                                              B                           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BB                                  P
                     8.75211                                                                                                                                                                                           11.1012                                           6.80461                                                                                                                                                                                         9.00496
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                           1985                1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                         1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Year When 22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    49
                               Ohio                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Oklahoma
                                                                                                                         PP                      B B BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PP                                     B
                     10.8523                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12.2908                                           9.66358                                                                                                                                  PP                                    B       10.9504
                                                                                                                     PP                        B        B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P                                      B
                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                           BB PP              PP             B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PPP                                      B               B
                                                                                                                 B                         B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B                                   P    B
                                                                                                         B     P                 P     BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                       B           B               B
                                                                                                                              BB B PB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B       BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P                   B B BB B
                                                                                                                     B B BB B        P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P B BB B B
                                                                                                     PP
                                                                                                     B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B                                  BBB
                                                                                                             P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B                   P
                                                                                                           P                           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                         P
                                                                                                                                                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                          B                   P                                                         P
                                                                                                   B                                     P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P       P
                                                                                                                                                 P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P               P
                                                                                                                                           P P
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                                             P       P                                                                                                                                                                                                        P               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P       P                                                                             PP
                                                                                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                       P                                                                                                                       P                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                       BB                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BB
                                                                                   B     P
                                                                               B               PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B       P       P
                                                                                   P
                                                                           B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B BB                                P
                                                                BP
                                                               BP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BB
                                                           B               PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                       B PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PB                                  P
                                 B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B                 PP
                                                       P
                                                   B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B                       P       P
                                            B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P
                                          BPP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B                       P
                                           B P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B                           PP
                     9.49454                                                                                                                                                                                           11.5049                                           8.46968                                                                                                                                                                                10.3531
                               1950        1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                              1985                1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                  1985              1990                1995
                                                                                                       Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Year When 22

                               Oregon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pennsylvania
                                                                                                                                                               P                                   BBB B                                                                                                                                                                            PP                    B BB B
                     9.50114                                                                                                                                       P                           B      B                10.7453                                           11.0841                                                                                                       P                B                                                       12.338
                                                                                                                                                                                           B                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B
                                                                                                                                               PP P P                  P                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P          B
                                                                                                                               P PP P                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                        PPP      P         BB
                                                                                                                                                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                            BBB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P            BBP BBB
                                                                                                                                                           B       B P   B                                                                                                                                                                                                   P B     B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B BB B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B
                                                                                                                      B                                             BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                   B BP            BB B            B                                               PP                                                                                                                                                                                          PP
                                                                                                                               B                                               P                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                           BB                                  B
                                                                                                                                                       B                           P           P                                                                                                                                                              PB                                                        P
                                                                                                       B                                                                               PP                  PP P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BP
                                                                                                       P               P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                   B           P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B           P                                                         P               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P                                                                                             P
                                                                                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PP
                                                                                   BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                    P P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BB                                                                                                    P
                                                                               B                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B                   P
                                                                           B
                                                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B                           P
                                                           B       B               P                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BBB                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P                                       P
                                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                   B                           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PBP
                                                                   P PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P P P
                                 B                  P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B    P
                                      B      BP P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B                               P
                                           P      P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                          BBP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B                               P
                     8.04206                                                                                                                                                                                           9.84056                                           9.72609                                                                                                                                                                                11.7675
                               1950        1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                              1985                1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                  1985              1990                1995
                                                                                                       Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Year When 22




                               Rhode island                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        South Carolina
                                                                                                                                       P                       P                               BB B BB                                                                                                                                                                                             PP PPP                                       BB B B
                     9.14804                                                                                                                       PP                                                                  9.87658                                           9.62898                                                                                                                     P    P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.0784
                                                                                                                   P                                  P                                    B                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BB
                                                                                                                                   P           P                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                       P                    P
                                                                                                                                         P P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                                                                                               P                             BBB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P                        BB B
                                                                                                                       PP P           BB B B            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B BB    PB                         P
                                                                                                                                 BB B        PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P    B
                                                                                                           P                                          P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B BB
                                                                                                                               B           P
                                                                                                                                                PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BBB                                               P       P
                                                                                                                          B BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                       P                                           PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B                                         P
                                                                                                                       BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B                                                     P
                                                                                                                   B                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P                                                                                     P
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                               B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                           B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                   B
                                                                               P       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                 P    B
                                                                           P     BB P                                                                                                                          P                                                                                                                          P PP
                                                                                    BP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                               B        P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P                                                                                                                      BBB P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                           P                           P
                                                                       BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P
                                 B                            B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P          B        B       B
                                                           BB P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BB              B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P                           P
                                      B                B
                                               P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P
                                          BB       BP          P                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BB              P
                                                           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P       P
                                               BP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B                           P
                     7.43426                                                                                                                                                                                           9.15074                                           8.05611                                                                                                                                                                                10.4936
                               1950        1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                              1985                1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                  1985              1990                1995
                                                                                                       Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Year When 22

                               South Dakota                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tennessee
                                                                                                                       B                   P PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PPP               BB B B
                     8.51238                                                                                   BB          B
                                                                                                                                   PP                      P                                                           9.58314                                           9.93591                                                                                                                                                                                11.3744
                                                                                                           B                                           P       P                                                   B                                                                                                                                                               P                 B
                                                                                                                           PP                                                                          B BB                                                                                                                                                                     PP
                                                                                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PP        B
                                                                                                                            B                                  BP                                  B                                                                                                                                                                B B BB B BB B BB
                                                                                                                                                                BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B B B  B
                                                                                                                                                   BBB                     B                                                                                                                                                                                      B           P       B BB PB          P
                                                                                                                                       BB                              P       B        B                                                                                                                                                                       B           P
                                                                                                   B                               B      B                                        BB B                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P                          P
                                                                                                                                                                           P                                                                                                                                                                                B         P
                                                                                               B                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P                      P
                                                                                       BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PP PP                                P
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                               P                                                                                                                                                                          B                                                P
                                                                                   B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P                                            P
                                                                                           P           P       P
                                                                               B
                                                                           B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                           BB B
                                                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BB
                                                                                       P       P                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BP
                                                       B                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B           PP
                                           P                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                   B                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                   P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                   P                                                                                                                                       P               P       P                                                                                                              B                       P
                                               P                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                               P                                                                                                              B
                                                           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P                   BB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BB
                                               B       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PB
                                                               P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P                              P
                                 B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B           P               P
                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B                       P
                                                                   P       PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B
                                          BB                           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BB                          P       P
                      6.8533                                                                                                                                                                                           9.04061                                           8.55468                                                                                                                                                                                10.7978
                               1950        1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                              1985                1990                1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                  1985              1990                1995
                                                                                                       Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Year When 22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
                               Texas                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Utah
                                                                                                                                                                                           P BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                      P                                       P           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                     11.1671                                                                                                                              P P PP                           B               12.5343                                           9.63397                                                                                                                                                                               P           10.3535
                                                                                                                                                      P          P                 BPB                                                                                                                                                                                                        P                                                    BBP
                                                                                                                                                  P                                P         P                                                                                                                                                                                            PPP              P                               P
                                                                                                                                               PP                         PP PB                PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                                                                 BB         B                                                                                                                                                                                                         P                                    PB
                                                                                                                                 P        BB                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                   PP                               P
                                                                                                                                P BB B BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P                                        PB PB  PB
                                                                                                                              PB B
                                                                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B PP B
                                                                                                                           BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BB
                                                                                                                          B P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BB
                                                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B BB B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B                B       BBB
                                                                                                                  B           P                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B                       B       B
                                                                                                           B PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BP
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ln Population 18
                                                                                                          PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B           P
                                                                                                          B P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B

                                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BB
                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                          BB
                                                                                           PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P       P
                                                                                      BP              P                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B                   P
                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BB          B
                                                                              B       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BB                      P
                                                                          B
                                                              BB B
                                                          B                       P
                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B               PP P
                                 B            PB                      P PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P
                                                          P       P                                                                                                                                                                                                           B       B P
                                      B                       P                                                                                                                                                                                                           B       B BP P
                                          B B PP
                     9.55457                                                                                                                                                                               11.6802                                           7.82684                                                                                                                                                                                           9.30002
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                      1985            1990             1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                           1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Year When 22

                               Vermont                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Virginia
                                                                                                                                                          P                                BB                                                                                                                                                                                             PPP                                              B BB B B
                     8.45681                                                                                                                                                      B BB        B        B   9.392                                              10.339                                                                                                                          P        PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P                   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11.5541
                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                     B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P                                            B
                                                                                                                                                               BB
                                                                                                                                      B          PP       BB B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P                                    P       B               P
                                                                                                                                          B     PB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BB      B               P
                                                                                                                              BB                        B
                                                                                                                                                       BP                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P                       BB
                                                                                                                                              PB
                                                                                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BB                      P           P
                                                                                                                                      PP                                                                                                                                                                                                              P       P           P                   BB                               P
                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                  P                                                        P                                                                                                                                                      P       P                           BB                                           P               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BB
                                                                                                                      B       P                                PP                      P                                                                                                                                                                          PPB
                                                                                                                                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                  B                                                                P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                          P                                               P                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                              PP               P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln Inst BA degrees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                      BPP
                                                                                                                                                                                                   P                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                  B                                                                                                    P                                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PP          P
                                                                                      BB
                                                                                       PB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BB
                                                                                  B           PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PBP
                                                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PB
                                              P                               BP
                                                                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                  BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                  PP P B                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P           BB          P
                                 B
                                      B                P                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                  BB B                    PP                                                                                                                                                                                                  B          PP
                                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                                                              BP
                                          BB                      P                                                                                                                                                                                                               B BP P
                     7.03703                                                                                                                                                                               8.47305                                           8.39728                                                                                                                                                                                           10.8342
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                      1985            1990             1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                           1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Year When 22




                               Washington                                                                                                                                                                                                                              West Virginia
                                                                                                                                                          PPP                 B                                                                                                                                                                                       B           PP                      B
                     10.0209                                                                                                                                                B                              11.2131                                           9.10997                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10.4724
                                                                                                                                                                 P        B                                                                                                                                                                                       B                                      B BB
                                                                                                                                               PP P P                   B                                                                                                                                                                                             PB              PP
                                                                                                                                                                       BP                                                                                                                                                                                     B                           P            B
                                                                                                                   P     P                                    P      BP                                                                                                                                                           P               PB B                      BB              BB
                                                                                                                     PP                                             BP                                                                                                                                                                                                      PPB     B     B P        B
                                                                                                                 P                                    BB B        B                                                                                                                                                                                                            PB B   B B   P  B   B
                                                                                                              B                                            BB B B
                                                                                                                                                                PP P      PP P                                                                                                                                                                    BP                                             B
                                                                                                              P PB B B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P
                                                                                                             B B       B B BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P B
                                                                                                           PP
                                                                                                          PB                                                                                                                                                                          P                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P                                           P                   PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ln Population 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B                                                                                                   PP
                                                                                            PP
                                                                                             B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B B BP                                                                                               P
                                                                                          B
                                                                                          PB P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B PB B                              P                                                                                                        P
                                                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                    P
                                                                    BB                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                  BBP P
                                                                   P P
                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                           B                   B                   P
                                              P                   P
                                 B                        B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                      B       P                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                          P                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                      BB          B
                                                  P                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                              B       P                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B                               P
                     8.54111                                                                                                                                                                               10.2802                                           7.83439                                                                                                                                                                                           10.1044
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                      1985            1990             1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                           1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Year When 22

                               Wisconsin                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wyoming
                                                                                                                                                          P                            B B BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                        PP                                      B
                     10.2295                                                                                                                                                 B                             11.4786                                           7.52618                                                                                                                                         PP         B                          BB          9.06277
                                                                                                                                               PP P P         P       B BB B                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B BB B BB
                                                                                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                                                                                                    B BB                                      BBP                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P               B
                                                                                                                  B                   PP      B
                                                                                                                       P            P      BB                     P                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PP               B    P
                                                                                                                                  P B B BB
                                                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BB
                                                                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B                                        B
                                                                                                                                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                               B                               B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P       B BB
                                                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B               BB                                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P            B                                                                P
                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P               P
                                                                                                                          P                                               P                                                                                                                                                                                               P                                                        PP P                P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                              P       P                                                                PP                                                                                                                                                         B                   P
Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln Inst BA degrees




                                                                                                      BP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ln Population 18




                                                                                                                                                                                  PP                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BB
                                                                                          B                                                                                                    P                                                                                                                                                  PP
                                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
                                                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P                           P
                                                                                  B                                                                                                                PP                                                                                                             B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B       P                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BB
                                                                              B               P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                          B                       P
                                                                  BB                                  P                                                                                                                                                                               P                                                       P
                                                              B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PB              P
                                                      B                               P
                                 B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B               B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P           PP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P       P
                                      B           B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                              P       P
                                          B                       P       P                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                              PP P
                                              B P                             PP                                                                                                                                                                                                  BB                                      P
                     8.57622                                                                                                                                                                               10.7398                                           5.90263                                                                                                                                                                                           8.20831
                               1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                      1985            1990             1995                                                                    1950           1955                1960                1965                1970 1975 1980                                           1985                1990                1995
                                                                                                          Year When 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Year When 22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        51
