NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DO YOUTH WITH MENTAL DISORDERS FARE IN THE JUVENILE JUSTICE
SYSTEM?
Pinka Chatterji
Alison Cuellar
Working Paper 12437
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12437

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006

This research uses data from Add Health, a program project designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S.
Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris, and funded by a grant P01-HD31921 from the National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 17 other agencies. Special
acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwistle for assistance in the original design.
Persons interested in obtaining data from Add Health should contact Add Health, Carolina Population
Center, 123 W. Franklin Street, Chapel Hill, NC 27516-2524 (addhealth@unc.edu). Funding for this
research was provided by grant number K01 MH067086 from the National Institute of Mental Health
(Cuellar, Principal Investigator) and by grant number K01 AA000328 from the National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (Chatterji, Principal Investigator). The authors would like to thank
Thomas McGuire, Sherry Glied, Carole Gresenz and participants at American Society of Health Economists
meeting in Madison, Wisconsin, for helpful comments. This paper has not undergone the review accorded
official NBER publications; in particular, it has not been approved by the Board of Directors. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of NIMH, NIAAA, or NBER.¸˛
© 2006 by Pinka Chatterji and Alison Cuellar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

How Do Youth with Mental Disorders Fare in the Juvenile Justice System?
Pinka Chatterji and Alison Cuellar
NBER Working Paper No. 12437
August 2006
JEL No. I1,L5
ABSTRACT
¸
The purpose of this paper is to examine the relationship between mental health problems and justice
outcomes. Several studies have documented that individuals with a variety of mental disorders are
overrepresented in the justice system. This pattern could result if persons with mental disorders are
more likely to commit crimes, or more likely to commit serious crimes, than persons without disorders.
In addition, individuals with mental disorders may be more likely than those without disorders to
be sanctioned conditional on committing a particular crime. The major public policy concern is around
the latter possibility, which has been interpreted as the justice system being biased against those with
mental disorders. In this paper we explore several channels through which mental health problems,
measured as ADHD and depression, may lead to over-representation in the criminal justice system.
Using a large sample of adolescents, our findings show that youth with ADHD fare worse in the juvenile
justice system in terms of the probability of being arrested and the probability of conviction once arrested.
We find that elevated ADHD symptoms during adolescence are associated with statistically significant
and meaningful increases in the probability of arrest and conviction after controlling for preexisting
factors and mechanisms that may arise from the disorder itself.

Pinka Chatterji
University at Albany
Economics Department
Business Administration 111A
1400 Washington Avenue
Albany, NY 12222
and NBER
pchatterji@albany.edu
Alison Cuellar
RAND Corp
1200 South Hayes Street
Arlington, VA 22202-5050
acuellar@rand.org

1. Introduction
Rates of mental illness among incarcerated populations are more than twice as high as in
the general U.S. population (Teplin, 1990; Robins and Regier, 1991). An estimated 10-16
percent of all individuals in the criminal justice system have a severe mental illness (Guy, et al
1985; Teplin 1990; Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1999), which corresponds to approximately
700,000 to 1.1 million severely mentally ill individuals across jails, prisons, and probation. 1 The
fact that individuals with a variety of mental disorders are overrepresented in the justice system
also has been documented in studies (Teplin et al, 2002; Wasserman, et al, 2002). How can such
a pattern be explained? Are persons with mental disorders more likely to commit crimes, or
more likely to commit serious crimes, than persons without disorders? Or are individuals with
mental disorders more likely than those without disorders to be sanctioned conditional on
committing a particular crime? The major public policy concern is around the last possibility,
which has been interpreted as the justice system being biased against those with mental disorders
(Massaro, 1999). Despite such concerns, there have been few systematic comparisons of persons
with and without mental illness in the justice system, and almost no information is available
about mechanisms that may lead from mental health problems to subsequent over-representation
in the criminal justice system.
Understanding the mechanisms that may lead to over-representation of persons with
mental illness in the criminal justice system is critical to inform public policy. If mental
disorders affect the probability of committing crimes or the severity of criminality, and this is the
main mechanism that leads to over-representation in the justice system, then policies related to
mental heath treatment should focus on prevention of criminal behaviors. If bias is a primary

3

mechanism, in the sense that individuals with mental disorders are more likely to be sanctioned
for a given crime or sanctioned more severely, then a concerted policy focus on changing the
behaviors of key players in the justice and mental health systems is needed. This implies greater
education of police, defense attorneys, prosecutors, probation officers and judges. It also implies
a greater need for speedy access to mental health screening, treatment and information for those
who become involved with the justice system.
This goal of this study is to examine the relationship between mental health problems and
justice outcomes. This paper adds to the literature in several ways. First, we develop the
plausible channels through which mental illness might affect justice outcomes. Conceptually, we
draw parallels to the employment discrimination literature, where researchers have faced similar
issues in assessing the impact of race or gender on labor market outcomes. Observed differences
in justice outcomes that are not explained by differences in offending behavior and delinquency
may reflect discrimination against those with mental health problems. This discrimination may
be based on personal prejudice (Becker 1957, 1971), or the discrimination may be statistical in
nature (Phelps 1972, Arrow 1973). In this application, statistical discrimination would imply
that law enforcement officials, facing imperfect information about youths’ delinquent behavior,
rationally may use mental health symptoms as signals. For example, a police officer may be
more likely to arrest a youth displaying psychiatric symptoms, after controlling for delinquency,
since mental illness is associated with more violent criminal behavior (Brennan, et al, 2000;
Swanson, et al 1990)
Differences in justice outcomes that are not explained by differences in delinquency,
however, may result if mental health problems affect other characteristics associated with justice
1

Based on rates of mental illness among inmates and probationers in 1998 (Bureau of Justice Statistics,1999) and
applied to year-end 2004 data on inmates (Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2005) and probationers (Bureau of Justice

4

outcomes, such as academic outcomes, substance use, and family relationships. If such
mediating factors, or mechanisms, are significant barriers to equitable treatment, then they ought
to be addressed as a first step. Depending on the policy purpose we may be interested in the “full
effect” of mental illness on justice outcomes, which would include differences that operate
through these mechanisms, or the “partial effects” of mental illness, which would be calculated
after holding constant differences that operate through mechanisms In this study, we estimate
both full and partial effects of mental health problems, which provides some insight into the
intermediate mechanisms that lead from these problems to justice outcomes.
A second contribution of this paper is our use of the National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent Health (Add Health), which includes data on a community sample of youth. Add
Health offers several advantages over databases that have been used in prior research. First, it
relies on data from a large, nationally representative sample of youth, which greatly increases the
generalizability of our findings compared to previous studies. Second, youth in the sample are
first interviewed in the community rather than in institutions, further avoiding problems of biased
sampling criteria. Third, we can control for important variables that are not present in previous
studies. These include the nature of the justice sanction, the youth’s history of delinquency,
mental health, and individual demographic and community variables. Fourth, our data are
longitudinal, which allows us to explore mechanisms linking early mental health problems to
subsequent justice outcomes.
Using a rich, longitudinal data source to sort out the contribution of preexisting factors
and mechanisms is important to our understanding of whether and why juvenile justice
disparities exist for youth with mental disorders and how to address them. Our results show that
observable differences between youth with and without disorders can explain a large fraction of
Statistics, 2006).

5

the gap in justice outcomes. Yet, a significant unexplained gap remains.
The paper proceeds in the following manner. Section I describes the previous literature.
Section II discusses the unconditional gap in justice outcomes between youth with mental
disorders and those without. It also addresses possible sources of observed disparities. Section
III assesses how conditioning on different characteristics affects the estimated differences in
arrests and convictions for ADHD. Section IV presents similar analysis for the impact of chronic
depression. Section V decomposes the observed differences in arrest and conviction
probabilities. Section VI concludes with a discussion of our evidence.
2. Previous Literature
Previous studies have documented a high prevalence of mental disorders among youth
(Teplin et al, 2002; Duclos, et al, 1998; Timmons-Mitchell, et al 1997; Wasserman, et al, 2002)
and adults (Teplin, 1990) in the justice system. These studies find that the rate of disorder is
typically higher than those found in community studies (see Shaffer, et al 1996). It may be
tempting to interpret these data to say that the justice system is biased against persons with
mental disorders, but such an interpretation should be made with caution. Aside from their small
sample sizes, these studies also have design limitations that limit our ability to assess whether
individuals with mental disorders are sanctioned more heavily than others for the same crimes.
Many of these studies assess youth for mental disorders in a particular justice setting,
such as in detention facilities (where cases typically have not been adjudicated or “tried” and
stays are relatively short) or in commitment facilities (where youth have been found delinquent
or “guilty” and are serving their punishment). Incarcerated youth are a relatively small subset of
all justice-involved youth; thus, the studies provide only a narrow view of the juvenile justice
system. The prevalence of disorder across these studies varies considerably, in part because the

6

likelihood of any youth being arrested or otherwise involved in the justice system varies
geographically. For example, Duclos et al (1998; 2003) found a relatively low prevalence of
mental disorders in an area where incarceration rates of youth were generally quite high. In
other words, the broader the involvement of youth in juvenile justice, the more the justice sample
resembles a community sample. Studies restricted to youth in commitment facilities are further
difficult to interpret because youth with shorter sentences leave more quickly, leading to
oversampling of long-stay youth. Similar issues exist in studies of adult inmates in jails, which
confine individuals for short periods, and in prisons, which typically confine inmates guilty of
felony offenses and sentenced to more than a year. Importantly, these studies also typically do
not control for demographic characteristics or offending behaviors.
Other studies have found that prisoners with mental illness are more likely to be arrested
and to serve longer sentences than prisoners without mental illness (Teplin, 1984; Hochstedler,
1987; Ditton, 1999). Ditton (1999), in a federal survey of mental illness among inmates, found
that state prison inmates with mental illness were sentenced to serve an average of 12 months
longer than other inmates. On the other hand among jail inmates, the findings were reversed: the
average maximum sentence was 6 months shorter among those with mental illness than those
without. Studies of inmates also find that those with mental illness are more likely than others to
be involved in fights and break more rules (Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1999). One difficulty
with inmate surveys, as mentioned previously, is that they overrepresent long-stay individuals
relative to short-stay individuals and this may be confounded with mental illness.
Another study compared individual court cases involving mentally ill defendants with
aggregate population-level data on court cases (Hochstedler, 1987). Although the study finds
that those with mental illness were more likely to receive probation or imprisonment, rather than

7

fines or dismissal, this study could control only for broad differences in the offense for which the
individual was charged (i.e., felony vs. misdemeanor offenses) which is discretionary. The study
is not able to control for actual offending behavior, prior level of criminal activity, or
demographics.
Teplin (1984) undertakes a qualitative study of policy-citizen encounters and tests for
differences in arrest rates controlling for visible signs of mental disorder. The degree to which
the police behavior was affected by researchers’ observation of the encounters is not known.
The study is narrowly focused on the role of visible symptoms of severe mental illness such as
bizarre speech, confusion/disorientation, or paranoia. Among its limitations are the fact that it is
able to study only two urban precincts in a single city in 1980/81. Furthermore, the study is
limited to the probability of arrest among 500 citizens considered “suspects” by the police, 30 of
whom were considered mentally disordered. The labeling of suspects, however, is discretionary
and itself endogenous. The study finds that, controlling for offense type, the arrest rate is higher
among those exhibited signs of mental disorder than those who did not. The study is unable to
control for other characteristics.
The existing literature ultimately does not answer the key question of what would have
happened to those with mental illness in the justice system had they not had mental illness. The
complication is that, in addition to affecting delinquency, mental illness may affect the
distributions of other characteristics associated with justice outcomes. Depending on the policy
purpose we may be interested in the full effect of mental illness, including these other
differences, or the partial effect, net of some differences. In the next section we focus on youth
with mental illness, because it matches our empirical approach, but similar arguments can be
made for adults.

8

3. The Full Effect of Mental Illness on Justice Outcomes
There are many points in the juvenile justice system at which discretionary decisions are
made which may lead to disparate outcomes for youth. These include the decision by police to
arrest youth rather than send them home or otherwise serve a warning; the court intake step at
which an offense is recorded; the decision to detain a youth in a formal facility to await further
case processing, rather than have them wait in a community setting; the decision by the probation
officer or prosecutor to formally or informally pursue a case; the decision by the judge to
adjudicate the youth as delinquent or not (i.e., find them guilty or not); and finally the degree of
the sanction, such as confining the youth in a commitment facility or having them perform
community service.
One challenge is sorting out the channels through which mental illness affects justice
outcomes. Similar challenges are faced in the employment discrimination literature that assesses
the impact of race on labor market outcomes. We draw the following analogy. In the labor
market literature, observed differences in wages across racial groups may be explained by
discrimination, meaning minority workers with the same ability and training receive lower
wages. The observed wage differences may also be explained by minorities having less ability
and training which leads to lower rewards. As Carneiro et al (2005) point out, the policy
implications are profoundly different. In addition, if discrimination or expectations of
discrimination contribute to some dimensions of lower ability and training of minorities, then
these factors are proxies for discrimination and should not be included as control variables when
testing for wage differences across racial groups (Neil and Johnson, 1996; Carneiro, Heckman,
Masterov, 2005). This is true to the extent one wants to know the “full effect” of discrimination
through all channels.

9

Whereas the employment discrimination literature focuses on whether wage differences
arise from discrimination, from discrimination’s role in acquiring abilities, or from differences in
abilities unrelated to discrimination, we focus on observed differences in justice outcomes for
persons with mental illness. The empirical goal of the paper is to determine whether youth with
mental illness, measured as elevated symptoms of ADHD and depression, experience worse
outcomes in the juvenile justice system compared to youth without these problems.
Our data come from the Add Health, a nationally representative study of adolescents
living in the community which surveys youth regarding delinquent behavior and justice sanctions
as well as mental disorders. Add Health surveyed all students in grades 7 through 12 in a pair of
schools in each of 80 communities in the United States. In 1994 and 1996, two waves of the
survey were conducted, with data collected at the individual, family, school, and community
level. Respondents were then re-interviewed as young adults in a third wave of the survey
conducted in 2001 and 2002. We included only youth who responded to the in-home survey in
all three waves (1994, 1996, and 2001). Our sample size is 9,201 youth.
Juvenile Justice Outcomes. As outcome variables, we consider two measures of justice
system response to youth delinquency. For all youth, we measure whether a youth was ever
arrested prior to age 19. Additionally, among those ever arrested, we measure whether the youth
was ever convicted prior to age 19 in juvenile court. Youth who are incarcerated during the
Wave III interview are not observed.
Mental Health. As the primary covariate of interest, we focus on two types of mental
health problems that are highly prevalent among adolescents: Attention Deficit and
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and depression. To measure symptoms of ADHD, we use the
18-item Retrospective Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Scale from Wave 3. This scale requires

10

respondents to report on the frequency of behaviors such as impulsiveness, inattention,
disorganization, and hyperactivity between the ages of 5 and 12 We define youth as having
elevated ADHD symptoms if they were at the 75th percentile of the sample distribution or higher
in terms of their self-reported symptoms. To measure depression, we use the modified Center
for Epidemiologic Scale for Depression (CES-D) used in waves 1 and 2. We identify youth as
having chronic, elevated depressive symptoms if their average score in both waves ranks at the
75th percentile or higher of the sample distribution for depressive symptoms.
Since Add Health does not include formal diagnostic interviews for mental disorders,
neither the ADHD nor the depression measures are diagnostic assessments per se. Our measures
are broad in the sense that they capture adolescents who would meet diagnostic criteria for these
disorders, as well as adolescents with sub-threshold disorders and no disorders. Consequently,
we assess the effect of elevated symptoms, rather than diagnosis. Youth who are being treated
for their conditions will thus have lower symptoms.
Table 1 describes rates of justice outcomes by mental health disorder. It shows that youth
who had ADHD were more likely to be arrested prior to age 19 than other youth (7.6 percent vs.
3.9 percent). Among those arrested, youth with ADHD were more likely to be convicted (50.6
vs. 37.8 percent). Similarly, youth with depression were more likely than other youth to be
arrested (5.7 percent vs. 5.0 percent). Among those with depression who were arrested, the
likelihood of conviction was greater (48.1 percent vs. 42.3 percent).
3. Decomposing the Gap in Justice Outcomes.
Differential response to youth with mental disorders could arise from multiple
mechanisms operative in the justice system. One is simple prejudice, or beliefs and stereotypes
by prosecutors, probation officers, defense attorneys and judges that reflect unjustified negative

11

attitudes based on a person’s group membership (Dovidio, et al 1996). Some have argued, for
example, that antisocial behavior among African Americans is viewed as delinquent, whereas
similar behavior among Whites is attributed to a mental illness (Campbell, 1998; Bridges and
Steen, 1998). This would affect perceptions of culpability and choices of punishment. Similarly,
individuals with mental disorders may exhibit behavior that exacerbates perceptions of their
delinquency, for example, by exhibiting less remorse or by being inattentive or hostile.
Disrespectful and hostile behavior has been found to be associated with higher likelihood of
arrest (Novak and Engel, 2005). Being remorseless, inattentive or hostile during case processing
is likely to increase the chances of conviction. Thus, the justice system may be reacting to
symptoms of mental illness, rather than the presence of the illness itself.
In addition to true prejudice and intolerance for those displaying symptoms of mental
illness, statistical discrimination also may result if there is uncertainty about whether punitive or
rehabilitative justice approaches are more likely to succeed and reduce recidivism for youth with
mental disorders. Such uncertainty may lead to unequal application of justice approaches,
leading one to observe more punitive approaches for one group than the other. Another possible
mechanism is that incarceration is viewed as an alternative to mental health treatment,
particularly in geographic areas where supply of health care services is low or in circumstances
where involuntary heath care treatment is difficult to impose (Wexler, 1983); however, this
avenue into the justice system would only be relevant for those with mental illness.
Finally, there are a number of covariates correlated with mental illness that may partially
explain its effect on justice outcomes. Some of these covariates are preexisting characteristics,
such as race and gender, that may confound an observed association between psychiatric
symptoms and justice outcomes. Other covariates, such as academic outcomes and family

12

relationships, are of interest as mechanisms, as they are factors that may link mental illness to
justice outcomes. In the following sections, we evaluate the effects of preexisting characteristics
and mechanisms by estimating the model below:
J = α1MH + α2X + α3C + α4D + α5S + α6A + α7F +ε

(1)

In Equation (1), juvenile justice outcome (J) is a function of a measure of mental health
(MH), standard demographic variables including gender and race (X), community characteristics
(C), delinquency history (D), substance use (S), school outcomes (A), and family relationship
characteristics, (F). Construction and interpretation of these variables is described in detail
below. To estimate Equation 1, we use logistic models and include the two mental health
variables (ADHD, depression) separately because these variables are highly collinear. We start
with a specification that includes only the mental health measure on the right hand side. We then
incrementally add each set of covariates (X, C, D, S, A, F) to the model and gauge how the
addition of each set of variables affects the magnitude and statistical significance of the
coefficient on the mental health measure. The demographic and community variables which are
added first (X and C) are considered preexisting factors, while delinquency, school outcomes,
substance use, and family relationships (D, S, A, F) are of interest as mechanisms. If the mental
health coefficient is still a statistically significant predictor of justice outcomes, even after all the
preexisting factors and mechanisms have been added to the model, we would interpret this
coefficient as capturing the effects of discrimination towards youth with mental health problems,
as well as the effects of any unobserved heterogeneity or unmeasured mechanisms.
Table 3 summarizes findings from logistic models which focus on the effect of ADHD
symptoms on justice outcomes. Models are estimated using a combined gender sample as well
as a males only sample (we do not show findings for a females only sample because the sample

13

size of arrested females is too small to analyze convictions). Panel A in Table 3 shows the
models with arrested before age 19 as the dependent variable, while Panel B shows the models
with conviction before age 19 as the dependent variable. Each column in Table 3 represents a
successively richer model in which we add additional covariates. Each cell shows the estimated
coefficient of a binary indicator for ADHD symptoms and is from a separate regression. Table 4
shows similar results from models in which the effect of depressive symptoms on justice
outcomes is of interest. Here, too, each cell is from a separate regression. Full regression results
are shown in the appendices.
3.1 The Role of Demographic Characteristics
Observed differences in arrest rates could arise not only from differences in delinquent
behavior and academic performance but also from the correlation between mental disorder and
other sociodemographic factors that influence justice outcomes. For example, the prevalence of
mental illness differs by gender. The clinical literature finds that males are more likely to be
diagnosed with ADHD than females, but less likely to be diagnosed with depression (USDHHS,
1999). At the same time arrest is more likely for males. Consistent with the clinical literature
we find in our sample that youth with ADHD are more likely to be male (59 percent) than youth
with depression (40 percent) or youth with neither disorder (49 percent).
Prior literature also shows that mental illness is correlated with low income (Glied, et al
1997) which, in turn, may affect the quality of a person’s legal representation. We proxy family
income by measuring whether or not the mother completed less than high school or high school
and with whether either the mother or father received welfare assistance. We also control for
whether the youth lived with two parents. In our sample youth with ADHD or depression are
somewhat more likely to be from lower income families. Sixty percent in both groups had a

14

mother with high school education or less, compared to 56 for youth with neither disorder. Rates
of welfare receipt were similar with 13 percent reporting welfare among youth with ADHD,
compared to 14 percent among youth with depression and 11 for youth with no disorder.
Race and ethnicity also are correlated with mental illness. Data from the National
Comorbidity Survey-Replication show that lifetime prevalence of mental disorders is lower
among Hispanics and non-Hispanic Blacks and that the lower risk of disorder begins in
childhood (Breslau, et al 2005). At the same time, there is evidence that minorities are
overrepresented in the U.S. justice system (OJJDP, 2004). Minorities represented approximately
one third of youth in 1997, but two thirds of youth incarcerated in detention or commitment
facilities. Further, studies find minorities are overrepresented at each stage of case processing
and that these differences persist after controlling for severity of crime and prior rates offenses.
Consequently, minority status in the mental health context is a protective factor for justice
outcomes.
In our first specification, we estimate the association between ADHD and justice
outcomes with no other covariates included (Table 3A, Column 1). From this model, estimated
with the combined gender sample, we see that high levels of ADHD symptoms are associated
with a 3.7 percentage point increase in the probability of arrest, which is about a 71 percent
increase at the sample mean arrest rate of 5.2 percent. In the males only sample (Table 3B,
Column 1), high levels of ADHD symptoms are associated with a 49 percent increase in the
probability of arrest measured at the sample mean arrest rate for males. Among individuals who
have been arrested, ADHD is associated with a 12.6 percentage point increase in the probability
of conviction, which is a 28 percent increase at the sample mean conviction rate of 44.5 percent.
Similarly, in the males only sample, ADHD is associated with a 29 percent increase in the

15

likelihood of conviction at the sample mean for males.
To see whether these effects change appreciably as we add preexisting characteristics to
the model, we begin by including gender in the model (Table 3A, column 2). When gender is
included, the coefficient on ADHD declines sharply, although it remains positive and statistically
significant. The marginal effect of ADHD declines from 3.7 percentage points to 1.9 percentage
points. In the model with conviction as the dependent variable, the coefficient on ADHD also
declines when gender is added to the mode. The marginal effect declines by roughly one
percentage point, from 12.6 percent to 11.5 percent.
Including the other demographic variables to the model (column 3) has virtually no
impact on the coefficients for ADHD either in the arrest or in the conviction models.
Coefficients on the demographic variables are shown in Appendix 1 (arrest) and Appendix 2
(conviction). While having two parents in the household is associated with a decline in the
probability of arrest, race, welfare receipt and mother’s education have little independent effect
on justice outcomes. The probability of arrest increases with age, but at a declining rate. Age
also increases the probability of conviction. We run separate models for males and find similar
results.
3.2 Community Characteristics
In this section we address the role of community influences. The literature on crime finds
after controlling for individual factors, residence in underclass neighborhoods is significantly
associated with delinquent behavior (Peeples and Loeber, 1994). In addition, although urban
residence does not appear to be an independent risk factor for mental disorder for adults (Judd et
al, 2002), among adolescents, urban residence is associated with more conflict and externalizing
behaviors (Elgar et al., 2003a) and higher levels of behavioral and substance use problems

16

among juveniles (Elgar et al., 2003b). The stability, or perceived stability, of the local
environment may also influence whether youth are returned to their homes conditional on
delinquent behavior.
We control for several measures of community influences measured at the level of the
Census tract, including median housing value, percent of households with income below poverty
and its square, and urbanicity. 2 Some of these measures, for example median income, may also
proxy for family characteristics. In our sample, we find very small differences in community
characteristics across the three groups of youth (Table 2). In Table 3A, column 3, we show that
controlling for observed community characteristics has little effect on the estimated effect of
ADHD on arrest. The effect of neighborhood characteristics on conviction, however, is more
pronounced. After including community characteristics in the model, the marginal effect of
having ADHD on the likelihood of being convicted increases from 11.7 to 15.9 percentage
points. For males (Table 3B, column 3), the marginal effect increases from 13.3 to 17.5
percentage points.
3.3 The Role of Delinquent Behavior
We now move from examining the effects of confounding, preexisting characteristics to
considering potentially important mechanisms in the relationship between ADHD and justice
outcomes. One obvious explanation for the high prevalence of mental disorder in the criminal
justice system is that mental disorders in adolescents may manifest themselves in inappropriate
or unlawful conduct (Fabrega, Ulrich and Loeber, 1996; Rawal, et al 2004). Certain mental
disorders, such as hyperactivity and depression, are associated with higher rates of delinquent
behavior, not just higher rates of arrest (Barkley, Fischer, Smallish, Fletcher, 2004). Youth with
ADHD, for example, experience peer rejection and engage in numerous disruptive behaviors

17

(NIH 2000); their increased impulsivity also has been found to lead to greater initiation of fights
(Halperin et al. 1995). For persons with depression a sense of hopelessness and lack of future
orientation may lead them to discount future consequences and be more likely to commit crimes.
Juveniles also are more apt than adults to act out their depression through disruptive and
aggressive behaviors (Bleiberg, 1991). Problems with social functioning and peer relations can
make juveniles with depression more prone to delinquent behavior and aggression (Brimaher, et
al, 1998).
Delinquency is measured as the reported frequency of a given activity in the past 12
months. 3 The frequency is summed across 8 separate activities in each wave and we take an
average. We include both a linear and squared term for delinquent acts. Separately, we sum the
number of violent acts reported in the past 12 months each wave and take an average. 4 We also
create indicators for whether the youth reported a nonminor theft 5 or selling or possession illegal
drugs in each wave and take averages for both.
Youth with mental disorders were more likely to report high levels of delinquency. Table
2 shows that all youth reported 2.6 delinquent acts on average across both waves, compared to
3.0 for youth with ADHD and 3.4 for youth with depression. The average number of violent acts
was 0.8 for all youth, 1.1 for youth with ADHD and 1.1 for youth with depression. Similarly, the
0.12 of all youth reported nonminor theft and sale/possession of drugs respectively, compared to

2

We impute missing values.
The reported activities: “How often did you paint graffiti on signs on someone else’s property or in a public place;
deliberately damage property that didn’t belong to you, it to your parents or guardians about where you had been or
whom you were with; take something from store without paying for it; run away from home; drive a car without the
owner’s permission; steal something worth less than $50; and act loud, rowdy, or unruly in a public place.
4
For each wave we assigned a one if youth reported having done any of the following in the past 12 months: get
into a serious physical fight; hurt someone badly enough to need bandages or care from a doctor; use or threaten to
use a weapon to get something from someone; take part in a fight where a group of your friends was against another
group; pulled a knife or gun on someone; shot or stabbed someone. We then sum each youth’s responses across
waves, resulting in a composite variable has possible values of 0, 1 or 2.
5
We define nonminor theft as stealing more than $50 or going into a house/building to steal in the past 12 months.
3

18

16 percent and 17 percent for youth with ADHD and 18 percent for youth with depression.
In Table 3, column 5 we include the measures of delinquent behavior. We find that the
effect of ADHD remains positive and significant after controlling for delinquency, although as
expected the coefficient on ADHD drops considerably after the inclusion of the delinquency
covariates. The marginal effect declines from 1.6 percent to 0.8 percent in the full sample and
from 3.9 percent to 2.1 percent in our sample of males only. Adding delinquency measures also
has a substantial effect in the conviction models. Here the marginal effect of ADHD declines
from 7.1 percent to 5.8 percent in the full model (17.5 percent to 14.4 percent for males only).
These findings indicate that after controlling for demographic and community characteristics as
well as delinquency, youth with high levels of ADHD symptoms still fare appreciably worse
than youth without high levels of ADHD symptoms in the justice system.
3.4 The Role of Substance Use
In this section, we focus on substance use. Previous research suggests that psychiatric
disorders, including ADHD, anxiety and depression, are strong correlates of substance use
(Kandel, et al 1997; Pulkkinen & Pitkanen 1994, Caspi et al. 1996, Block et al. 1988, Boyle &
Offord 1991, Deykin et al. 1987, Deykin et al. 1992). Because alcohol and illicit drug use
among minors is by law a punishable offense, this correlation between mental illness and
substance use may be an important contributor to observed differences in arrest rates.
Following a large body of previous research, our adolescent substance use measures are
continuous measures capturing binge drinking, the frequency of alcohol use, and the frequency
of illicit drug use (Dee & Evans, 2003; DiNardo & Lemieux, 2001; Rees et al., 2001; Kenkel &
Ribar, 1994; Farrelly et al., 2001; Guillamo-Ramos et al., 2005; Swahn et al., 2004; Lundborg,

19

2002 and others). 6 For frequency of alcohol use we calculate the number of days on which the
youth drank alcohol in the past year in wave I and wave II and create an average.7 For frequency
of binge drinking we identified chronic, frequent drinkers who report binge drinking in both
wave I and wave II. Our indicator is equal to one if in both waves the youth reported report
having binged (i..e., having had 5 or more drinks on one occasion) on 2 or more days in the past
month. Our illicit drug use measures focus on marijuana use, since this drug is the most
commonly used in our sample. Marijuana use is measured as the number of times over the past
month and we take the average response for both waves. For categorical responses to survey
questions on alcohol and drug use, we use the midpoints of the categories to create continuous
measures of frequency of use.
Our data on mental illness and substance use are consistent with the prior literature. For
youth with neither disorder the average frequency of drinking alcohol drinks was 15.2 days,
compared to 19.1 days for youth with ADHD and 20.8 days for youth with depression. The
average proportion reporting binge drinking was 8 percent for youth with neither disorder, 11
percent for youth with ADHD, and 12 percent for youth with depression. Finally, average
marijuana frequency was 1.9 for youth with no disorder, 2.6 for youth with ADHD and 2.8 for
youth with depression.
Table 3, column 6 shows the effect of including substance use measures. When the
measures of binge drinking, alcohol frequency, and marijuana use are included, the coefficients
on ADHD change only modestly in both the arrest and the conviction models. Frequency of
alcohol use increases the likelihood of arrest, but not of conviction (see Appendix 1 and 2).
6

As is the case for our measures of ADHD and depression symptoms, respondents who drink heavily may or may
not meet diagnostic criteria for substance use disorders.

20

Controlling for alcohol frequency, binge drinking has a small negative effect on arrest and no
statistically significant effect on conviction. Marijuana frequency does not affect the probability
of arrest, but it is associated with an increased likelihood of conviction.
3.5 Academic Performance
Another mechanism through which mental illness may affect justice outcomes arises
from academic performance. Youth with certain mental disorders have more trouble in school
and develop poor academic performance relative to other youth. For example, youth with major
depression for example have lower grade point averages and more suspensions than other youth
(Marmorstein and Iacono, 2003). This relative poor academic performance may be a direct
consequence of the mental health symptoms experienced by the youth. A youth with poor
academic performance also may be perceived as more severely delinquent or more likely to
recidivate than another youth. Poor academic performance, thus, may affect the willingness of
the justice system to process a case informally (e.g., by not arresting or charging the youth) and
the degree of any sanction assessed. Since grades, in particular, are not observable to an
arresting officer we include this variable only in the conviction models.
We use two measures of academic performance. First, we use an average grade point
average based on youth reported grades in math and English in wave I and wave II. We also
average how many days the youth reported being absent from school with no excuse across wave
I and wave II. Absolute differences in unexcused absences were relatively small across groups,
however, youth in the full sample had fewer unexcused absences (1.3) than youth with ADHD
(1.6) and youth with depression (1.6). Column 7 in Tables 3 shows including school
performance reduces the magnitude and statistical significance of the ADHD coefficient in the
7

In waves 1 and 2, respondents provide information regarding the number of days on which the youth drank alcohol
in the past 12 months and regarding the number of drinks per occasion. We multiply these responses to create a

21

arrest model (both in the combined gender and male only samples), suggesting that these
outcomes may be a mechanism linking psychiatric symptoms to justice outcomes.

In the

conviction models, however, the magnitude and statistical significance of the ADHD coefficient
actually increases with the addition of school outcomes. This finding is counterintuitive, as
youth with elevated ADHD symptoms have worse schooling outcomes and a higher probability
of conviction compared to youth without elevated ADHD symptoms.
3.6 Parent Relationships
The strength of a youth’s relationship with their parents may proxy for whether the
parents would take an active role in the event the youth is picked up by the police following a
delinquent act. To include two measures of the parent-youth relationship. One is a parent–
adolescent activities composite which reflects the number of shared parent-child activities within
the past 4 weeks (averaged over wave I and wave II reports). This measure was based on an item
in which adolescents reported involvement in up to 10 activities with a parent. 8 Activities are
asked of mother and father separately. We included the activity in our count if it was reported
for either mother or father. In addition we include a measure of parent-child closeness. We sum
responses to five questions on a 5-point scale that measures how close adolescents’ feel to their
mother and how much they believe their mother cares about them. 9 We then average the
response across both waves. A low score indicates a closer relationship. We include an
measure of total drinks in the past year.
8
Youth were asked about having done the following in the past four weeks: have you gone shopping? Have you
played a sport? Have you gone to a religious services or a church-related event? Have you talked about someone
you’re dating or a party you went to? Have you gone to a movie, play, museum, concert, or sports event? Have you
had a talk about a personal problem you were having? Have you had a serious argument about your behavior? Have
you talked about your school work or grades Have you worked on a project for school? Have you talked about other
things you’re doing in school?
9
Youth responded that on a scale of 1 to 5 (1 being strongly agree and 5 being strongly disagree) to the following
statements: Most of the time your mother is warm and loving toward you. Your mother encourages you to be
independent. When you do something wrong that is important, your mother talks about it with you and helps you

22

indicator if there is no resident mother.
Youth report relatively small differences in parent relationships across disorders. Those
with neither ADHD nor depression had mean parental relationship scores of 8.5 compared to 8.6
for youth with ADHD and 9.0 for youth with depression. The number of joint activities with a
parent was virtually the same across groups (2.6 for youth with ADHD or no disorder and 2.8 for
youth with depression). Our multivariate regression results show that the coefficient on ADHD
does not change much with the inclusion parental relationship measures in either the arrest or the
conviction models.
IV. Chronic Depression
Table 4 has the same layout as Table 3, but shows the estimated coefficients of the binary
indicator for chronic depression. In the most basic model, depression appears to have a positive,
but not statistically significant effect on arrest. Once we add gender to the model (in the
combined gender sample), the estimated coefficient for depression then becomes positive and
statistically significant. The addition of other preexisting factors has little effect on the
depression coefficient. However, once we add delinquency as a mechanism, the effect of
depression becomes zero and not statistically significant. Adding additional mechanisms, such
as substance use, school performance and parental relationships does not change this effect.
Thus, the effect of depression on arrest can be explained by the higher rates of delinquency
among depressed individuals. The results also hold for our sample of males. In our models of
conviction, we find that depression has a positive effect on conviction in all models, but the
effect is not statistically significant. This is also true in the model estimated with males only.
V. Oaxaca Blinder Decomposition of Arrest and Conviction Rates.

understand why it is wrong. You are satisfied with the way your mother and you communicate with each other.
Overall, you are satisfied with your relationship with your mother.

23

In this section, we examine the proportion of the total gap in justice outcomes that can be
explained by observable characteristics following Oaxaca (1973) and Blinder (1973). In our
application this method involves estimating separate justice outcome equations for two groups
(e.g. those with a mental disorder and those without) and decomposing the estimated differential
in outcomes between the groups into two components: (1) a component that can be explained by
differences in the distributions of observed characteristics (e.g. differences in delinquency); and
(2) a component that can be attributed to the structure of the model (e.g. differences in the
coefficients on delinquency for the two groups and differences in unobservable endowments).
We quantify the contribution to group differences in outcomes from all measured characteristics,
i.e., delinquency, substance use, school performance, parent relationships, demographics and
community characteristics.
The decomposition for a nonlinear equation, Y = F ( Xβˆ ) , can be written as (Fairlie,
1999):
Y −Y
A

B

⎡ N A F ( X iA βˆ A ) N B F ( X iB βˆ A ) ⎤ ⎡ N B F ( X iB βˆ A ) N B F ( X iB βˆ B ) ⎤
= ⎢∑
−∑
−∑
⎥ + ⎢∑
⎥
NA
NB
NB
NB
i =1
i =1
⎢⎣ i =1
⎥⎦ ⎢⎣ i =1
⎥⎦

(2)

where A denotes the group of youth with a mental disorder, B denotes the group of youth
without, and N denotes the sample size for group j. The first term captures the part of the gap in
outcomes that is due to group differences in the distribution of X. This equation assumes that the
group with a mental disorder represents the appropriate baseline. Equally valid is a specification
that assumes that the group B, those without the mental disorder, constitutes the appropriate
baseline in which case βˆ B would be used as weights in the first part of the decomposition. In
fact, any combination of βˆ A and βˆ B could be used as weights (Ransom and Oaxaca, 1994). For
this analysis we compose the gap in justice outcomes using coefficient estimates from the pooled

24

sample of groups A and B.
The results in Table 5 confirm that most of the gap in justice outcomes for youth with
ADHD is due to differences in observable characteristics. The explained portion of the arrest
gap is 68 percent for ADHD among all youth. For convictions the explained portion of the
ADHD gap is lower, 38 percent for the full sample. For depression observables explain a higher
portion of the gap. For convictions, the observable covariates explain 71 percent of the gap for
the full sample. Table 5 also underscores the previous findings on arrests that selection on
observables favors youth with depression. Results for the male only sample are qualitatively
similar.
VI. Discussion and Conclusion
Using a large sample of adolescents, our findings show that youth with some mental
disorders fare worse in the juvenile justice system in terms of the probability of being arrested
and the probability of conviction once arrested. Our models control for most likely correlates of
mental disorders and juvenile justice outcomes. We find that elevated ADHD symptoms during
adolescence are associated with statistically significant and meaningful increases in the
probability of arrest and conviction after controlling for preexisting factors and mechanisms.
We examined factors, such as demographics and community characteristics that in most
cases preexist the youth’s mental illness. An important preexisting factor is gender, as males
fare worse in terms of justice outcomes than females. Among mechanisms that may arise from
the ADHD disorder itself, delinquency accounts for a significant fraction of the observed
difference in arrest rates between those with and without ADHD. School performance and
parental relationships play a lesser role.
For depression we did not find a disparity in arrests rates. In fact, conditional on

25

preexisting factors and mechanism, such as delinquency, substance use, and academic
performance, youth with depression appeared to have a lower probability of arrest than those
without. Depression is an “internalizing disorder” which is often not readily detected by
observers.
Our study has several important limitations. First, it is limited by the fact that the
measurement of mental disorders is based on symptom scales rather than on a diagnostic
assessment tool. Symptoms, however, are likely to be what is observed by agents of the justice
system. At the time of conviction it is possible that diagnostic information becomes available.
Our measures of justice sanctions rely on youth's recall of these events, and were not
independently confirmed with administrative records from the police or juvenile justice records.
Similarly, delinquent behaviors are self-reported and we can not rule out that the delinquent
behaviors of youth with mental illness are different from the behaviors of other youth in subtle
ways. Furthermore, we estimate an average effect of each disorder, but this may mask large
differences across jurisdictions.
This study is able to control for important individual and area characteristics that are
lacking in previous studies, but which may otherwise confound the relationship between mental
health and justice contact. Despite the richness of the data there may be dimensions of the crime
or sanction that are unobserved to us and that are correlated with the youth’s disorder leading to
biased regression results. Such unobserved characteristics could be aspects of the crime
committed (e.g., degree of violence) or of the youth’s attitude (e.g., remorse exhibited or
disrespectful behavior). In addition, since we measure delinquency and intermediate
mechanisms at the same time, the possibility of structural endogeneity remains (e.g. academic
performance leading to depressive symptoms instead of or in addition to the other way around).

26

However, in the end, this limitation is less relevant since these mechanisms did not prove to be
important empirically. Despite these limitations this study offers important advantages over
existing research and enables us to address directly the question of whether youth with mental
disorders are sanctioned disproportionately by the justice system.
Results of this study will have important implications for identifying a group of youth
whose health needs are not being appropriately recognized and who face a greater likelihood of
being punished as a result of their disorder. Bias in the justice system may reflect a lack of
understanding that untreated mental disorders can exacerbate the propensity to engage in
delinquent behavior. Careful consideration of a youth’s mental disorders could lead to more
appropriate referral of delinquent youth to community treatment services and the expansion of
the public mental health system. Recognizing the needs of youth with mental disorders, the
justice system may also develop more appropriate sanctions that include treatment components.
With appropriate assistance, youth with mental disorders who are serving sentences, such as
probation, may more successfully comply with the terms of probation and not face additional
sanctioning. Ultimately, this study has implications for education programs in the justice system,
as well as the delivery system of public mental health services.

27

References
Barkley RA, Fischer M, Smallish L, Fletcher K (2004) Young adult Follow-up of Hyperactive
Children: Antisocial Activities and Drug Use. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry 45(2):195-211.
Barsky, R, Bound J, Kerwin KC, Lupton J, (2002) “Accounting for the Black-White Wealth
Gap: A Nonparametric Approach,” Journal of the American Statistical Association
97(459): 663-673
Bearman, PS, Jones J, Udry, JR. The National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health:
Research Design (online). Available at
http://ww.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth/design.html.
Block, J. et al. (1988). Longitudinally foretelling drug usage in adolescence: Early childhood
personality and environmental precursors. Child Development, 59, 336-355.
Breslau J, Aguilar-Baxiola S, Kendler KS, Su M, et al (2005) “Specifying Race-Ethnic
Differences in Risk for Psychiatric Disorder in a USA National Sample,” Psychological
Medicine 35:1-12
Boyle, M.H. & Offord, D.R. (1991). Psychiatric disorder and substance use in adolescence.
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 36, 699-705.
Brennan PA, Mednick SA, Hodgins S. (2000). Major mental disorders and criminal violence in
a danish birth cohort. Archives of General Psychiatry 57:494-500.
Bridges, GS and Steen, S (1998). Racial Disparities in Official Assessments of Juvenile
Offenders: Attributional Stereotypes as Mediating Mechanisms. American Sociological
Review 63:916-923.
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Department of Justice (1999), Mental Health and Treatment in

28

Inmates and Probationers Publication Number NCJ174463, (Washington, DC: USDOJ)
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Department of Justice (2005) “Probation and Parole in the United
States, 2004” Publication Number NCJ 210676 accessed at www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs
updated November 2, 2005 and accessed on March 1, 2006
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Department of Justice (2006) “Corrections Statistics” Publication
Number accessed at www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs updated January 17, 2006 and accessed on
March 1, 2006
Campbell, AD. 1998. Kansas V Hendricks: Absent a Clear Meaning of Punishment, States are
Permitted to Violate Double Jeopardy Clause. Loyola University of Chicago Law Review
30:87-131.
Carneiro P, Heckman, JJ, Masterov, DV. (2005) “Labor Market Discrimination and Racial
Differences in Premarket Factors” Journal of Law and Economics 48(1): 1-39.
Caspi, A. et al. (1996). Behavioral observations at age 3 years predict adult psychiatric
disorders: Longitudinal evidence from a birth cohort. Archives of General Psychiatry 53,
1033-1039.
Council of State Governments, Criminal Justice/Mental Health Consensus Project (New York:
Council of State Governments June 2002) available at www.consensusproject.org
(August 15, 2004)
Dee, T., & Evans, W. (2003). Teen Drinking and Educational Attainment: Evidence from TwoSample Instrumental Variables Estimates. Journal of Labor Economics, 21(1), 178-209.
Deykin, E.Y. et al.. (1987). Adolescent depression, alcohol, and drug abuse. American Journal of
Public Health, 77, 178-182.
Deykin, E.Y. et al.. (1992). Depressive illness among chemically dependent adolescents.

29

American Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 1341-1347.
DiNardo, J., & Lemieux, T. (2001). Alcohol, Marijuana, and American youth: the unintended
consequences of government regulation. Journal of Health Economics, 20, 991-1010.
Ditton, Paula M. "Mental Health Treatment of Inmates and Probationers," Bureau of Justice
Statistics Special Report (Washington, DC: U.S. Department Justice, Office of Justice
Programs, July 1999)
Dovidio JF, Brigham, JC, Johnson BT, GAertner SL. (1996). Stereotyping, prejudice, and
discrimination: Another look. In Macrae N, STangor C, and Hewstone M (eds),
Stereotypes and Stereotyping (New York: Guilford): 276-319.
Duclos CW, Beals J, Novins DK, Martin C, Jewett CS (1998) Prevalence of Common Mental
Health Disorders Among American Indian Adolescent Detainees. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37:866-873.
Duclos CW. Beals J. Novins DK. Manson SM. Psychiatric disorders in detainees.[comment].
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 42(2):127, 2003
Feb
Fabrega H, Ulrich R and Loeber R (1996). Adolescent Psychopathology as a function of
informant and risk status. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease. 184: 27-34.
Farrelly, M., Bray, J., Zarkin, G., & Wendling, B. (2001). The joint demand for cigarettes and
marijuana: evidence from the National Household Surveys on Drug Abuse. Journal of
Health Economics, 20, 51-68.
Feldman, L., Harvey, B., Holowaty, P., & Shortt, L. (1999). Alcohol Use Beliefs and Behaviors
Among High School Students. Journal of Adolescent Health, 24, 48-58.

30

Garland AF, Hough RL, McCabe KM, et al: Prevalence of psychiatric disorders in youths across
five sectors of care. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry 40:409-418, 2001
Glied, Sherry, R. Moore, C. Hoven, A.B. Garrett, D. Regier. “Children’s Access to Mental
Health Care: Does Insurance Matter?” Health Affairs, 16(1) 1997: 167-174.
Guilamo-Ramos, V., Jaccard, J., Turrisi, R., & Johansson, M. (2005). Parental and School
Correlates of Binge Drinking Among Middle School Students. American Journal of
Public Health, 95(5), 894-899.
Guy E, Platt E, Zwerling I, and Bullock S: Mental health status of prisoners in an urban jail.
Criminal Justice and Behavior. 1985;12(1): 29-53.
Henggeler, S. W. (1994). A consensus: Conclusions of the APA Task Force report on innovative
models of mental health services for children, adolescents, and their families. Journal of
Clinical Child Psychology,23(Suppl), 3-6.
Hochstedler, E, “Twice Cursed? The Mentally Disordered Criminal Defendant” Criminal Justice
and Behavior. 1987;14(3): 251-267
Kandel DB. Johnson JG. Bird HR. Canino G. Goodman SH. Lahey BB. Regier DA. SchwabStone M. (1997). Psychiatric disorders associated with substance use among children and
adolescents: findings from the Methods for the Epidemiology of Child and Adolescent
Mental Disorders (MECA) Study. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology. 25(2):121-32.
Kenkel, D., & Ribar, D. (1994). Alcohol Consumption and Young Adults' Socioeconomic Status.
Brookings Papers in Economic Activity, 119-175.
Lundborg, P. (2002). Young People and Alcohol: And Econometric Analysis. Addiction, 97,
1573-1582.

31

Marmorstein N and Iacono W (2003). Major Depression and Conduct Disorder in a Twin
Sample: Gender, Functioning and Risk for Future Psychopathology Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 42(2):225-233.
Neil, D and Johnson W (1996), “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage
Differences,” Journal of Political Economy 104(5): 869-95.
Novak, KJ and Engle, RS (2005). “Disentangling the influence of suspects’ demeanor and
mental disorder on arrest,” Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies and
Management 28(3):493-512
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 2004. U.S. Department of Justice.
Juvenile Court Statistics, 2000. Washington, DC: OJJDP, DOJ.
Peeples, F and Loeber R. 1994. Do Individual Factors and Neighborhood Context Explain Ethnic
Differences in Juvenile Delinquency? Journal of Quantitative Criminology 10(2): 141157
Powell TA, Holt JC, Fondacaro KM: The prevalence of mental illness among inmates in a rural
state. Law Hum Behav. 1997; 21(4): 427-438.
Pulkkinen, L. & Pitkanen, T.. (1994). A prospective study of the precursors to problem drinking
in young adulthood. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 55, 578-87.
Rawal P, Romansky J, Jenuwine M, Lyons JS (2004). Racial Differences in the Mental Health
Needs and Service Utilization of Youth in the Juvenile Justice System. Journal of
Behavioral Heath Services and Research 31(3):242-254
Rees, D., Argys, L., & Averett, S. (2001). New Evidence on the Relationship Between Substance
Use and Adolescent Sexual Behavior. Journal of Health Economics, 20, 835- 845.

32

Robins, LN and Regier DA. Psychiatric Disorders in America: The Epidemiologic Catchment
Area Study. (New York: Free Press, 1991)
Shaffer, D., Fisher, P., Dulcan, M.K., Davies, M., Piacentini, J., Schwab-Stone, M.E., et al.
(1996). The NIMH diagnostic interview schedule for children version 2.3 (DISC-2.3):
Description, acceptability, prevalence rates, and performance in the MECA study.
Methods for the epidemiology of child and adolescent mental disorders study. Journal of
the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 35(7), 865-77.
Swahn, M., Simon, T., Hamming, B., & Guerrero, J. (2004). Alcohol-consumption behaviors and
risk for physical fighting and injuries among adolescent drinkers. Addictive Behaviors,
29, 959-963.
Swanson JW, Holzer CE, Ganju VK, et al: Violence and psychiatric disorder in the community:
evidence from the epidemiologic catchment area surveys. Hospital and Community
Psychiatry 41:761-770., 1990
Teplin LA. 1990. The prevalence of severe mental disorder among male urban jail detainees:
comparison with the epidemiologic catchment area program. Am J Public Health. 80(6):
663-669.
Teplin, Linda A. 1984. Criminalizing Mental Disorder: The Comparative Arrest Rate of the
Mentally Ill. American Psychologist vol. 39 (no. 7): 794-803.
Teplin LA, Abram KM, McClelland GM., et al (2002): Psychiatric disorders in youth in juvenile
detention. Archives of General Psychiatry 59:1133-1143
Timmons-Mitchell J. Brown C. Schulz SC. Webster SE. Underwood LA. Semple WE. Spring
1997. Comparing the mental health needs of female and male incarcerated juvenile
delinquents. Behavioral Sciences & the Law. 15(2):195-202.

33

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1999. Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon
General—Executive Summary, Chapter 3. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration,
Center for Mental Health Services, National Institutes of Health, National Institute of
Mental Health.
Wasserman, G.A., McReynolds, L.S., Lucas, C.P., Fisher, P., Santos, L., (2002). The voice
DISC-IV with incarcerated male youths: prevalence of disorder. Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 41:314-321
Wexler, DB. 1983. The Structure of Civil Commitment: Patterns, Pressures, and Interactions
with Mental Health Legislation. Law and Human Behavior 7:1-18.

34

Table 1: Total Gap in Justice Outcomes by Mental Disorder
Arrest Before Age 19
All Youth (N=9,201)
Males Only (N=4,235)

5.2%
9.0%

Youth with ADHD (N=3,110)
Youth without ADHD (N=6,091)

7.6%
3.9%

Males with ADHD (N=1,752)
Males without ADHD (N=2,483)

11.5%
7.1%

Youth with Chronic Depression (N=3,335)
Youth without Chronic Depression (N=5,866)

5.7%
5.0%

Males with Chronic Depression (N=1,247)
Males without Chronic Depression (N=2,988)

10.9%
8.3%

Conviction Before Age 19
All Youth (N=383)
Males Only (N=317)

44.5%
46.3%

Youth with ADHD (N=210)
Youth without ADHD (N=173)

50.6%
37.8%

Males with ADHD (N=187)
Males without ADHD (N=130)

52.9%
38.3%

Youth with Chronic Depression (N=158)
Youth without Chronic Depression (N=225)

48.1%
42.3%

Males with Chronic Depression (N=118)
Males without Chronic Depression (N=199)

52.2%
43.2%

35

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics, Mean Values
Variable
ADHD (binary indicator)
Chronic Depression (binary indicator)
Male
Other Demographics
Age
Black
Other NonWhite
Two Parent Household
Welfare
Mother, High School or less
Community Characteristics
Urbanicity
Ratio (Arrest/Reported Crimes)
Percent of Households in Poverty
Median Housing Value ($1000)
Delinquent Behaviors
Reported Delinquent Acts
Theft (binary indicator)
Drug Sale/Possession (binary indicator)
Violent Acts
Substance Use
Alcohol Frequency
Alcohol Binge Drinking (binary indicator)
Marijuana Frequency

Full Sample
(N=9,201)

Youth with
ADHD
(N=3,110)

0.36
0.35
0.49

1.00
0.42
0.59

Youth with
Chronic
Depression
(N=3,335)
0.43
1.00
0.40

15.72
(0.10)
0.16
0.18
0.68
0.11
0.56

15.72
(0.11)
0.14
0.17
0.65
0.13
0.60

15.95
(0.10)
0.19
0.19
0.63
0.14
0.59

0.51
(0.04)
0.21
(0.01)
0.14
(0.01)
82.19
(3.80)

0.51
(0.04)
0.21
(0.01)
0.15
(0.01)
79.16
(3.86)

0.52
(0.04)
0.21
(0.01)
0.16
(0.01)
80.21
(3.93)

2.63
(0.06)
0.12
0.12
0.81
(0.03)

3.01
(0.09)
0.16
0.17
1.12
(0.05)

3.36
(0.09)
0.18
0.18
1.09
(0.06)

15.19
(0.73)
0.08
1.93
(0.25)

19.07
(1.22)
0.11
2.55
(0.41)

20.79
(1.29)
0.12
2.83
(0.36)

1.25
(0.09)
2.8
(0.2)

1.60
(0.13)
2.6
(0.3)

1.63
(0.13)
2.7
(0.2)

8.50
(0.06)
2.64
(0.03)
0.04

8.61
(0.09)
2.62
(0.04)
0.06

9.00
(0.09)
2.77
(0.04)
0.05

School
School Absences
Grade Point Average
Parent Relationship
Perceived Relationship (low is good)
Parent Activities
No resident mother (binary indicator)

Standard deviation in parentheses
36

Table 3: Juvenile Justice Outcomes: The ADHD Gap
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.25
(1.78)

0.26
(1.85)

[.007]
0.30
(1.94)
[.019]

[.007]
0.30
(2.02)
[.020]

Panel A: Arrested before Age 19 – Logistic Model
Coefficient (t statistic) [Marginal Effect]
Full Sample (N = 9,201)

Males Only (N = 4,235)

0.70
(5.49)
[.037]
0.53
(3.75)
[.044]

0.49
(3.80)
[.019]

0.46
(3.48)
[.016]
0.50
(3.50)
[.039]

0.47
(3.59)
[.016]
0.51
(3.58)
[.039]

0.27
(1.94)
[.008]
0.31
(2.06)
[.021]

0.27
(1.90)
[.007]
0.31
(2.03)
[.021]

Panel B: Convicted Conditional on Arrest prior to 18– Logistic Model
Coefficient (t statistic) [Marginal Effect]
Full Sample (N = 383)

Males (N =317)

0.51
(2.05)
[.126]
0.54
(2.00)
[.133]

0.47
(1.82)
[.115]

0.47
(1.81)
[.117]
0.54
(2.00)
[.133]

0.65
(2.55)
[.159]
0.71
(2.65)
[.175]

0.52
(1.82)
[.126]
0.58
(1.99)
[.144]

0.50
(1.62)
[.123]
0.56
(1.72)
[.138]

0.58
(1.85)
[.141]
0.68
(2.00)
[.166]

0.56
(1.85)
[.137]
0.63
1.87
[.155]

Gender
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Other demographic characteristics
X
X
X
X
X
X
Community characteristics
X
X
X
X
X
Delinquent behaviors
X
X
X
X
Substance use
X
X
X
School Performance
X
X
Parent Relationship
X
Each cell shows the estimated coefficient of a binary indicator for ADHD symptoms and is from a separate regression. Parentheses contain t statistics and
brackets contain the marginal effect. Other demographic characteristics include age, age squared, race/ethnicity, welfare receipt, mother’s education, and family
structure. Community characteristics include ratio of county arrests to reported crimes, percent of households in poverty by census tract, and median housing
value by census tract. Delinquent behaviors include number of delinquent acts, and binary indicators for theft, drug sale or possession, and violence. Substance
use includes alcohol frequency, binge drinking, and marijuana frequency. School absences include days missed in the past year without an excuse. Parent
relationships include continuous measures of perceived parental relationship and number activities in the past four weeks. Details are provided in the text.

37

Table 4: Juvenile Justice Outcomes: The Depression Gap
(1)

Full Sample (N = 9,201)

Males Only (N = 4,235)

Full Sample (N = 383)

Males (N = 317)

0.13
(0.53)
[.007]
0.30
(1.91)
[.026]

0.13
(0.53)
[.031]
0.21
(0.78)
[.053]

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Panel A: Arrested before Age 19 – Logistic Model
Coefficient (t statistic) [Marginal Effect]
0.20
0.32
0.36
0.29
0.32
0.19
(0.85)
(1.43)
(1.50)
(1.15)
(1.12)
(0.67)
[.014]
[.013]
[.013]
[.0001] [-.0003] [-.0004]
0.28
0.29
-0.08
-0.09
-0.10
(1.72)
(1.85)
(0.45)
(0.52)
(0.57)
[.022]
[.023]
[-.005]
[-.006]
[-.006]
Panel B: Convicted Conditional on Arrest prior to 18– Logistic Model
Coefficient (t statistic) [Marginal Effect]
0.20
0.32
0.36
0.29
0.32
0.22
(0.85)
(1.43)
(1.50)
(1.15)
(1.12)
(0.77)
[.050]
[.080]
[.089]
[.071]
[.079]
[.047]
0.36
0.43
0.34
0.39
0.26
(1.37)
(1.51)
(1.13)
(1.11)
(0.71)
[.091]
[.107]
[.086]
[.098]
[.064]

(8)

0.09
(0.31)
[-.0006]
-0.10
(0.59)
[-.006]

0.14
(0.47)
[.021]
0.19
(0.51)
[.047]

Gender
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Other demographic characteristics
X
X
X
X
X
X
Community characteristics
X
X
X
X
X
Delinquent behaviors
X
X
X
X
Substance use
X
X
X
School Performance
X
X
Parent Relationship
X
Each cell shows the estimated coefficient of a binary indicator for chronic depression symptoms and is from a separate regression. Parentheses contain t statistics
and brackets contain the marginal effect. Other demographic characteristics include age, age squared, race/ethnicity, welfare receipt, mother’s education, and
family structure. Community characteristics include ratio of county arrests to reported crimes, percent of households in poverty by census tract, and median
housing value by census tract. Delinquent behaviors include number of delinquent acts, and binary indicators for theft, drug sale or possession, and violence.
Substance use includes alcohol frequency, binge drinking, and marijuana frequency. School absences include days missed in the past year without an excuse.
Parent relationships include continuous measures of perceived parental relationship and number activities in the past four weeks. Details are provided in the text.

38

Table 5: Decomposition of the Gap in Justice Outcomes
Total Gap

Gap due to
Observables

%

ADHD
Probability of Arrest
Probability of Conviction

3.7
12.8

2.5
4.8

67.6
37.5

ADHD Males Only
Probability of Arrest
Probability of Conviction

4.4
14.6

2.2
5.1

50.0
34.9

Depression
Probability of Arrest
Probability of Conviction

0.7
5.8

0.8
4.1

114.3
70.7

Depression Males Only
Probability of Arrest
Probability of Conviction

2.6
9.0

3.3
5.7

126.9
63.3

39

Appendix 1: Probability of Arrest Prior to Age 19: The ADHD Gap (N=9,201)
ADHD
Male
Age
Age^2
Black
OtherNonWhite
Two Parent Household
Welfare
Mother, High School or less
Urbanicity
RatioArrests/CrimesReported
Percent Poverty
Percent Poverty^2
Median Housing Value ($1000)
Delinquent Acts
Delinquent Acts^2
Theft
Drug Sale/Possession
Violent Acts
Alcohol Frequency
Alcohol Binge
Marijuana Frequency

Column1 Column2 Column3 Column4 Column5 Column6 Column7 Column8
0.70
0.49
0.46
0.47
0.27
0.27
0.25
0.26
(5.49)
(3.80)
(3.48)
(3.59)
(1.94)
(1.90)
(1.78)
(1.85)
1.75
1.80
1.79
1.68
1.68
1.70
1.72
(8.74)
(8.98)
(8.84)
(8.00)
(8.03)
(8.12)
(8.20)
1.31
1.32
0.64
0.69
0.68
0.63
(1.08)
(1.05)
(0.50)
(0.55)
(0.53)
(0.49)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(1.19)
(1.16)
(0.66)
(0.73)
(0.73)
(0.67)
(0.05)
0.10
0.11
0.14
0.16
0.15
(0.27)
(0.41)
(0.48)
(0.60)
(0.69)
(0.63)
0.00
0.03
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.01)
(0.14)
(0.55)
(0.51)
(0.59)
(0.58)
(0.83)
(0.84)
(0.68)
(0.68)
(0.64)
(0.68)
(5.71)
(5.81)
(4.24)
(4.20)
(3.94)
(4.10)
0.22
0.30
0.30
0.28
0.24
0.21
(1.04)
(1.36)
(1.23)
(1.13)
(0.99)
(0.84)
(0.19)
(0.14)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.12)
(0.09)
(1.30)
(0.97)
(0.57)
(0.53)
(0.85)
(0.56)
0.09
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.05
(0.54)
(0.20)
(0.23)
(0.27)
(0.27)
0.12
0.04
(0.03)
0.00
0.01
(0.15)
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(2.66)
(2.59)
(2.76)
(2.87)
(2.90)
(1.20)
(1.19)
(1.27)
(1.30)
(1.29)
3.00
3.14
3.52
3.84
3.88
(0.71)
(0.73)
(0.84)
(0.90)
(0.90)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
(0.16)
(0.29)
(0.20)
(0.27)
(0.26)
0.20
0.19
0.19
0.19
(3.47)
(3.33)
(3.29)
(3.15)
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
(0.01)
(1.33)
(1.23)
(1.30)
(1.27)
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.02
(0.50)
(0.28)
(0.14)
(0.15)
0.32
0.24
0.23
0.23
(2.39)
(1.71)
(1.66)
(1.65)
0.12
0.10
0.10
0.10
(2.48)
(1.93)
(1.88)
(1.92)
0.003
0.003
0.003
(1.84)
(1.91)
(1.97)
0.23
0.15
0.16
(0.91)
(0.59)
(0.61)
0.00
0.00
0.00
(0.08)
(0.14)
(0.15)

40

0.04
(2.76)

School Absences
Parent Relationship
Parent Activities
No resident mother
Constant

(3.20)
(26.04)

(4.30)
(21.54)

(12.74)
(1.37)

t-statistics below coefficients

41

(12.66)
(1.31)

(7.58)
(0.77)

(7.80)
(0.80)

(7.59)
(0.77)

0.04
(2.73)
0.01
(0.36)
0.01
(0.16)
(0.26)
(0.67)
(7.31)
(0.72)

Appendix 2: Probability of Conviction: The ADHD Gap (N=383)

ADHD
Male
Age
Age^2
Black
Other NonWhite
Two Parent Household
Welfare
Mother, High School or less
Urbanicity
RatioArrests/CrimesReported
Percent Poverty
Percent Poverty^2
Median Housing Value ($1000)
Delinquent Acts
Delinquent Acts^2
Theft
Drug Sale/Possession
Violent Acts
Alcohol Frequency
Alcohol Binge
Marijuana Frequency

Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4 Column 5 Column 6 Column 7 Column 8
0.51
0.47
0.47
0.65
0.52
0.50
0.58
0.56
(2.05)
(1.82)
(1.81)
(2.55)
(1.82)
(1.62)
(1.85)
(1.85)
0.54
0.60
0.60
0.67
0.70
0.62
0.77
(1.92)
(2.06)
(1.93)
(1.80)
(1.71)
(1.52)
(1.82)
-2.03
-2.26
-2.95
-3.72
-3.79
-3.92
(1.05)
(1.20)
(1.49)
(1.81)
(1.77)
(1.69)
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.11
0.11
0.12
(0.95)
(1.10)
(1.40)
(1.73)
(1.67)
(1.58)
-0.19
-0.16
-0.29
-0.58
-0.46
-0.43
(0.61)
(0.44)
(0.74)
(1.27)
(0.94)
(0.89)
0.12
0.26
0.27
0.15
0.22
0.35
(0.37)
(0.72)
(0.72)
(0.37)
(0.55)
(0.83)
-0.37
-0.28
-0.39
-0.28
-0.26
-0.07
(1.43)
(1.05)
(1.38)
(0.99)
(0.87)
(0.23)
0.26
0.43
0.48
0.73
0.74
0.96
(0.73)
(1.18)
(1.34)
(1.96)
(1.90)
(2.60)
0.02
0.06
-0.04
-0.13
-0.27
-0.27
(0.07)
(0.23)
(0.14)
(0.47)
(1.06)
(1.01)
0.75
0.68
0.90
0.93
1.01
(2.65)
(2.48)
(2.96)
(2.83)
(2.97)
1.77
1.02
1.28
1.26
1.83
(1.00)
(0.57)
(0.67)
(0.62)
(0.80)
-11.81
-12.91
-13.20
-14.75
-16.01
(3.10)
(3.36)
(3.36)
(3.51)
(3.60)
21.18
24.09
24.94
27.24
30.45
(2.86)
(3.14)
(3.15)
(3.25)
(3.47)
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.01
-0.01
(1.71)
(1.54)
(1.95)
(1.85)
(1.83)
0.23
0.30
0.28
0.25
(2.28)
(3.05)
(2.80)
(2.58)
-0.02
-0.02
-0.02
-0.02
(2.77)
(3.53)
(3.24)
(3.19)
0.36
0.50
0.39
0.53
(1.82)
(2.56)
(2.06)
(2.67)
-0.08
-0.19
-0.25
-0.26
(0.43)
(0.93)
(1.22)
(1.31)
0.09
0.12
0.11
0.09
(1.06)
(1.40)
(1.26)
(1.03)
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
(1.88)
(1.96)
(2.06)
0.36
0.21
0.27
(0.97)
(0.55)
(0.70)
0.01
0.01
0.02

42

(1.82)

(2.11)
0.07
(2.75)
-0.26
(1.42)

29.42
(1.83)

31.09
(1.87)

School Absences
Grade Point Average
Parent Relationship
Parent Activities
No resident mother
Constant

-0.46
(2.15)

-0.90
(3.22)

16.49
(1.10)

t-statistics below coefficients

43

18.40
(1.26)

23.71
(1.53)

(2.51)
0.07
(2.86)
-0.29
(1.61)
0.10
(1.93)
0.26
(2.41)
1.68
(2.41)
30.62
(1.71)

Appendix 3: Probability of Arrest Prior to Age 19: The Depression Gap (N=9,201)
Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4 Column 5 Column 6 Column 7 Column 8
0.15
0.38
0.37
0.38
0.00
-0.01
-0.02
-0.02
Chronic Depression
(1.04)
(2.82)
(2.71)
(2.83)
(0.03)
(0.08)
(0.11)
(0.17)
1.87
1.92
1.91
1.71
1.71
1.73
1.74
Male
(9.68)
(9.87)
(9.72)
(8.42)
(8.46)
(8.56)
(8.65)
1.29
1.29
0.64
0.70
0.68
0.64
age
(1.07)
(1.04)
(0.50)
(0.55)
(0.54)
(0.50)
-0.05
-0.05
-0.03
-0.03
-0.03
-0.03
Age^2
(1.18)
(1.15)
(0.66)
(0.73)
(0.73)
(0.68)
-0.12
0.04
0.09
0.12
0.14
0.13
Black
(0.60)
(0.16)
(0.37)
(0.50)
(0.60)
(0.56)
-0.05
-0.01
-0.11
-0.10
-0.12
-0.12
OtherNonWhite
(0.27)
(0.08)
(0.60)
(0.55)
(0.63)
(0.62)
-0.84
-0.85
-0.69
-0.69
-0.65
-0.69
Two Parent Household
(5.83)
(5.95)
(4.37)
(4.32)
(4.05)
(4.18)
0.20
0.28
0.30
0.28
0.24
0.21
Welfare
(0.93)
(1.26)
(1.20)
(1.11)
(0.97)
(0.84)
-0.17
-0.12
-0.08
-0.07
-0.12
-0.09
Mother, High School or less
(1.23)
(0.89)
(0.53)
(0.49)
(0.81)
(0.54)
0.08
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.04
Urbanicity
(0.48)
(0.14)
(0.17)
(0.22)
(0.22)
0.12
0.07
-0.01
0.03
0.04
RatioArrests/CrimesReported
(0.15)
(0.09)
(0.01)
(0.04)
(0.04)
-2.63
-2.59
-2.76
-2.86
-2.88
Percent Poverty
(1.18)
(1.19)
(1.27)
(1.30)
(1.29)
2.75
3.11
3.49
3.81
3.85
Percent Poverty^2
(0.65)
(0.73)
(0.84)
(0.90)
(0.90)
Median Housing Value
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
($1000)
(0.09)
(0.30)
(0.22)
(0.28)
(0.27)
0.21
0.20
0.20
0.19
Delinquent Acts
(3.59)
(3.46)
(3.41)
(3.29)
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
Delinquent Acts^2
(1.43)
(1.33)
(1.40)
(1.38)
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.02
Theft
(0.50)
(0.27)
(0.13)
(0.14)
0.32
0.25
0.23
0.23
Drug Sale/Possession
(2.43)
(1.74)
(1.68)
(1.67)
0.13
0.11
0.10
0.11
Violent Acts
(2.66)
(2.10)
(2.03)
(2.08)
0.003
0.003
0.003
Alcohol Frequency
(1.78)
(1.86)
(1.92)
0.25
0.17
0.17
Alcohol Binge
(0.95)
(0.63)
(0.65)
0.00
0.00
0.00
Marijuana Frequency

44

(0.07)

(0.12)
0.04
(2.89)

-7.77
(0.80)

-7.56
(0.77)

School Absences
Parent Relationship
Parent Activities
No resident mother
Constant

-2.95
(27.24)

-4.30
(23.91)

-12.48
(1.35)

t-statistics below coefficients

45

-12.32
(1.28)

-7.48
(0.76)

(0.12)
0.04
(2.85)
0.01
(0.42)
0.01
(0.17)
-0.23
(0.57)
-7.32
(0.73)

Appendix 4: Probability of Conviction: The Depression Gap (N=383)
Depression
Male
Age
Age^2
Black
Other NonWhite
Two Parent Household
Welfare
Mother, High School or less
Urbanicity
RatioArrests/CrimesReported
Percent Poverty
Percent Poverty^2
Median Housing Value ($1000)
Delinquent Acts
Delinquent Acts^2
Theft
Drug Sale/Possession
Violent Acts
Alcohol Frequency
Alcohol Binge
Marijuana Frequency

Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4 Column 5 Column 6 Column 7 Column 8
0.13
0.20
0.32
0.36
0.29
0.32
0.19
0.09
(0.53)
(0.85)
(1.43)
(1.50)
(1.15)
(1.12)
(0.66)
(0.30)
0.66
0.75
0.79
0.82
0.88
0.78
0.88
(2.39)
(2.58)
(2.47)
(2.16)
(2.16)
(1.89)
(2.06)
-2.13
-2.38
-3.10
-3.81
-3.75
-3.83
(1.14)
(1.28)
(1.56)
(1.83)
(1.76)
(1.68)
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.11
0.11
0.11
(1.03)
(1.17)
(1.47)
(1.74)
(1.66)
(1.56)
-0.27
-0.24
-0.36
-0.66
-0.54
-0.52
(0.82)
(0.64)
(0.93)
(1.42)
(1.14)
(1.09)
0.11
0.28
0.28
0.14
0.2
0.31
(0.36)
(0.80)
(0.75)
(0.36)
(0.50)
(0.74)
-0.36
-0.26
-0.39
-0.28
-0.26
-0.06
(1.35)
(0.97)
(1.38)
(0.97)
(0.88)
(0.20)
0.29
0.45
0.50
0.73
0.71
0.94
(0.80)
(1.24)
(1.40)
(1.97)
(1.86)
(2.52)
0.06
0.11
-0.02
-0.11
-0.25
-0.3
(0.22)
(0.42)
(0.06)
(0.41)
(0.98)
(1.12)
0.63
0.60
0.85
0.87
0.96
(2.17)
(2.11)
(2.77)
(2.64)
(2.83)
1.52
0.78
1.10
1.17
1.68
(0.80)
(0.41)
(0.55)
(0.55)
(0.71)
-11.19
-12.53
-13.01
-14.38
-15.61
(2.91)
(3.29)
(3.27)
(3.44)
(3.52)
19.79
23.28
24.55
26.75
30.05
(2.64)
(3.06)
(3.11)
(3.30)
(3.53)
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.01
-0.01
(1.60)
(1.44)
(1.81)
(1.74)
(1.69)
0.24
0.31
0.29
0.27
(2.49)
(3.21)
(3.05)
(2.82)
-0.02
-0.02
-0.02
-0.02
(3.09)
(3.77)
(3.57)
(3.55)
0.37
0.52
0.42
0.55
(1.89)
(2.73)
(2.25)
(2.80)
-0.12
-0.25
-0.3
-0.3
(0.70)
(1.32)
(1.50)
(1.61)
0.11
0.14
0.14
0.12
(1.24)
(1.60)
(1.58)
(1.42)
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
(1.63)
(1.68)
(1.78)
0.30
0.17
0.24
(0.81)
(0.47)
(0.63)
0.01
0.01
0.02
(1.75)
(2.06)
(2.48)

46

0.07
(2.57)
-0.23
(1.24)

School Absences
Grade Point Average
Parent Relationship
Parent Activities
No resident mother
Constant

-0.24
(1.45)
0.13
(0.53)

-0.83
(3.15)
0.20
(0.85)

17.34
(1.20)
0.32
(1.43)

t-statistics below coefficients

47

19.55
(1.35)
0.36
(1.50)

25.03
(1.61)
0.29
(1.15)

30.29
(1.86)
0.32
(1.12)

30.89
(1.87)

0.07
(2.75)
-0.27
(1.49)
0.09
(1.83)
0.25
(2.26)
1.83
(2.76)
30.14
(1.70)

