                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE FORECASTING ABILITY OF MONEY
                     MARKET FUND MANAGERS AND
                        ITS ECONOMIC VALUE


                           Alex Kane

                          Young Ki Lee


                     Working Paper No. 12143




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         December 1983




We wish to thank Paul Berger, Alan Marcus, Robert McDonald and Don
Smith for helpful discussions. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper 1il243
                                               December 1983



            The Forecasting Ability of Money Market Fund
                   Managers and Its Economic Value


                              ABSTRACT




     The model proposed by Merton(1981) to determine the
value of' forecasting ability is adapted to investigate
whether money market fund managers successfully anticipate
changes in the yield curve by adjusting the average maturity
of their portfolios in the right direction. The potential
economic value of' such behavior is assessed, and it is shown
that if the portfolios of all money market funds were
aggregated it would appear that managers are good forecasters
even if individually they possess insignificant forecasting
ability. At the same time, the economic value of' the aggregate
portfolio will be diminished because of the reduced net change
in average maturity. Thus, diversifying into many money market
funds will not attain the gain that could be realized if' an
individual manager had a forecasting ability equal to the
quality of the average forecast.
     A sample of 34 money market funds is investigated. Analysis
suggests that a small fraction of the funds exhibited forecasting
skills, but even theygenerated negligible economic value because
the changes in their portfolios average maturity were too small.
There appears to be no relationship between forecasting ability
and economic success of money market funds as measured by asset
size and growth.




                                    Alex Kane and Young Ki Lee
                                    School of Management
                                    Boston University
                                    704 Commonwealth Avenue
                                    Boston, MA 02211
             THE FORECASTING ABILITY OF MONEY MARKET FUND MANAGERS

                             AND ITS ECONOMIC VALUE



 I. INTRODUCTION

    The performance of investment managers encompasses two elements: (1)

Microforecasting: the ability to forecast price movements of individual

stocks and (2) Macroforecasting:    the ability to forecast the performance of

equities relative to fixed income securities.

    Merton (1981) motivates the study of macroforecasting by demonstrating the

staggering value of macroforecasting ability; using monthly returns of

Treasury—bills and a portfolio invested in the NYSE for the period 1927—1978

he demonstrates that a manager who started with 1OOO in January 1927 and

switched funds between these two assets every month with perfect foresight,

would have produced by December 1978 a fund valued at approximately

5,4OO,OOO,OOO compared with approximately 67,OOO when consistently invested

in the NYSE index. Such numbers explain the zeal of practitioners in

attemptiong to tap this potential reward and attempts by students of finance

to identify above—average macroforecasting talents.

    Studies of macroforecasting prior to Merton's (1981) work1 used the

capital asset pricing model (CAPM) to identify the element of macroforecasting

in the overall performance. Merton (1981) and Henriksson and Merton (1981)

develop a more general approach to measure macroforecasting ability.

   All of these studies, however, share one common assumption, namely that

managers allocate their funds to one risk—free asset and a portfolio chosen

from a universe of risky securities. The nominally risk—free asset is
commonly taken to be a Treasury—bill of maturity equal to the portfolio

rebalancing interval. A large number of individual and institutional

investors use money—market funds as proxies for risk—free investments.2 The

keen competition among these money—market funds (MMF) for the investor's

dollar inevitably leads to the question of another kind of macroforecasting

ability, i.e., the prediction of short—term movements in the yield curve. The

measurement and economic value of interest rate forecasting by MMF managers is

the subject of this paper.

    Two approaches to the study of this question have appeared in print so

far, both by Fern and Oberhelrnan (1981a, 1981b). In the earlier paper Fern

and Oberhelman (1981a) use the CAPM framework to measure the performance of

MMFs as they would have with any other portfolio. The trouble with this

approach when applied to MMFs is that it is quite sensitive to the choice of

benchmark as discussed in Roll (1979). Roll raised the problem with reference

to the identity of a benchmark risky portfolio when the performance of equity

fund managers is measured. In analyzing the performance of MMFs the more

relevant question is the identity of the efficient zero—beta portfolio and its

expected return. The robustness of using T—bills as the benchmark zero—beta

portfolio in the evaluation of the performance of (very low beta) portfolios

of MMFs is unclear at this point.

    In their later study, Fern and Oberhelman (1981b) use an alternative,

indirect approach. They argue that the attempt of MMF managers to apply yield

curve forecasting to their portfolio decison results in a continuous

adjustment of their portfolios' average maturity. Accordingly, they correlate

changes in average maturity with subsequent changes in short—term interest

rates to judge the forecasting ability of fund managers. Their conclusion is




                                      —2—.
 that, on average, MMF managers exhibit a significant ability to forecast

 changes in interest rates. In developing their methodology, however, Fern

 and Oberhelman fail to avoid a number of important pitfalls which might be

 responsible for their results as will be discussed below.

     The present paper uses Merton's (1981) methodology to test the MMF

 managers' ability to forecast interest rates. We take special care in

 identifying the nature of the changes in interest rates, the forecast of which

 is implied by changes in average maturities of MMF portfolios. In contrast to

Fern and Oberhelman (1981b), we do not use the aggregate MMF portfolio.

Rather, we explore the change in average maturity of individual MMF portfolios

relative to subsequent changes in interest rates.

    In developing the methodology we estimate the potential earnings to MMFs

from interest rate forecasting using 1—bill and CD data for the 1978—1981

period. We find that the performance of the majority of the MMFs in our

sample of 34 funds did not exhibit a significant ability to forecast
                                                                       changes
in interest rates over the test period of 1978—1981.   At the same time,

however, we find that a few funds exhibited such ability to a statistically

significant degree. Still, because of the low magnitude of the actual changes

in their portfolio maturities, even those funds could not achieve anywhere

near the potential economic performance (in terms of rates of return earned)

that would have been possible with such ability.3

    We also explain how the aggregation procedure can account for the upbeat

results of Fern and Oberhelnian (1981b). Section II develops the methodology

of the tests. Results are presented in section III.    Section IV concludes.




                                     —3—
II. METHODOLOGY

    In this paper we take the approach that the forecasting ability of MMF

managers manifests itself in the changes they make in the maturity structure

of their portfolio. "Forecasting changes in interest rates, however, is not

a clearly defined concept. MMF managers are, at least implicitly, concerned

with changes in the whole relevant range of the term structure of interest

rates (i.e., up to maturity of 1 year) and thus their appropriate response

consists of changes in the full—blown maturity structure of their portfolios.

In empirical research it would be next to impossible to correlate changes in

the entire maturity strucutre of portfolios with the subsequent change in the

entire yield curve. In restricting the nature of the test to some practical

measure one jeopardizes its validity. Thus we first turn our attention to

this issue.



11.1 RELATING CHANGES IN AVERAGE MATURITY TO SUBSEQUENT CHANGES IN INTEREST

      RATE S

    Fern and Oberhelman (1981b) measure changes in average maturity which

take place over the last one and two weeks of every month. They go on to

measure changes in the yield to maturity of 90—day securities4 over the next

one and two months. A successful prediction is recorded if a rise in the

90—day yield was preceded by a shortening of the MMF average maturity and vice

versa. This experiment is perfectly valid if the yield curve always remains

flat over the MMF's maturity range. Since the yield curve is, in general,

neither flat nor affected by a mere shift upward or downward, such an

experiment, henceforth referred to as the yield experiment, is   of   limited

validity. In particular it is possible that the current forecast of a MMF




                                      —4—
 manager is for 90 day rates to go up over the prediction horizon, yet

 lengthening the average maturity of the portfolio would still yield a better

 rate of return than leaving it unchanged. Two possible cases are shown in

 Figure 1.   In both cases, 1(a) and 1(b), the initial yield curve, y0(t), is

 flat and in both cases 90—day yields in the subsequent yield curve y(t)

 and y(t), are actually higher. However, the nature of the change in the
                                                       a      b
 entire yield curve for bonds of initial maturity
                                                      M0 and M0,
respectively, is such that they could improve their holding period return by

 lengthening their average maturity to M and M.

    An alternative experiment restricts the changes in the yield curve over

the holding period to a more general class. Denote the price, at time s, of a

pure discount bond with maturity, 1, by P(s,T). With a holding period, t, the

final price is P(s+t,T—t) and the holding period return is




         R' + -r' —
                 /
                  — P(s+t,     T.-t)   —
                        P(s   1)




    The alternative experiment requires that changes in the yield
                                                                  curve during
the interval (s,s÷t) are such that the rate of return on any pure discount

bond with maturity, T, will be equal to that of a two—bond benchmark portfolio

with maturities Ti,, 12 so that



         R(s+t,T) =                ÷ (1—x)R(s+t,T2)
                      xR(s+t,11)                                           (2)



where




                                           —5—
            T—T2
        xTj
                                                               returns be
For this condition to hold it is necessary that holding period

linear in maturity, i.e.,



         R(s,T) =   a5b5T


In order to see the restriction on changes in the yield curve imposed by this

assumption, denote the annual, continuously compounded yield to maturity at

time s for any maturity by Y(s,T). Then:



         P(s,T) = exp[—Y(s,T)T]



and



                                                            - 1
         R(s+t,T) =   exp[Y(s,T)T    -   Y(s+t,T-t)(T-t)]                    (3)




The linearity of R(s+t,T) in T, together with (3), requires that




                            =   Y(s,T)   -   log(a+bT)                 (4)
         Y(s+t,T-t)




Thus the validity of the experiment requires that changes in the yield curve

will be limited to a two—parameter shift given by:5 -.-log(a+bT) and

 forecasters are required to forecast the parameters (a,b). This experiment is




                                             —6—
 more general than the yield experiment which restricts b=o and accounts for

 the initial maturity so that it does not suffer pitfalls as demonstrated in

 Figure 1.

     For this experiment in the present study (henceforth called the rate of

 return experiment) we chose for the benchmark portfolio the maturities T1=30

 days, 12=90 days and the holding period t=7 days. Thus we recorded a

 successful prediction whenever a decrease in average maturity for a MMF over a

 given week was followed by R(7,30) >   R(7,90) for the next week and vice versa.
     We undertook to measure the importance of the nature of the experiment by

correlating the weekly indicated change in average maturity under these two

alternative experiments. To reiterate, if one uses the yield experiment, then

a successful prediction is recorded when an increase (decrease) in
                                                                     90—day
yields over a given week is preceded by a decrease (increase) in the average

maturity of a MMF portfolio. If, on the other hand, one uses the rate of

return test (on 30-. vs. 90—day bonds), then a successful prediction is

recorded when a higher (lower) rate of return on 30—day bonds (relative to

90—day bonds) over a given week is preceded by a decrease (increase) in the

average maturity of a MMF portfolio.

    Analysis of the indicated direction of the change in average maturity for

the two experiments over the sample period is presented in Table 1. As Table

1 indicates, the two methods of measuring changes in the yield curve

prescribed identical maturity changes (in direction) for 173 out of 206 weeks

(84.0 percent) for 1—bill portfolios and for 101 out of 163 weeks (62.0

percent) for Certificates of Deposit portfolios. Since CDs constitute the

larger share of MMF holdings in the sample (see Table 2), the 62 percent

agreement is more indicative of the possible loss of validity in
                                                                   concentrating




                                        —7—
on only one of these experiments above. One could seriously misjudge the

prediction of MMF managers from average maturity changes by choosing,

arbitrarily, one of these two possible experiments (as well as, perhaps,

others). In the study we use only periods (weeks) for which both measurements

of interest rate changes would have led to the same direction of the change in

average maturity. It is assumed that when these two measurements agree it is

unlikely that the nature of the actual changes in the entire yield curve over

these weeks were such that they would have indicated opposite changes in

average maturity in preceding weeks.

     We now turn to the issue of the types of securities acutally held by the

MMF s.




11.2 THE INTEREST BEARING SECURITIES USED TO MEASURE CHANGES IN THE YIELD

         CURVE

     MMFs hold, for the most part, three types of securities: Treasury bills

(TB), bank certificates of deposit (CD), and commercial papers (CP). These

securities are not identical, as evidenced by their risk premia. Figure 2

shows the risk premia of 90—day CDs over TBs of equal maturities. The graph

demonstrates that the type of bond used to measure yields is important.    The

relative holdings of these securiteis by MMF5 has been changing markedly over

time, as is indicated in Table 2.

     In order to examine how important it is to use the appropriate bonds when

recording successful and unsuccessful changes in maturities, we contrast the

 prescribed direction of the change in average maturity when the yield (or the

 rate of return) method is applied to any of the three types of bonds. Table 3

 presents the results for the yield experiment, which were similar to those of




                                       —8—
  the rate of return experiments. Comparing the consistency of prescribed

 changes with the most widely held MMF securities, Table 3(a) indicates that

 24.7 percent of the weeks provide conflicting results. The consistency of

 measurement using TB yields vs. CP and CD is even worse, with 34.4 percent and

 27.1 percent, respectively, conflicting prescriptions. These results raise

 another problem with Fern and Oberhelman's (1981b) study which uses CDs

 only. In order to avoid the loss of validity due to different
                                                                 security
 holdings by various MMFs, we concentrate on periods for which the indicated

 changes in average maturity (as measured with both alternative ways) for all

 three security holders agree.

     So far we opted to restrict the observations to weeks when a successful

 change in average maturity is indicated by both the yield and the rate of

return experiments (section 11.1) and to those when the same successful change

 applies to all three major securities: TB, CD, and CP. Table 4 summarizes

the number of available observations and reemphasizes the pitfalls from using

observations indiscriminately.

    The analysis of maturity changes by MMFs that was conducted by Fern and

Oberhelman concerns the average portfolio of all MMFs in their sample.

Consequently they argue that their favorable conclusion applies to the average

fund. The validity of this assessment is addressed next.



11.3 SHOULD MMF PORTFOLIOS BE AGGREGATED IN AN EXPERIMENT TO DETERMINE OVERALL

      FORECASTING ABILITY BY MANAGERS

    Consider a population of N forecasters who are trying to predict the

outcomes of a binomial process,




                                        —9—
             X   t —     B(O,1;Pt)


Suppose that m of the N forecasters are identical and superior to the other

n =   N—rn   forescasters, who are identical also. For simplicity, assume that the

unconditional probability               =   .5 for all t and that the m superior

forecasters issue forecasts


                     —
                         B(O,1;P)


with conditional probabilities of correct forecasts,



                                                                     =.5 +
                     =
                         Pr(Y   = 0 IX=O) =       = Pr(Ytt=1lXt=1)           em     (5a)




                                                                                        with
for i =      1,...,m      while the inferior forecasters issue forecasts



                                                          = .5
      =
          Pr(Vt=0IXt=0)
                                =    = Pr(Yt=1Ixt=1)             e   (5b)




for j      = m+1,...,N        and I > em > en > 0



 In this symmetric case the correlation coefficient between any forecast

          (k=rn,n) and the actual outcome           is a statistic of the

 forecaster's ability and is given by,



                 k
                     =                      p +   -1   =                          (6)
                         Corr(Yt,Xt)                       2ek




                                                   —10—
 for i = 1,...,N       ,   and k = m,n   ,   so that ek = 0 =>      = 0 and ek = •
 =>    = 1 as expected. The relevant question is what happens when the

 forecasts are aggretated. Suppose that a user of the forecasts does not know

 the superior from the inferior forecasters and hence uses a simple average,




          Vt =
                   N

                   i=1't
                       1
                                   m
                               = r(1
                                   i=1   t
                                         1
                                                 +
                                                      N

                                                     j=m±1 '
                                                                                     (7)



 In order to determine the properties of the
                                             aggregate forecast one has to know
the dependence structure. We assume that the conditional forecasts



                   ;          i = 1,...,N and k = m,ri



are independent. This means that the unconditional forecasts are dependent.

In particular, the correlation coefficient between any two forecasts at time t

is




                 V) = 4ekel ;                    k,1 = m,n               (8)



so that when em = e 1/2, the correlation is perfect, etc. Under these

circumstances the correlation between the average forecast, '' and the

realization, X, is:




                                       memnen
                       =
                                             2         2    2 1/2                (9)
                           [N/4+(me+ne) .-(mem+ne)]



                                                     —11—
                                                                                      0
   Consider first the case when all forecasters are identical, i.e., m =

and n = N.   Then,



                                     e

         p(Yt,Xt)    =2                  2 1/2
                                                                              (9a)

                      [e+(1/N) (1/4—er)]


This expression reveals that if the forecasters have absolutely no forecsting

                      0,   their number will make no difference. If, however,
ability, i.e., en =

they have some ability, however small, e >         0,   then




                           = 1                                                 (10)
         '"> p(Y,X)
                                 .




This result gives us the first idea about results from aggregate forecasts. A

small forecasting ability of individual managers can generate a powerful
                                                                     do not
 average forecast when many forecasts are used. Since most investors
                                                 the performance of the average
 diversify MMF holdings among many funds,
                                                    For concreteness, consider the
 forecasts might be a misleading statistic.
                                                 (1981b). They report a measure of
 results reported by Fern and Oberhelman
                                                            in the maturity of
 association of Q = .28 between the direction of the change
                                                        direction of change in 90—day CD
 the average MMF portfolio and the subsequent

 yield. Using the conditional probabilities of P1, P2 for the average MMF
                                                 of association, Q, is defined as:6
 forecast of yield changes, their measure




                                            —12—
                P P —          (1—P )(1—P )
            =          +
                Pip2           (i-P1)(1-P2)


 Let us assume that this portfolio exhibits
                                                           symmetry in forecasting ability,
 i.e., P1 = P2 = .5 +          e, then



                  2e
                           2                                                            (ha)
                h/2-4-2e




With a single forecaster's ability, e, the correlation between the forecast,

     and the realization, X, is



                       = 2e
                                                                                      (12)



and hence




                   = 1 1 2.4/2 -1                                                     (13)



Thus, for Q = .28 we arrive at p              = .14.    If we assume, again, that the

individual managers are identical and issue conditionally independent

forecasts we can use (9) to infer the individual
                                                               forecasting ablity, e.
The number of MMFs in Fern and Oberhelman's study varies over the sample

period 1975—1980. If we take a reasonable average number of N = 50 MMFs, then

(9) produces a low individual forecasting ability of               e = .01,   i.e.,




                                                 —13—
  = p1+P2_1 =   2e    =   1.02.   As we will show later, such ability has

little economic value. In our sample of 34 MMFs with weekly data for the

period 1978—1981, the sample average *        for   all MMFs was 0.11 and assuming

symmetry and identical ability it implies e = .055.          Using (9), we expect a

correlation coefficient for the average forecast of p        = .54,   implying e = .27

and * = 0.54.    The actual statistic for the average portfolio was p* =        0.43.

To check whether the actual lower figure is due to the heterogeneity of the

sample we assumed it consists of two classes of identical superior and

inferior forecasters. Out of 34 MMF5, the best four exhibited an average             P =

0.38,   all significant at the 1 percent level. The best eight exhibited an

average *   = 0.31,   all significant at the 5 percent level or better. Table 5

presents the implied quality of the average forecast and demonstrates that the

actual lower average forecast quality is probably not due to the assumption of

homogeneity. Another cause might be some positive conditional dependence of

the MMFs forecast —— an issue which is left to a later section.

    All in all, the foregoing analysis shows that measuring aggregate

performance may serve as a powerful test to discover weak forecasting ability

among many forecasters. It should not, however, be misinterpreted as

indicative of strong individual ability from the quality of the average

forecast. In the present study we concentrate on the individual ability of

MMF managements.

    We now turn to the discussion of the economic value and the measure to be

used for the individual forecasting ability of MMFs.




                                            —14—
 11.4 THE PERFORMANCE MEASURE AND EcONqMIc VALUE OF MMF MANAGEMENTS' YIELD

       F OR E CA ST r NG


     The state of the art of the determination of the economic value of

 forecasting ability (applied to stock market timing) is found in Merton

 (1981). The case examined by Merton involves a portfolio manager who limits

 his activity to the allocation of investment funds between a risk—free

 security and a prespecified risky asset, say, the market portfolio. At any

 time, t, with a horizon of T periods, the manager compares the known gross

yield to maturity on the risk—free asset, R(t) =      1+r(t),    with his forecast of

the gross rate of return on the risky portfolio, Z(t) =         1+z(t).   Defining
perfect foresight as the ability to choose the security with the higher

ex—post rate of return, Merton shows that a dollar invested by a manager with

perfect foresight yields a rate of return identical to that of a portfolio

consisting of a dollar invested in the risky security plus a call option,

valued at c(t), on a 1 share in the risky portfolio, with maturity T and

excercise price R(t)7. Therefore, the economic value expressed as a rate of

return premium to perfect foresight is given by,8



          c(t) =     2N[(1/2) (t)12] -    1
                                                                             (14)



where N [.]    is   the cumulative standard normal distribution function,       is

the standard deviation of the rate of return on the risky portfolio and the

formula (14) is a simplification of the Black—Schole's call option valuation

formula when the exercise price equals the risk—free rate.

    For our purpose we need to adapt the model to a case where the MMF manager

chooses between two prespecified risky securities, say a 30— and a 90—day




                                         —15—
1—bill. Let Z(t) correspond to the rate of return on the longer term and R(t)

to the stochastic rate of return on the shorter term bond. With perfect

foresight defined as before, a dollar invested by the manager will yield a

rate of return identical to that of a portfolio consisting of 1 invested in

the short term bond plus a call option on a 1 position in the long term bond

with the call maturity T and stochastic exercise price R(t). The economic

value of perfect foresight under these conditions is therefore derived from

the value of a call option with a stochastic exercise price [Merton (1973),

Fisher (1978)]. Suppose that the price dynamics of the short term bond is

described by:9



         dB(t) = B(t)czRdt + B(t)aRdWR



The actual gross holding period rate of return on the bond over the interval

(t,t+T) is




         R(t) =          =
                  B(t)       exp[RT   aR t dWR]




with expectation R(t) = exp(cIRT).    The stochastic exercise price for the

call on the longer term bond is exp[R(t)—1] which, following Merton (1981), we

approximate by R(t). The realized holding period rate of return on the longer

 term bond is




                                         —16—
                                      t+ I
          Z(t) =
                    exp[aT+           t dw]


 with expectation Z(t) =                     Define
                                 exp(aT).

           2         2       2
          s (t) =        +
                                 — 2r0R


 where s2(t) is the variance rate of the difference between the rates of

 return on the long and short—term bonds and p is the correlation coefficient

 between dWR and dWz. With these parameters the economic value of perfect

 foresight management given by (14) in Merton's (1981) case becomes here,



         c(t) =                      - 1
                  2N[s(t)TU2]                                                           (15)



    To measure the economic value of perfect
                                                      foresight management by MMF

managers, we first observed actual weekly 1—bill prices over the period

1978—1981. Specifically, we observed maturities as close as possible to 23,

30, 83 and 90 days so that, for example, the
                                                      continuously compounded holding
period return on a 30—day 1—bill over week t is:           log B(t,23)/B(t_1,30)    .    We

then computed the annual realized rate of return for three strategies:
                                                                                   (i)

hold the 30—day 1—bill, (ii) hold the 90—day bill, (iii) hold the bill

which yielded the higher ex—post rate for each week. The results of this

experiment for the overall period and two sub—periods are presented in Table

6. For the overall period of 1978—1981 the realized annual rates of return on

30— and 90—day bills were 10.26 and 10.80 percent, respectively, and we assume

that the difference of .56 percent per annum represents risk adjustment. On
the other hand, the return of 12.28 percent to the perfect foresight strategy

reflects a risk—free premium of 2.02 percent per annum to perfect foresight

management.

    It is well known [Bodie, Kane and McDonald, (1983)] that interest rates

became more volatile (to date) since October 1979, a fact which is also

reflected in the table. Commensurately, the premium that would have been

realized with perfect foresight over the period 1980—81 is 3.24 percent per

year. Note that the standard deviation for the difference between the

realized rates on 30— and 90—day bills is .72 percent and .94 percent per

annum for the overall period and the 1980—81 subperiod, respectively. These

standard deviations reflect a correlation coefficient between the rates of

0.75. Substituting these estimates for s(t) in (15), we obtain a theoretical

estimate of the premium to perfect foresight as 2.11 percent for the overall

period and 2.75 percent for the 1980—81 period.   The theoretical estimates of

the premia from (15) are more reliable than the measured premia because the

latter depend on the variance estimate alone (see Merton, 1980), while the

empirical ex post measures assume that the period averages equal ex ante means.

    We repeated the same experiment for CD strategies.   This experiment has

the empirical problem of lack of data for the 23— and 83—day maturities.

                                                             and
Thus, we approximated BCD(t,23) and BCD(t,83) by BCD(t,3O)

BCD(t,9O). Because of these less reliable estimates, we only report here

that the estimate of the theoretical premium to perfect foresight with CDs is

2.75 percent over the 1978—81 period (compared to 2.11 percent for 1—bills),

 reflecting a slightly greater variance of CD rates and therefore greater

 forecasting value.

     It is interesting to speculate on the value of perfect foresight if, for




                                      —18—
 the longer bond, managers used a 180—day instead of a 90—day rnaturity)0 We

 use the assumption underlying the validity of the rate of return experiment,

stated by (2) and (4), i.e., that the 180—day 1—bill rate is given by:



         R(t,180) = —1.5R(t,3o) +       2.5R(t,90)


Thus, using the variance and correlation estimates for R(t,30) and R(t,90), we

obtained a standard deviation for the difference R(t,180) —          R(t,30)   of 1.72

percent for the 1978—81 period. Substituting this figure into (15) yields a

perfect foresight premium of 5.07 percent per year.'1 Between 1978—79 and

1980—81 periods, MMFs shortened their average maturities reflecting, at least,

a recognition on their part of less than perfect foresight ability which led

them to forego the larger potential gains.

    Merton (1981) goes on to prove that with less than perfect foresight, the

conditional probabilities:




         P1 =   Pr(lengthen maturity           ex—post justified)
            =   Pr(shorten   maturity     ex—post justified)



provide sufficient information to assign economic value to their forecasting

ability. In particular, P* =                   is a sufficient statistic for that
                                 P1+P2.....1

value which implies that the symmetry in ability (P1=P2) is of no

importance, as well as the symmetry in realization, i.e., whether one outcome

is more frequent. Thus the value of the forecast in (15) adapted to a

specific forecasting ability is p*c(t).

   Finally, Merton considers the value of forecasting ability when not all




                                           —19—
funds are switched according to the forecast. Specifically, when XR is

invested in the short bond when the forecast is favorable to it (and l_Xk in

the less favorable long bond) and Xk is invested in the short bond when the

forecast favors the long bond, then the value of the forecast becomes:12



         m(t) =   A(t)P*c(t)                                          (16)




where A(t) =                   In our case by (2),
               Xh(t)_Xk(t).


         Xm =   (Tk_T2)/(Tl_T2)
                                      for m =   h,k


Hence Xh_Xk =                     and thus the value of forecasting
                (TR_Tk)/(Tl_T2)
ability is prportonal to the change in average maturity as a proportion of the

maturity difference in the bench mark bonds.13

    Armed with these results we are able to analyze the actual data from our

MMFs sample.



III. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF THE MONEY MARKET FUNDS OVER THE PERIOD

      1978 — 1981

111.1 The Sample Data

    The MMF maturity data were obtained from the Donoghue Money Market Fund

report for the period 1978—1981. We kept in the sample all MMFs (34 funds)

for which the average maturity was included in all reports. The Report also

lists, in addition to the average maturity, the market value of the portfolio

of the MMFs.




                                         —20—
     As explained earlier, the weekly observations had to be trimmed down to

 include only weeks for which the favorable change in average maturity is

 unambiguous by our assumption about the nature of the change in the yield

 curve. The overall number of weeks which qualified for performance

 measurement is given in Table 4. The overall number of avaialble weeks (69)

 is not distributed evenly over the period. Table 4 also shows the breakdown

 for the two—year subperiods, 1978—79 and 1980—81. The relatively low number

 of available weeks for the period 1978—79 (24) renders estimates for this

 subperiod less reliable.

    Weekly 90—day yields—to—maturity and realized rates of return on T—bills

 and CDs of 30— and 90—day maturities were taken from the Wall Street Journal.

The 90—day CP yields were obtained from Business Week.



111.2 Forecasting Ability

    Before we present estimates of forecasting ability we should qualify the

results by stating that it is not established that all
                                                          funds change maturity
solely in an attempt to exploit yield curve forecasts. The need for liquidity

and risk preference may, for some periods at least, be an important

consideration. To this extent, estimatates that derive forecasting ability

from maturity changes may be noisy and thus biased downwards in statistical

signficance.

    Table 7 summarizes the estimates of the conditional
                                                          probabilities, P1
and P2, for the 34 MMFs in the sample for the overall period (1978—81) and

the two—year subperiods. The bottom line of the table shows that, taking the

aggregate portfolio of all MMFs, the combined forecast is potentially

valuable. The statitistic P* =
                                 P1+P2—1 for the aggregate portfolio over




                                     —21—
the period is .43, which means that if all funds were to be switched between

the short and long maturity benchmark securities, these forecasts would retain

43 percent of the value of perfect foresight management. As was argued in

Section 2.3, however, these results might be driven, at least in part, by the

sheer number of the MMFs with even marginal forecasting ability.   The two

lines next to the bottom of the table show that the simple average    of *   for
the 34 MMF5 in the sample is .11, and, when weighted by asset size,    .17. (The

difference is not statistically significant and the question of the

relationshiup between * and asset size is discussed below.)

    The estimates for the overall period show 8 MMFs with *   statistics     which

are significantly different from zero, ranging from .63 to .22. (Note that

the aggregate portfolio performed better than the second best MMF.)



111.3 The Consistency and Symmetry of the Estimated Forecasting Ability

    The rank correlation for * between the two subperiods is quite low (.04)

and not significantly different from zero. Because the low forecasting

ability of most MMF5 in the sample may be introducing noise into the

correlation estimate, we also use a 2x2 chi—square test to check for

consistency of * over the subperiods. The chi—square value from the test was

 .72 with 1 degree of freedom suggesting that there is no consistency in

performance over the two subperiods. This result, however, has to be

qualified due to the small number of observations in the early period

 (1978—79).
    Another interesting question is the symmetry of the estimated forecasting

 ability. Here, too, the problem with the aggregate portfolio shows up. The

 aggregate portfolio exhibits a signiicantly better ability to forecast yield




                                      —22—
 curve changes which favor a reduction in average maturity, i.e., P1 =           .81,
 compared to those that favor an increase in average maturity,               .61.   But
                                                                      P2 =
 the estimates for the average MMF tell a different story. The difference

 between P1 and P2 is smaller and in the opposite direction. For the

 simple average, P1 =   .50 and P2 = .61, and the difference is smaller for

 the weighted average (P1 =   .54,   P2 =   .62).   These numbers suggest that MMF

 managers might be able to forecast better yield changes which favor

 lengthening the portfolio average maturity.



 11.4 Does the Sample Suggest that MMF Managers Are Able Forecasters

    The most important question concerning the estimates of * for various

MMFs (and their statistical significance) is:         To what extent can these

results be attributed to sampling phenomena. To be specific, Table 7

indicates that 9 MMFs exhibit P greater than .2, i.e., the potential value of

their forecast is 20 percent (or better) of the value of perfect foresight.

For each MMF the distribution of the P* statistic is hypergeometric

(Henriksson and Merton, 1981). Suppose that for the i—th MMF we estimate
= Pr(P*>Q=.2 p*0), i.e., the probability that with no forecasting ability
                                                                          a

sample of observations will yield P*>.2. Using the 34 estimtes of              we

have the expected number, n, of MMFs with P*>=.2 (under              P. = 0;
                                                                H0
for i=1,...,34) as E(n) =

    The heavy line in Figure 3 represents the number of MMFs for which the

estimated value exceeds various levels of *           The dashed line (the lowest

line) represents the expected number of MMFs at each level of P* assuming no

forecasting ability on the part of all MMFs in the sample. From these two

graphs one has to conclude that the nuber of "able" MMFs is beyond expectation




                                        —23—
                                                  ability. For Q=.2, for example,
under the null hypothesis of no forecasting

we have 9 MMFs which exceed it compared with 2 MMF5 which could be expected to

do so. To assess this inference we construct a graph for a 95 percent

confidence interval above the expectation line in Figure 3 assuming that MMF

forecasts are independent. This line, while lying well above the expectation

line, still shows that some MMF managers have to be considered able

forecasters. For Q=.2, the 95 percent confidence bound is only 5 compared to

the actual (9).

    One may question the assumption of independent forecsts, however. To

establish the confidence interval with dependent forecasts we need to estimate

Var(n) = Var( c) when Corr(ct1c) =            >   0.   In this case, Var( ctj) =


a2 + a2   + 2a    a r. ..   The correlation coefficient, r. 13.,   is   a complex two
 i j                   13
                                                                                        =
two stage linear transformation of the correlation between forecasts, ir
                 First because     is a statistic with a binomial
Corr(Y1V).
distribution and second because the         statistics (underlying the aj)

 is hypergeometrically distributed. Thus it requires a stretch of the

 imagination to use the forecast correlation matrix,               to infer r1. As

 a first step we consider the foundation of the independence assumption. This

 would require the independence of the conditional forecasts:



                   =               lengthening maturity is favorable)
                       Corr(Y1Y
                   =               shortening maturity is favorable)
                       Corr(YY

     Table 8 indicates that both sets of conditional correlation coefficients

 appear to be distributed normally with a mean of .05, which is statistically

 significant. It is interesting to check whether the conditional correlation




                                           —24—
 coefficients are different among the top 8 MMFs.    In Table 8 the mean of p(—)

 is .08 and for p(+) is .03. In both cases the means are not significantly

 different from those of the overall sample. The correlation coefficients

 between the unconditional forecasts have a mean of .04 with a standard

 deviation of .082 (somewhat surprisingly) similar to those of the conditional

 forecasts. These correlation coefficients could be used to estimate the

 correlation between the    statistic (r) only if the transformation were
 linear. Yet, since the data suggest that the       must be correlated, we use

 these means as justification to present the range of .05—.10 for r1 in

 constructing the confidence limits as our best guess. The remaining two lines

 in Figure 3 show the 95 percent confidence limits based on       = .05 and

 .10. The higher line of the two (for   r1 = .10)   traces the actual graph

almost exactly except for the single, top MMF which logged P* =     .62.    Thus the
question of whether the forecasting ability demonstrated by the MMFs is just a

sample phenomenon cannot be answered with confidence although the evidence

seems to favor the hypthesis that a small number of MMF managers did exhibit

superior forecasting skills.



111.5 The Actual Economic Value of the MMFs Forecasting Ability

    It is tempting to try to relate the actual rates of return for the various

MMFs to their demonstrated forecasting ability. A priori, the difficulties in

this approach are mainly two: First, a good number of these funds use the

amortized premium accounting method which would obscure any distinction of

performance which is attributable to forecasting ability.     Second, the

constant change of the MMFs' portfolio composition in terms of the various

securities would make it impossible to separate the timing from the selection




                                    —25—
skills, if any. Finally, using actual returns would imply that ex post

returns can be taken to reflect ex ante means.   Thus we have to resort to the

indirect method explained in Section 2.4, where we made additional use of

Mertori's (1981) model. We showed that under our assumptions, with the

benchmark securities being T—bills of 30— and 90—day maturity, the economic

value of their forecasting skills is given by p*c(t).    We have shown above

that c(t) is of the order of magnitude of 2 percent premium to the annual risk

adjusted rate of return. There are 8 MMFs which exceed p*.22 with

statistical significance and hence could potentially realize 22—62 percent of

that premium. What factor, , should be used for this potential annual gain

of p*c(t) =   .5 — 1.5 percent Table 9 presents the average change in maturity

(in days) over the sample period. The first column shows the averages for the

weeks used to measure performance. The first panel accounts for the overall

period. These numbers show that the best four MMFs behaved similarly to the

other 28. Using 3 days as the average change in maturity yields
                                                                     =   3/60 =
                                                                         from
 .05, which is so low as to practically eliminate any potential gain
forecasting ability. Note also that the aggregate portfolio average change in

maturity (1.73 days) reflects the interfund forecast variability and assures

 that whatever advantage one obtains from forecast averaging (P*=.43) might be

 lost by averaging the intended maturity change, since       .03.


     We are led to conclude that even if some of the MMF managers have any

 forecasting ability they either lack in confidence or in recognition of their

 own skills or, more likely, are prevented by institutional constraints from

 taking advantage of them. The second column in Table 9 is presented for a

 good reason. It shows that the weeks used to measure performance are not

 significantly different in terms of maturity decisions from other weeks, and




                                      —26—
  if at all, the changes during these weeks are actually smaller. Recall that

 the weeks used for performance evaluation
                                               are those for which the 90—day yield
 changes and the realized rate of return differential between 30— and 90—day

 securities of the three bond types (TB,
                                             CP, CD) all favor the same directional

 change in maturity. One expects these weeks to coincide with relatively

 severe changes in the yield curve. Table 10 shows that this is indeed the

 case. The changes in yields and rate of return differentials are double or

 more for the weeks used to measure performance. If it is easier to forecast

 more severe changes in the yield curve, then our performance measurement in

 the preceding section is biased in favor of
                                                MMF managers. This, however, is
 probably not the case since changes in
                                          average maturity are not larger during
these weeks, indicating that managers, at least, do not feel that way.



111.6 The Relationship Between
                                 Forecasting Ability and Asset Size and Growth
    As Table 8 indicated, the weighted average of P for the MMF sample (.17)

is higher than the simple average (.11). This raises the question of whether

the managers of larger MMFs possess better forecasting skills. Since the

management fee is proportional to asset size, one would expect that larger

MMFs will be able to allocate more
                                     resources to yield curve forecasting and
thus, if it is at all possible, should perform better.
                                                           Table 11 suggests that
this propostiion is not supported by the evidence, either because larger MMFs

do not allocate more resources to
                                    forecasting or that additional resources do
not result in better forecasts. The simple and Spearman rank correlation

coefficients between * and asset size either at the end of 1978 or 1981
                                                                        are
low and not significantly different from zero.

   A related question is whether revealed
                                              forecasting ability results in the




                                      —27—
success of a MMF as a business, when measured by the rate of growth in asset

size over the period 1978—81. The simple and rank correlation coefficients

between P and the magnitude of assets growth as show in Table 11 indicate

that the answer to this question is also negative. This could be a result of

the fact that investors recognize, as we showed earlier, that even MMFs with

revealed forecasting ability did not generate any significant economic value.

Of course, one cannot reject the conclusion that forecasting ability goes

unrewarded in the market place which, in turn, explains why the larger MMFs

would not try harder, which in turn explains why there is no correlation

between size and performance.



IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

    Previous investigation suggested that money market fund managers

demonstrated ability to anticipate changes in short term yields by changing

their portfolio average maturity in the direction considered consistent with

subsequent changes in the yield curve. This paper demonstrated that the

question was inadequately addressed by (1) aggregating the sample MMF

portfolios, (ii) measuring their performance with inadequate statistics,

(iii)   determining the adequate direction of change on the basis of

subsequent changes in the 90—day yield to maturity and (iv) using CDs as

representative of the money market fund portfolio composition.   We proceeded

to observe the maturity behavior of individual money markt funds and adopted

 Merton's (1981) model to measure the forecasting skills and economic value of

yield curve management by money market fund mangers.

     We recorded the adequacy of changes in portfolio maturity in a way which

 is valid up to a two parameter shift in the yield curve.   We used only weeks




                                      —28—
when the favorable direction of change in portfolio maturity is consistent for

1—bills, CDs and CPs whether the benchmark is the subsequent change in the

90—day yield to matuirity or the difference in the realized rate of return on

30— vs. 90—day securities.

    Results show that some funds do demonstrate forecasting ability.

Measuring the average weekly change in maturity, however, shows that these

were sufficiently small to devoid the demonstrated skills of any economic

value. It was also shown that larger money market fund mangers do not

demonstrate better forecasting skills and that, in turn, revealed forecasting

skills are not rewarded by faster growth in the money market fund assets.




                                   —29—
                                                                37

                            Figure 1


    Examples of Changes in Yield Curves from Y0(t)

    to Y1(t), which Favors Changes in Maturity of
    Same Direction as the Changes in 90 Day Yield.


                  (a)                         (b)

  Initial Maturity 1a                Initial Maturity
  s Longer than 90 Bays              is Shorter than 90 Days


Yield to                           Yield to
Maturity                           Ma   ity




                                                               (t )


                              t)

                              0                              me i:o
            90
           days         Maturity                    days   Maturity
                                                                        38
                               Figure 2



         DIFFERENCE 8ETWEEN 3 MONTH T—EIILL RATES AND 90 DAY CO RATES
                                     SCUF.CE -

3.5


3.0



2.5



2.0                                                                          2.0



                                                                             1.5


1.0                                                                          1.0


0.5                                                                          0.5


0.0
 77: 1                                                                       ".0
                i78 I        197 I                 1980   I   1981: 1
                                     WEEKLY DATA




                                —.3'.
                                                            39



Number of Funds Exceeding Various Levels of P P1+P2—1

        Actual
        Expected, Assuming No Focasting Ability
        95% Confidence Limit for correlation coeff.
—-—         II                It              It        = .05
            It           It   It              I,        = .10




2




10


    5




                   .2         .3        .4         .5            .6
           .1




                         3Z
                                        Table 2

                     Composition (a) of Bond Holdings by MMFs
                             (percent of total assets)


                                                                Average
         Types                                                  78 — 81
         of Bonds      1978      1979        1980    1981

                        14.6      11.7        15.7    13.2         13.8
           TBs
           COs          31 .3     20.9        16.0    16.1         21 .2

                        30.7      35.8        40.0    34.5         35.3
           CPs
                        23.4      31.6        28.3    36.2         29.9
         Others(b)
                       100       100         100     100          100
         Total


Notes:

    a.   Average of percentage holdings of each type of bond by 34 sample MMFs.
                                                             Eurodollar CDs,
    b.   Includes Repurchase Agreement, Banker's Acceptance,
         etc.




                                           —34—
                        Table 3

Direction of Prescribed Changes in Average Maturity
     of MMF Portfolios Holding Different Bonds
          as Measured by the Yield Method


Table 3(a) CP vs. CD

Direction of       Direction of Changes
Changes for        for CP Portfolios
CD Portfolios      Decrease     Increase

Decrease                71          17         88
Increase                i           39         58
Total                   90          56        146


Table 3(b) CP vs. TB

                   CP Portfolios
TB Portfolios      Decrease      Increase    Total

Decrease               64           18         82
Increase                38         43          81
Total                  102         61         163


Table 3(c) TB vs. CD

                   CD Portfolios
TB Portfolios      Decrease      Increase    Total

Decrease               74          19          93
Increase               30          58          88
Total               104            77         181




                        -.35—
                                       Table 4

                     Total Number of Weekly Observations for
                  the Period 1978—1981 Broken Down by Direction
          of Indicated Maturity Change and Agreement Between the Types
             of Bond Held and Experiments (Yield and Rate of Return)


                                                             Yield or Rate of
                Direction of                                 Return of All
                Indicated             Types of Bond          Securities (TB, CD,
                                                             CP) Indicate Same
                Change in
                                                             Direction of
Types of        Average
Experiment      Maturity              TB CP            CD    Maturity Change

                                      107 101 102                 50
                Shorten
                                       99    76         61        33
Yields          Lengthen
                                      206 177 163                 88
(90 days)       Total

                                       86    —          85        57
Rate of         Shorten
                                      120    —         117        77
Return          Lengthen
                                      206    —         202       134
(30— vs. 90— Total
days bonds)
                                       80     —         55        37
Both            Shorten
                                       93     —         46        32
Experiments     Lengthen
                Total                 173     —        101        69
Agree


Note:       The distribution of the weeks used for performance measurement is not
            even across the 2 year subperiods:

                                             Lengthen         Shorten
                        Total Weeks Used     Maturity         Maturity

                               69                 32             37
            Total
                               24                 16              8
            1978—79
                               45                 21             24
            1980—81




                                            —36—
                                                  Table 5

               Simulations of the Results of Aggregation of MMFs Portfolios
                     Using Actual Data from the 34 MMFs in the Sample




 Breaking the Sample into                                   Breaking the Sample into
 8 Superior and 26 Inferior                                 4 Superior and 30 Inferior
 MMF Managements                                            MMF Managements
  =   8,   n =   26,    n/rn =    3.25                      m =   4,   n =   30,       n/rn =   7.5
                             Average Statistics in the Actual Sample
                                  for the Superior Managements

                       = 1.31 ; e = .155                                                1.38
                                                                        P1+P2 =                 ; e =   .190
                            Average Statistics in the Actual Sample
                                 for the Inferior Managements

               = 1.05;      e = .025                                               =   1.07 ; e = .035
                Assuming Conditional Independence and Using en, em, m, n
                  from the Sample, Equation (8) Predicts the Following
                                  Aggregation Results

                            p=.55                                              p=.53
               = 1.55;      e =   .275                                  Pi+P2 = 1.53            ;   e = .265

                                 At this Stage, Will the Addition of
                                   Inferior Forecasters Improve the
                                  Quality of the Average Forecasta

                       No                                                          Yes


(a). The partial derivative of p             in   (8) with respect to n implies that if

                  (em_2en —
                                   (4emen)(1_2e
           m
                             e(1—4e)
then adding an inferior forecaster will actually improve the quality of the
average forecast.




                                                  —37—
                                   Table 6

                 Realized Rates of Return on T—bill Strategies
                 with 30— and 90—Day Maturities for 1978—1981


                                       1978—81        1980—81    1978—79
    Strategy


                                       10.26          12.14      8.41
Hold 30—Day Bill Mean (percent
  annual ized)
                                         .55            .60       .34
  Standard Deviation

Hold 90—Day Bill
                                       10.80          13.32      8.31
  Mean
                                        1.04           1.26       .56
  Standard Deviation

Switch with Perfect Foresight
                                       12.28          15.38      9.20
  Mean
                                        2.02           3.24       .79
  Premium Over 30—Day Bill

Difference Between 90—
  and 30—Day Rates
                                          .54          1.19      —.10
  Mean
                                          .72           .94       .38
  Standard Deviation




                                      —38—
                                  Table 7

                Estimates of the Forecasting Ability of MMFs
                          for the Period 1978—1981

                                      Estimation Periods
                                   1978 — 1981           80—81      78—T9
    Fund ID No.              P1       P2       P1P2
        58
                                                         P1-+-P2    P1P2
                            .74       .88       1.62     1.70       1.46
        50                  .67       .66       1.32     1 .27      1 .60
        15                  .65       .66       1.31     1.27       1.35
        16                  .60       .67      1 .27        .93     1.76
        11                  .54       .71      1.26       1.05      1.43
            2               .55       .70      1.25       1.17      1.37
        34                  .64       .58      1.22       1.25      1.10
        81                  .52       .70      1.22       1.24       .95
        71                  .61       .61      1.22       1 .15     1 .19
        84                  .58       .61      1.19       1.31       .90
        32                  .52       .65      1.17       1.01      1 .53
       41                   .56       .60      1.16       1.05      1.23
       26                  .60        .55      1.15       1 .03    1.21
       12                  .58       .57       1.14       1.10     1.37
       43                  .58       .55       1.14       1 .06    1.37
       64                  .54       .59       1.13       1.05     1.29
       62                  .48       .65       1.13       1.11     1.17
        3                  .44       .67       1.11       1.09     1.24
       88                  .43       .66       1.09       1.00     1.23
        1                  .42       .66       1.07       1.04     1.27
       72                  .48       .59       1.06        .88     1.47
       74                  .48       .58       1.06      1.02      1.33
        7                  .43       .62       1 .04       .93     2.00
       96                  .44       .59      1.03       1.04       .96
       33                  .45       .58      1.03       1.07      1.50
       68                  .47       .57      1.03       1.00       .89
       48                  .43       .60      1 .03        .97     1 .07
       66                  .48       .54      1.02         .94      .89
       90                  .50       .50      1.00        .70      1.50
       21                  .31       .63        .93      1.09       .56
        5                  .40       .50        .90       .87      1 .00
       19                  .43       .45        .88       .97       .90
       42                 .32        .56        .87       .89       .78
       60                 .25        .57        .82       .68      1.00

Simple Average            .50       .61       1.11       1.05      1.21
Weighted Average          .54       .62       1.17       1.09      1.21
  (by Assets Size)
MMF Portfolio             .81       .61       1.43       1.34      1.67




                                  —39—
                       Table 8

 Mean and Standard Deviation of the Correlation
   Coefficients Between Conditional Forecasts


                           Corr(Yi, Yfl

                           Mean      S.D.


All 34 MMFs
  Shortening of
  Maturity Is              .047      .179
  Favored     (—)

Lengthening of
  Maturity Is               .046      .206
  Favored     (÷)


Top B MMF5
  Shortening (—)            .079      .200
  Lengthening (4-)          .031      .163



          Y =    1 if maturity shortened
                 0 if maturity is lengthened




                           —40—
                          Table 9

         Average Weekly Changes in the MMF Portfolio
                      Average Maturity
                (in days, 34 MMFs, 1978—1981)


                         For the Weeks      For All Weeks
                         Used to            in the Period
                         Measure            (208 Weeks in
                         Performance        1978—81)
1978—81
  Top 4 MMFs                2.94                3.58
  Other 28 MMFs             3.14                3.52
  Aggregated
   MMF Portfolio            1.73                2.07
1980—81
  Top 4 MMFs                2.65                2.66
  Other 28 MMFs             2.57                2.87
  Aggregated
   MMF Portfolio            1.66                1.70
1980—81
  Top 4 MMFs                3.85                4.46
  Others                    4.08                4.18
  Aggregated
   MMF Portfolio            1.86                2.44




                          —41—
                                  Table 10

             Average Magnitude of Changes in the 90—Day Yield to
             Maturity and Difference in Realized Rates of Return
                      Between 90— and 30—Day Securities
                             (percent 1978—1981)


                                                        Rate of Return
Type of Weeks          Yield Changes                    Differences
and Indicated          (90—Day Maturity)                (90— vs. 30—Days)
Direction of
                         TB       CD             CP      TB        CD
Maturity Change

All Weeks
  Shorten               .244
                      —.239     —.266           —.462    .029      .022
  Lengthen

Weeks Used for
Performance
Measurements
                        .674      .693           .439   —.056    —.061
  Shorten
                                                                   .097
  Lengthen




                                         —42—
                          Table 11

      Performance, Asset Size and Growth During 1978—81
     (Simple and Spearman Rank Correlation Coefficients)



               AST78    AST81     Growth    AVAST

AST78                    .70      —.29       .69        .22
AST81          .72        —          .08     .99        .24
Growth        — .49      .18         —       .06       — .28
AVAST          .74       .99         .15      —         .24
               .21       .03      — .14      .04         —

Upper right corner: Simple correlation coefficients.
Down left: Spearman rank correlation coefficients.
A5178(AS181): Asset size of a MMF in 1978(1981)
AVAST: Average of AST78 and AST81




                          —43—
                                  Footnotes




1. See Merton (1980) and I-ienriksson and Merton (1981) for references.

2. For example, as of June 1981 the total market value of short term

    financial assets (i.e., T—bills of up to 6 month maturity, CPs, CDs and

    bankers' acceptances) was 574.5 billion dollars and the total market value

    of the assets held by money market funds amounted to 126.4 billion

    dollars, dispersed among slightly more than 100 funds.

3. We do not confront the question of whther MMFs should even attempt to do

    so. One can argue that MMF5 should precommit themselves to specific

    maturities and short—term instruments and leave the interest rates

    forecasting theatre to managers of interest futures funds. It is also

    possible that these funds restricted themselves in changing their

    portfolio maturity due to risk consideration.

4. We relegate the discussion of the identity of the bonds to a later section.

5. This restriction of the nature of the change in the yield curve implies,

     implicitly, the expectation hypothesis, for if the yield curve
                                                lefthand side in (4) must include
     incorporates liquidity premia,. then the

     the adjustment term for the liquidity premium.

 6. See Kendall and Stuart (1977, pp. 536—538), as cited by Fern and

     Oberhelman (1981b).

 7. This portfolio is also identical to a 1 share in the risky portfolio plus

     a put option on that share with a maturity T and exercise price R(t).

 8. The expression in (14) assumes that the manager collects fees (if any) at

     the end of the period. Merton assumes that in equilibrium, fees equal to

     the economic value are decucted up front, so that per dollar invested by

     client, the value is c(t)I[1+c(t)].


                                       —44—
9. If the holding period, T (which is in our case one week), is short

    relative to the maturity of the bond (30 or 90 days in our case), then the

    assumption of a constant mean and variance rates (c&,a2) for the price

    dynamics is reasonable.

10. Note that over the period 1978—79 the average maturity of the MMFs in the

    sample was around 70—90 days, which was reduced to around 25—35 days

    during the next subperiod.

11. Merton's results for the market portfolio with, say, 20 percent annual

    standard deviation is 43.7 percent.

12. This result requires the assumption that securities are priced to satisfy

    the security market line.

13. Note that changing the benchmark bonds will also change the variance of

   the rate difference in c(t) and leave the economic value of the forecast

   unchanged —   if the assumption of the linearity of rates in maturity is
   preserved.




                                     —45—
                                 References

Bodie, Z., A. Kane, and R. McDonald, "Why Are Real Interest Rates So High,"
    National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., Working Paper No. 1141, June
    1983.

Dono hue's Money Fund Reports, Donoghue's Money Fund Directory, Holliston,
     ass., various issues.

Fern MG., and H.D. Oberhelman, "How Well Do Money Markets Perform,"
    Journal of Portfolio Management, Spring 1981 (1981a).
                                                            Mutual Funds:
_____ and _____, "A Study of the Management of Money Market
    1975—1980," Financial Management, Autumn 1981 (1981b).

Henriksson, R.D. and R.C. Merton, "On Market Timing and Investment Performance
    II: Statistical Procedures for Evaluating Forecasting Skills," Journal of
    Business, Vol. 54, No. 4, 1981.

Kendall, M.G. and A. Stuart, The Advanced Theory of Statistics, Charles
    Griffin a Co., Ltd., London, 1977.

Merton, R.C., "The Theory of Rational Option Pricing," Bell Journal of
    Economics and Management, Spring 1973.
                                                           Journal of
_____  "On Estimating the Expected Returns on the Market,"
    Financial Economics, 1980.

—    , "On Market Timing and Investment Performance I: An Equilibrium
    Theory of Value for Market Forecasts," Journal of Business 54, July 1981.

Roll, R., "Ambiguity When Performance is Measured by the Security Market Line,"
    Journal of Finance, September 1978




                                      —46--
