                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     EMPLOYER MATCHING AND 401(K) SAVING:
                EVIDENCE FROM THE HEALTH AND RETIREMENT STUDY

                                           Gary V. Engelhardt
                                              Anil Kumar

                                          Working Paper 12447
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12447


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006


All research with the restricted-access data from the Health and Retirement Study was performed under
agreement in the Center for Policy Research at Syracuse University and the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
We thank Dan Black, David Card, Courtney Coile, Chris Cunningham, Bill Gale, Erik Hurst, Annamaria
Lusardi, Brigitte Madrian, Costas Meghir, John Moran, Susann Rohwedder, Clemens Sialm, and seminar
participants at Syracuse University, University of Chicago, University of Missouri, University of Virginia,
Dutch Central Bank, Econometric Society World Congress, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, and the NBER
Transatlantic Public Economics Seminar for helpful discussions and comments. We are especially grateful
to Bob Peticolas and Helena Stolyarova for their efforts in helping us understand the HRS employer-provided
pension plan data. The research reported herein was supported (in part) by a grant from the TIAA-CREF
Institute and (in part) by the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College pursuant to a grant from the
U.S. Social Security Administration funded as part of the Retirement Research Consortium. Various portions
of the underlying data construction were funded by the Center for Policy Research at Syracuse University,
the Economics Program, National Science Foundation, under Grant No. SES-0078845, National Institute on
Aging, under Grant No. 1 R03 AG19895-01, and the U.S. Department of Labor. The opinions and
conclusions are solely those of the authors and should not be construed as representing the opinions or policy
of the Social Security Administration, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Federal Reserve System, any agency
of the Federal Government, Center for Retirement Research at Boston College, TIAA-CREF, United States
Department of Labor, National Science Foundation, National Institute on Aging, or Syracuse University.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Gary V. Engelhardt and Anil Kumar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Employer Matching and 401(k) Saving: Evidence From the Health and Retirement Study
Gary V. Engelhardt and Anil Kumar
NBER Working Paper No. 12447
August 2006
JEL No. E21, H24, J32

                                            ABSTRACT


Employer matching of employee 401(k) contributions can provide a powerful incentive to save for
retirement and is a key component in pension-plan design in the United States. Using detailed
administrative contribution, earnings, and pension-plan data from the Health and Retirement Study,
this analysis formulates a life-cycle-consistent econometric specification of 401(k) saving and
estimates the determinants of saving accounting for non-linearities in the household budget set
induced by matching. The participation estimates indicate that an increase in the match rate by 25
cents per dollar of employee contribution raises 401(k) participation by 3.75 to 6 percentage points,
and the estimated elasticity of participation with respect to matching ranges from 0.02-0.07. The
parametric and semi-parametric estimates for saving indicate that an increase in the match rate by
25 cents per dollar of employee contribution raises 401(k) saving by $400-$700 (in 1991 dollars).
The estimated elasticity of 401(k) saving to matching is also small and ranges from 0.09-0.12
overall, with just under half of this effect on the intensive margin. Overall, the analysis reveals that
matching is a rather poor policy instrument with which to raise retirement saving.


Gary V. Engelhardt
Center for Policy Research
423 Eggers Hall
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
gvengelh@maxwell.syr.edu
I. Introduction

        As 401(k)s have come to dominate the private pension landscape in the United

States, researchers and policy makers have given increased attention to the impact of plan

characteristics on retirement-saving decisions. 1 One important characteristic is whether

and to what extent the employer matches employee contributions. A typical match might

be 50 cents for each dollar of contribution, up to a maximum percentage of pay, say, 6

percent. Although much of the discussion by the popular press and policy makers

presumes employer matching raises saving, there is actually strikingly little consensus

among researchers. Some studies have found that increases in the match rate raise 401(k)

saving (Papke and Poterba, 1995; Clark and Schieber, 1998; VanDerhei and Copeland,

2001; and Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick, 2002). Others have found that it is not

the match rate per se that matters, but whether the firm offers a match at all (Even and

Macpherson, 1996; Bassett, Fleming, and Rodrigues, 1998; Papke, 1995; Kusko, Poterba,

and Wilcox, 1998). That is, providing a match raises 401(k) saving, but an increase in

the level of the match rate (conditional on providing a match) does not. Finally, still

other studies (Employee Benefit Research Institute, 1994; Andrews, 1992; Munnell,

Sunden, and Taylor, 1998; and GAO, 1997) have suggested that, conditional on being

eligible for a match, an increase in the match rate lowers 401(k) contributions, which,

when interpreted in the context of a simple two-period model of saving, suggests that the

income effect dominates the substitution effect from the higher rate of return matching



1
 This includes work on automatic enrollment (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and
Metrick, 2002, 2004), investment in company stock (Poterba, 2003; Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner, 2004;
Mitchell and Utkus, 2002), portfolio choice and trading in 401(k) plans (Benartzi and Thaler, 2001; Agnew,
Balduzzi, and Sunden, 2003).


                                                    2
provides. 2 Overall, this ambiguity has emerged as an important empirical puzzle in the

literature on saving behavior (Bernheim, 2003).

        A central shortcoming in this literature has been the failure to exploit the fact that

employer matching, based either on multiple-match-rate schedules or caps on the

generosity of the match, results in a non-linear household budget set. As has been long

recognized in the study of taxation on labor supply, reduced-form estimates of behavioral

elasticities are biased and inconsistent unless the non-linearity is accounted for explicitly

(Hausman, 1985; Moffitt, 1990; Blundell and MaCurdy, 1999). Indeed, the presence of

budget-set kinks may reconcile some of the findings of previous studies: for example, the

provision of a match may raise 401(k) saving if the substitution effect dominates, but

variation in match rates may not matter if employees are bunched at kinks.

        Unlike previous studies, this paper includes a detailed theoretical framework that

models the budget set defined by employer matching and federal tax treatment as twice

continuously differentiable and then uses the first-order conditions from the consumer’s

optimization to derive a life-cycle-consistent econometric specification for 401(k)

participation. As an alternative to the maximum-likelihood piecewise-linear-budget-set

estimation summarized in Hausman (1985)—and the recent, related non-parametric

extensions by Blomquist and Newey (2002)—and the maximum likelihood

differentiable-budget-constraint methodology of MaCurdy, Green, and Paarsch (1990),

this paper employs instrumental-variable techniques that linearize the budget set at the

observed outcome to calculate the price and virtual-income terms and then instruments to

correct for endogeneity, which also has a long history, but a recent example of which is

2
  Throughout the paper, “401(k) saving” and “401(k) contributions” are used synonymously as per period
flows. In a multi-period model, this would suggest the income effect dominates the substitution and wealth
effects (Summers, 1981).


                                                    3
Ziliak and Kniesner (1999).     To calculate budget-set slopes and virtual income in a

neighborhood around kink points, kernel regression is used to smooth the budget set non-

parametrically.    We also estimate a censored regression model of 401(k) saving to

decompose the overall 401(k) saving response between the extensive and the intensive

margin, where the instrumental-variable Tobit estimator of Newey (1986, 1987b) and an

instrumental-variable symmetrically censored least squares (SCLS) estimator based on

Powell (1986) and Newey (1986) are used.

       Empirically, the paper makes four additional contributions. First, to circumvent

difficulties with measurement error in 401(k) contributions and matching incentives that

have plagued previous studies, administrative data from three sources are used:

contributions from W-2 earnings records provided by the Social Security Administration

(SSA) and Internal Revenue Service (IRS); detailed matching formulas from pension

Summary Plan Descriptions (SPD) provided by the employers of Health and Retirement

Study (HRS) respondents; and, a combination of Social-Security-covered-earnings

histories for 1951-1991 and W-2 earnings for 1980-1991, pension SPDs, and pension-

benefit calculators to construct public and private pension entitlements and accruals. The

sample consists of 1,042 individuals in 1991 eligible for 401(k) plans in the HRS.

Second, the analysis includes a calculation of the dollar amount of unused employer

matching contributions due to workers’ failure to contribute at least until the point at

which the employer match is exhausted.          Most of this occurs because of non-

participation.    For non-participants, the unclaimed employer match represented 3.7

percent of pay. However, even participants left “money on the table” equal to 1 percent

of pay in unclaimed employer match. Based on measures of liquidity constraints used by




                                            4
others in the literature, reduced-form evidence is not inconsistent with the presence of

liquidity constraints as a potential explanation for this phenomenon.          Third, unlike

previous pension studies that have used the employer-provided SPDs in the HRS, which

are available only for a non-random sub-sample of HRS respondents, the estimation uses

methods laid out in Vella (1992) and Das, Newey, and Vella (2003) to correct for

potential sample selection using a set of plausible exclusion restrictions derived from

Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form 5500 administrative pension-plan filings. The

exclusions have substantial predictive power for determining who is in the analysis

sample. There is statistically significant evidence of selection, but the economic impact

of the selection on the estimates is mixed: the bias is small in the censored regression

specifications of saving, but larger in the discrete choice participation specifications.

Finally, there is substantial evidence of the bunching of 401(k) contributions around

budget-set kink points induced by employer matching: about 25 percent of match-eligible

individuals are bunched at the kink.

       The estimates from the life-cycle-consistent discrete choice regression

specifications for participation indicate that the estimated marginal effect of an increase

in the employer match rate by 25 cents per dollar of employee contribution raises 401(k)

participation by 3.75 to 6 percentage points. When the estimates are expressed in terms

of elasticities, the results suggest that the impact of the match rate on 401(k) participation

is quite inelastic: the estimated elasticity of 401(k) participation with respect to the match

rate ranges from 0.02-0.07. In addition, the parametric and semi-parametric estimates

from the two-limit censored regression specifications indicate that the estimated marginal

effect of an increase in the employer match rate by 25 cents per dollar of employee




                                              5
contribution raises 401(k) contributions by $400-$700 dollars (in constant calendar year

1991 dollars). Comparing the Tobit and SCLS estimates using the Hausman-type test in

Newey (1987a), the validity of the Tobit model cannot be rejected. When the Tobit

estimates are expressed in terms of elasticities, the results suggest that the impact of the

match rate on 401(k) saving is quite inelastic: the estimated elasticity of 401(k) saving

with respect to the match rate ranges from 0.09-0.12 overall, with just under one half of

this effect on the intensive (contributions conditional on participation) margin.

       Overall, because of this very inelastic response on both the intensive and the

extensive margins, the analysis reveals that for employers and policy makers interested in

promoting retirement saving by older workers through greater 401(k) participation and

saving, matching is a rather poor policy instrument. Roughly speaking, the estimated

marginal effects in this paper suggest that an increase in the employer match rate of $1

per $1 of employee contribution would be needed to achieve the same increase in

participation as the implementation of automatic enrollment, based on the estimates in

Madrian and Shea (2001) and Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2002, 2004). The

analysis also suggests that government matching of voluntary contributions to any type of

Social Security personal account would be relatively ineffective in promoting personal-

account contributions (Engelhardt and Kumar, 2005).

       The paper is organized as follows. Sections II and III lay out the theoretical

model and first-order conditions that directly motivates the empirical analysis. Section

IV lays out the econometric framework and construction of the key variables. Sections V

and VI describe the data. Section VII describes the empirical analysis of the relationship

between matching and measures of liquidity constraints. For purposes of comparison




                                             6
with our more structural approach, Section VIII presents estimation results for ad hoc

reduced-form specification similar to those in the previous literature.         Section IX

discusses the identification of the structural model, and section X presents the estimation

results. There is a brief conclusion.



II. Theoretical Framework

       Previous studies have had two important shortcomings. First, they have not

couched their analyses in formal models of intertemporal choice, even though saving

involves the substitution of resources across time. This means that previous estimates

cannot be interpreted as estimates of life-cycle-consistent determinants of 401(k) saving

necessarily, because the empirical specifications may not have been consistent with

underlying utility maximization. So, while the existing literature has provided quite

informative descriptive analyses, it has said little about how 401(k) saving may respond

to prospective changes in employer matching or what the optimal match rate should be to

achieve a saving target. Second, with the exception of Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and

Metrick (2002), Mitchell, Utkus, and Yang (2005), and VanDerhei and Copeland (2001),

previous studies have failed to exploit the fact that multiple-match-rate schedules and

caps on matching induce kinks in the budget set.

       By specifying a detailed theoretical framework, this paper represents a stark

departure from the previous literature. In an effort to shorten the exposition, the model is

presented in full in Appendix A and briefly summarized here. It has nine key features:

   1) Intratemporal direct utility, U (C , l ; z ) , is derived from leisure, l , with an
       associated price, p l , consumption of a composite good, C , with an associated
       price, p c , and a vector of demographics, z , and is intratemporally weakly
       separable and intertemporally additively separable.


                                             7
2) The consumer faces a per period probability of survival of ρ , with period T
   being the known maximum length of life, and with probability 1 − ρ , the
   consumer dies and receives the terminal payoff Φ (W T ) , the utility of bequests,
   which is a function of total wealth, W T .

3) The lifetime is composed of two parts: from period N to Τ , the consumer is retired
   and no hours of labor are supplied to the market, so leisure equals the time
   endowment, and from period 0 to N - 1 , the consumer works; the timing of
   retirement in period N is endogenous.

4) Total wealth is accumulated in seven forms when working: IRAs, 401(k)s, non-
   401(k) defined-contribution (DC) pension plans, defined-benefit (DB) pension
   plans, Social Security, housing equity, and taxable wealth.

5) Retirement-account wealth, defined as the sum of IRA, 401(k), and non-401(k)
   DC assets, and taxable wealth can be invested in risky stocks, with stochastic
   return r s , and riskless bonds, and, in addition to the optimal asset allocation
   decision across the different forms of wealth, there is an optimal asset location
   decision, whereby the consumer must decide which assets to hold in taxable and
   tax-deferred forms.

6) The model specifies in detail non-linearities in the budget set induced by
   employer matching, the tax treatment of 401(k) and IRA contributions,
   respectively, IRA withdrawals, including the tax penalty for early withdrawals
   and minimum-distribution requirements, and the interrelationship between
   employer matching, 401(k) plan characteristics, and the price of leisure.

7) There are four liquidity constraints: a) non-401(k)-DC, DB and Social Security
   wealth are assumed illiquid until retirement and cannot be used as collateral (in
   accordance with federal law); b) there are constraints on the housing loan-to-value
   ratio for homeowners which limits the amount of mortgage debt that can be held;
   c) 401(k) wealth is assumed illiquid until retirement; and d) there is a cash-on-
   hand constraint, such that total per period full expenditure (also referred to as “full
   income” in the two-stage budgeting literature), y , must be less than or equal to
   total net cash on hand, where the latter is defined as beginning-of-period liquid
   taxable wealth and other income on hand, plus the market value of the leisure
   endowment, less the tax liability, plus any IRA wealth made liquid through a
   withdrawal, less any tax-deferred saving in the form of contributions to the 401(k)
   and IRA.

8) In each period t , there are minimum- and maximum-contribution constraints on
   401(k)s and IRAs (with multipliers in square brackets), respectively,

                                        QtVOL ≥ 0 ,                            [ η t0 ]   (1)


                                          8
                                          QtVOL ≤ LVOL
                                                   t   ,                          [ η tL ] (2)
                                          QtIRA ≥ 0 ,                             [ υ t0 ]   (3)
       and
                                          QtIRA ≤ LtIRA ,                         [ υ tL ] (4)

       where Q VOL denotes 401(k) contributions, Q IRAC denotes IRA contributions, and
        LVOL and LIRA are the upper limits on 401(k) and IRA contributions, respectively.
        LIRA is governed by federal law and depends on marital status and pension
       coverage; LVOL is governed by the employer’s plan, but may not exceed the
       federal statutory maximum.

   9) Each period when working, the consumer chooses consumption, leisure, voluntary
      401(k) contributions, Q VOL , IRA contributions, Q IRAC , IRA withdrawals, the
      housing loan-to-value ratio, and the shares of retirement-account and taxable
      wealth held in risky stocks, respectively. Each period when retired, the consumer
      chooses consumption, IRA contributions, IRA withdrawals, the housing loan-to-
      value ratio, and receives eligible pension and Social Security benefits.

       To summarize, the only forms of “active” saving when working are through

contributions to 401(k), IRA, or taxable assets; adjustments can be made to the mortgage-

debt position as well. However, the primary technology for smoothing resources across

periods when working is through taxable-asset saving, because 401(k) saving is illiquid;

IRA contributions are not necessarily illiquid because of the availability of withdrawals,

but IRA withdrawals may incur a tax penalty; traditional pensions and Social Security are

illiquid; and the extent of mortgage borrowing is limited. This means that the consumer’s

optimization does not imply automatically that all active saving be allocated first to the

tax-preferred asset with the highest net return, because, in the face of uncertainty, the

consumer must balance the desire for a high return with the need for liquidity.



III. First-Order Conditions




                                            9
        As explained in the data section below, consumption and hours are not fully

observed in the HRS, so that, from the perspective of the empirical analysis, it is

desirable to work with the indirect, rather than the direct, utility function. Specifically,

let V (p, y; z ) be the intratemporal indirect utility function. It takes as arguments the

vector of prices of leisure and consumption, p , full income, y , and the vector of

demographics, z . Following Browning, Deaton, and Irish (1985), let Vt * (WtT ) be the

sum of current and future expected utility based on total wealth in period t . The

individual makes all decisions at the beginning of the period, based on the information

set, Ω t , after which, r s is realized, E is the expectations operator conditional on the

information set, and β is the discount rate.

        The optimization is expressed in terms of two-stage budgeting. 3                  In the first-

stage, the individual chooses full income, dis-saving through IRA withdrawals, the

mortgage-debt position, and the portfolio allocations to stock of retirement-account and

taxable wealth, and must allocate total “active” saving to three asset categories─401(k),

IRA, and taxable wealth─to maximize the expected present discounted value of lifetime

indirect utility. In the second stage, optimal full income in each period is allocated

statically between the goods that enter direct utility: consumption and leisure.

        The first-order conditions when working for 401(k) contributions, IRA

contributions, and full income can be expressed as




3
  The necessary condition for two-stage budgeting is that utility be weakly separable (Gorman, 1959). The
model assumes strongly intertemporally and weakly intratemporally separable preferences, so that a two-
stage budgeting interpretation is valid.


                                                   10
                   ⎧                                                                                                                 ⎫
η tL − η t0 = E t ⎨[ RtRA (1 + M V 401k ) − RtTA (1 − T It (1 − ζ           QtIRA ))] ⋅ [ ρ t β V*
                                                                                                         + (1 − ρ t ) β Φ           ]⎬
                                                                     yl t                       WtT+1                       WtT+1
                   ⎩                   Qt
                                                                                                                                     ⎭ (5)
              − μ t (1 − T It (1 − ζ          QtIRA )),
                                       yl t



                        ⎧                                                                            ⎫
      υ tL − υ t0 = E t ⎨[ RtRA − RtTA (1 − T It ζ t )] ⋅ [ ρ t βV*
                                                                         + (1 − ρ t ) βΦ            ]⎬ − μ t (1 − T It ζ t ),         (6)
                                                                 WT                         WT
                        ⎩                                         t +1                       t +1    ⎭

and

                                            ⎧                                        ⎫
                 V y (p t , y t ; z ) = E t ⎨ RtTA [ ρ t β V *T + (1 − ρ t ) βΦ T ]⎬ + μ t ,                                          (7)
                                            ⎩               W
                                                             t +1
                                                                               W
                                                                                t +1 ⎭


respectively. Note that subscripts indicate a partial derivative (other than t , which

denotes time): for example, TI is simply the marginal tax rate; M QV 401k is the marginal

employer match rate for an additional dollar of 401(k) contribution; ζ is the fraction of

IRA contributions that is federally tax-deductible; ζ y l is the change in the fraction of an

IRA contribution that is deductible for an additional dollar of adjusted gross income

(AGI); V y is the marginal utility of full income; μ t is Kuhn-Tucker multiplier on the

cash-on-hand constraint; and R RA and R TA are the weighted average returns on

retirement-account and taxable wealth, respectively.

           Even though the typical employer match yields a net return far exceeding that on

other assets, so that it would appear obvious that the individual always would want to

make the maximum possible contribution to the 401(k), equation (5) indicates the role of

liquidity in the 401(k) contribution decision. In particular, there are two ways for this

equation to be satisfied when contributions are less than the plan maximum even when

the match and tax rates are positive, M QV 401k > 0 and TI > 0 , respectively, and these occur

when the liquidity constraint binds, μ > 0 : (a) the corner solution of no 401(k) saving,




                                                               11
for which the Kuhn-Tucker multipliers on the 401(k) contribution constraints in (1) and

(2) are η 0 > 0 and η L = 0 , respectively; and (b) an interior solution, for which η 0 = 0

and η L = 0 (i.e., the contribution is positive, but not at the plan maximum), and the

multiplier on the liquidity constraint is large enough that the second term just equals the

first term on the right-hand side of (5). A particularly important example of this latter

case is when the contribution is less than the match cap and the employee leaves “money

on the table” by not contributing up until the point the match is exhausted. Therefore,

even in the presence of an employer match, binding liquidity constraints can explain why

401(k) participation can be less than 100 percent, contributions can be less than the plan

maximum, and employees rationally can leave money on the table. This implication of

the model is examined in Section VII below, in which reduced-form specifications are

estimated to see whether variables used by others in the literature to measure liquidity

constraints can explain who fails to contribute at least until the match is exhausted.



IV. Econometric Specification

       The major difficulty with the use of (5) as a direct basis for estimating the impact

of employer matching on 401(k) participation is that most of elements on the right-hand

side are not fully observed in survey data: who is liquidity constrained, μ ; expectations,

E; the sum of future expected utility, V * ; bequest motives, Φ ; and the discount rate, β ,

for example. To overcome this, define the following tax/match prices, ptIRA ≡ 1 − TIt ζ t ,

ptm ≡ 1 + M V 401k , and pt401k ≡ 1 − TIt (1 − ζ          QtIRA ) , and then combine (5)-(7) to solve out
             Qt                                    yl t


for the unobserved elements to yield



                                                    12
                                  Δη t = Δp t ⋅ V y (p t , y t ; z ) + p tm Δυ t ,                          (8)

where Δη t ≡ η tL − η t0 , Δυ t ≡ υ tL − υ t0 , and Δp ≡ p m p IRA − p 401k . 4

         Equation (8) motivates the functional form for estimation. In particular, let the

indirect utility function take the following form,

                                                             ln( y ) − ln[a(p)]
                                 V (p, y; z ) = Ψ (z ) ⋅                        ,                           (9)
                                                                  ln[b(p)]

which is a member of the class of the PIGLOG indirect utility functions (Muellbauer,

1976), that has been used extensively in the literature on consumption.                               Following

Blundell, Browning, and Meghir (1994), Ψ is a utility scaling factor that is a function of

the exogenous demographic characteristics. In (9), b is homogeneous of degree zero and

modeled as a Cobb-Douglas price aggregator

                                            b(p) = ∏ p kγ k ,                                              (10)
                                                        k


across the k goods that enter the direct utility function, where                     ∑γ k = 0 .   Because there
                                                                                     k


are only two goods that enter direct utility, leisure (k = 1) and consumption (k = 2) ,

respectively, this implies γ 2 = −γ 1 , so that (10) can be re-written as

                                           b(p) = ω γ k ,                                                  (11)

where ω ≡ p l / p c is the real relative price of leisure. In addition, a is homogeneous of

degree one. From (9), the marginal indirect utility of full income, V y , is

                                                ⎛ Ψ (z ) ⎞
                                           Vy = ⎜            ⎟.                                            (12)
                                                ⎝ y ln[b(p)] ⎠


4
 These three prices are not for goods that enter the intratemporal direct utility function and, therefore, are
not in the price vector p that is an argument in the indirect utility function.


                                                            13
The scaling factor Ψ is modeled as

                                          Ψi (z ) = ∑ψ m z i ,m ,                            (13)
                                                          m


where z is an m × 1 vector that includes a constant. The second term on the right-hand

side of (8) is zero when IRA saving is at an interior solution, positive when constrained

by the upper IRA limit, and negative when at the lower IRA limit (of zero). Finally, let

                                                                IRA
                                         κ ≡ p m (D L                 − D0 ) ,               (14)

           IRA
where D L        is a dummy variable that is one if IRA contributions, which are measured in

the HRS, are at the upper limit and zero otherwise, and D 0 is a dummy variable that is

one if IRA contributions are zero and zero otherwise.

        Because, as will be illustrated in the discussion of the descriptive statistics, there

is a very small percentage of workers in the sample whose contributions equal the 401(k)

plan maximum, we first consider just the participation decision in the empirical analysis,

so that Δη collapses to − η 0 , and (8), (12), (13), and (14) combine to yield the following

discrete choice econometric model

                                                  Δpijt
                        −ηijt0 = ∑ δ1m zi ,m                    + δ 2κ ijt + αxijt + u jit   (15)
                                 m             yijt ln(ωijt )

and

                                VOL
                               Dijt         VOL*
                                    = 1 if Qijt  > 0 ⇔ − η ijt0 = 0
                                                                                             (16)
                                VOL
                               Dijt         VOL*
                                    = 0 if Qijt  = 0 ⇔ − η ijt0 < 0,

where δ 1m ≡ ψ m / γ 1 ,      VOL*
                             Qijt  denotes the desired 401(k) contribution, i and j index

individuals and 401(k) plans, respectively, and u is the error term. Alternatively, this

framework lends itself naturally to a censored regression model of the determinants of the


                                                           14
dollar amount of 401(k) saving (i.e., contributions), where at the upper contribution limit,

Δη > 0 , Qijt
          VOL*
               ≥ LVOL        VOL
                  ijt , but Qijt    ijt , and at the lower contribution limit Δη < 0 ,
                                 = LVOL

 VOL*            VOL
Qijt  ≤ 0 , but Qijt = 0 . If an increase in the employer match raises participation, then

the null hypothesis δ 0 = δ 11 = δ 12 = δ 13 = δ 14 = δ 15 = δ 2 = 0 should be rejected, and the

estimated marginal effects and elasticities of participation and saving to the match rate

should be positive, respectively.

        In the empirical analysis, z includes a constant, the worker’s education (in years),

age, and dummy variables for whether the worker was married, white, and female,

respectively.   These demographic characteristics enter parsimoniously and allow the

impact of employer matching to be heterogeneous across demographic groups. The last

term on the right-hand side of (15) includes x , a vector that contains a constant and

exogenous employer and employment characteristics.             These are additional factors,

explained in section X below, that fall outside of the scope of the theoretical framework,

but may affect contributions. In the baseline specifications, x is limited to a constant;

additional specifications allow the employer and employment characteristics to enter x .



V.   Data

        Previous research primarily has used nationally representative, individual-level

survey data, such as the Current Population Studies (CPS) and Surveys of Consumer

Finances (SCF), which are plagued by two important sources of measurement error.

First, even though the researcher must know the entire match schedule for a plan to

account for the individual’s full opportunity set, as well as whether the match is

discretionary or through profit-sharing, the typical survey respondent has great difficulty


                                              15
in accurately conveying even relatively simple pension provisions to interviewers, no less

detailed matching schedules. 5 Second, self-reported contribution data also suffer from

substantial reporting error. In addition, as the theoretical framework showed, the data

required to model saving are quite extensive: contributions, components of household

(including spousal) income, assets, debts, demographics, marginal tax rates, spousal

pension coverage, and expected entitlements from Social Security and traditional

pensions, which require lifetime and job earnings histories, respectively. Previous studies

have not had all of these data.

        In this paper, these problems are overcome by using remarkably detailed data

from the first wave of the HRS, a nationally representative random sample of 51-61 year

olds and their spouses (regardless of age). The first wave asked detailed questions about

wealth (including IRA and taxable assets), demographics, and spousal characteristics in

1992.    The survey also asked detailed questions about household income, tax

information, and IRA contributions, but, as is true in many household surveys, these

questions were for the previous calendar year, 1991. So, for the purposes of the empirical

analysis, periods t and t + 1 refer to 1991 and 1992, respectively.

        Questions on employment were asked for the job (if any) held at the time of the

interview, as well as previous jobs. A unique feature of these data is that the HRS used

the job rosters from the household interviews and collected Summary Plan Descriptions

(SPDs), which are legal descriptions of pensions written in plain English, from employers

of HRS respondents for all current and previous jobs in which the respondent was

covered by a pension.         These descriptions help to sidestep the problems with

5
 See Mitchell (1988), Starr-McCluer and Sunden (1999), Johnson, Sambamoorthi, and Crystal (2000),
Gustman and Steinmeier (1999), Rohwedder (2003a, 2003b), and Engelhardt (2001) for evidence on
measurement error in pension data.


                                               16
measurement error outlined above, and, instead, measure the exact incentives to

contribute by using the employer matching formulas given in the SPD. 6 Specifically, the

job in which the respondent was employed in 1991 was identified and then SPDs

associated with that job that had dates of adoption after 1991 were excluded. In addition,

the date of last amendment and dates for changes in plan provisions indicated in the text

of the SPD were used to exclude plans that were in existence in 1991 but whose features

changed between 1991 and the time the SPD was collected.

        The HRS also asked in the first wave the respondents’ permission to link their

survey responses to administrative earnings data from SSA and IRS.                          These

administrative data include Social Security covered-earnings histories from 1951-1991

and W-2 earnings records for jobs held from 1980-1991, and were made available for use

under a restricted-access confidential data agreement. They are the basis for two critical

measures in the analysis dataset. First, the W-2 data provide administrative data on

earnings and 401(k) contributions for 1991.           Unlike the contributions data used in

previous studies, these data are not subject to measurement error, as they are the

employer’s official report to the government on annual earnings and elective deferrals.

Second, when combined, the W-2 earnings histories, Social Security covered-earnings

histories and self-reported earnings histories, allowed for the construction of complete

earnings histories from 1951-1991 for each member of our sample. When used with

Social Security and pension-benefit calculators, which are described in Appendix B,

these data allowed for the calculation of the public and private pension wealth, accruals

and changes in accruals, for 1991 and 1992, respectively.


6
  The data appendix explains why self-reported pension information was not used and some other data
limitations in the HRS.


                                                17
       Overall, when all of the sources are combined, the data are a comprehensive

description of the household’s financial situation and exact pension incentives in 1991

and 1992 with which to estimate the parameters in the empirical specification in (15) and

a significantly richer data source than previous studies. Specifically, the sample consists

of 1,042 HRS individuals eligible to contribute to a 401(k) in 1991.



VI. Descriptive Statistics

       Many plans limit the amount of the match. These caps are usually expressed as a

percent of pay in the SPD, but also can be a percent of contributions, and even a fixed-

dollar amount. Table 1 shows the distribution of matching caps in the analysis sample,

expressed as a percent of annual pay. About 19 percent of these plans had caps on

employer matching that were less than four percent of pay. The median cap was 6

percent of pay, but 15 percent of plans had higher caps. Plans also vary according to the

match rate. Table 2 shows the distribution of “first-dollar” match rates in the analysis

sample. Columns 1 and 2 indicate that these match rates were clustered at 25, 50, and

100 percent, where the median match rate was 50 percent. However, 27 percent of the

plans offered matches of 100 percent, and three plans offered match rates of 200 percent.

       Descriptive statistics for selected variables used in the empirical analysis are

shown in Table 3.   Column 1 shows sample means for the full sample, with the standard

deviation in parentheses, and the median in square brackets. Overall, the sample consists

of mostly white, married individuals in their mid-50s, with some college education and

relatively few children at home. Only 56.4 percent of the sample actively participated

(defined as having made a positive contribution) in 1991.       The sample mean 401(k)




                                            18
contribution in calendar year 1991 was $1,377, but among contributors, the average

contribution was $2,446 (shown in column 4). Only 3 percent of the sample made the

maximum contribution.

       Figure 1 plots the distribution of 401(k) contributions for the match-eligible

individuals in the sample in intervals of $200 relative to the kink amount. As illustrated

in the figure, there is substantial bunching of contributions at the kink (measured as the

value 0 on the horizontal axis). About 25 percent of match-eligible individuals locate at

or within $400 of the kink on their budget sets.

       A comparison of contributions between those without and with employer

matching in columns 2 and 3 of Table 3, respectively, indicates that individuals with

matching contributed just over $400 more on average than those without matching (i.e.,

$1,640-$1,232=$408). The difference in the median contributions between these two

groups was $800.     Therefore, just based on a comparison of means, it would appear that

there is a small response of 401(k) saving to matching.

       A comparison of columns 2 and 3 in Table 3 also indicates that plans with

employer matching differ along other dimensions that may make saving attractive. For

example, if there is an employer match, the individual is much more likely to be able to

borrow against the plan balance, direct the investment of plan balances, less likely to

have another traditional pension plan, more likely to have the plan annual contribution

limit lower than the federal limit, and more likely to be allowed to make after-tax

contributions to the plan.



VII.     Explaining Unused Employer Matching Contributions




                                            19
        Because the typical employer match yields a return far exceeding that on

alternative investments, 401(k) participation would be predicted to be 100 percent if all

individuals were fully informed, financially rational, with access to perfect capital

markets and no transactions costs. In addition, at a minimum, all participants would be

predicted to maximize total compensation and contribute up to the point at which the

employer match was exhausted and then engage in a set of borrowing and lending

arrangements to achieve the desired level of consumption and leisure. 7 Yet in Table 3,

401(k) participation is 56.4 percent among all sample individuals, and only 54 percent

among those offered a match. This suggests that individuals left “money on the table” by

not capturing the total potential employer match.

        Column 1 of Table 4 shows the total potential employer match in the sample for

individuals eligible for a match. The mean potential match was $1,249, or 3.8 percent of

annual pay. The average employer match that went unused because contributions were

not made up to the level of the match cap was $550, or 1.9 percent of pay. Naturally,

non-participants accounted for most of this, with the unused match equal to 3.7 percent of

pay (column 3). Even more striking, though, is that among participants the average

unused employer match represented 1 percent of pay (column 2). 8

        As described in the theoretical framework, one possible explanation for this is that

individuals were liquidity constrained. To explore this, ad hoc reduced-form models

were estimated measuring whether and to what extent the 401(k) contribution was less

than the cap on the employer match as a function of a set of explanatory variables that

7
  A similar argument would imply that all individuals would be predicted to contribute up to the plan limit,
and engage in a set of borrowing and lending arrangements to achieve the desired consumption and leisure,
and thus exploit the tax arbitrage from deferral to minimize the lifetime tax liability.
8
  Choi et al. (2005) and Mitchell, Utkus, and Yang (2005) have similar findings using various sets of
company data.


                                                    20
measure (to varying degrees) the ability to borrow, which have been used by others in the

previous literature on liquidity constraints, but none of which measure such constraints

definitively: demographics (white, age, married, and years of education); dummy

variables for whether the household has no capital income; has access to borrowing

against home equity through a home equity line of credit, conditional on being a home

owner; has experienced financial distress in the past due to unanticipated medical

expenses and unemployment, respectively; and has access to informal private support

from friends and family if under financial distress. 9

        The results are shown in Table 5 for the sub-sample of individuals offered a

match. Sub-sample means are shown in column 1. Column 2 shows estimates from a

probit model in which the dependent variable is one if the individual contributed below

the employer match cap (including a zero contribution) and zero otherwise. Individuals

who were more educated or with a home equity line of credit were statistically

significantly less likely to have contributed below that match cap, whereas those

individuals who had financial distress from unanticipated medical expenses or no capital

income were statistically significantly more likely to have contributed below that match

cap. Columns 3 and 4 show estimates for Tobit models of the dollar amount and the

percentage of pay of the unused employer match, respectively, and the results are

qualitatively similar.     These results are not inconsistent with the theoretical result that



9
   This section of the paper includes the results of ad hoc reduced-form models of the impact of liquidity
constraints on “money on the table” only to provide some evidence in support of (or at least not
inconsistent with) the mechanism in the theoretical framework that would explain individuals’ failure to
fully exploit the employer matching and tax-deferral in 401(k)s—namely, liquidity constraints. In
particular, measures of liquidity constraints used by others in the literature are used here simply for
comparative purposes. There are at least two other explanations for the presence of unused employer
matching contributions, imperfect information and present-biased preferences, both of which we discuss in
the appendix.


                                                   21
constrained borrowing is a plausible explanation for why workers fail to capture the total

potential employer match.



VIII.    Ad Hoc Reduced-Form Estimation Results

        To compare the non-linear budget set approach with that from the previous

literature, this section gives the estimation results from a series of ad hoc reduced-form

specifications similar in spirit to those in the literature, using the same estimators as used

in the literature, but with the HRS data. Selected parameter estimates are shown in Table

6. Standard errors are in parentheses.

        Column 1 shows a probit specification for the decision to contribute to the 401(k)

plan in 1991.     In columns 2-4, the dependent variable is the dollar amount of

contributions. Contributions are modeled as a function of earnings, demographics, a

dummy for whether the firm matches contributions and the marginal match rate in

column 2. Column 3 expands the specification to include quartic functions in age and

earnings.   Column 4 presents one-limit Tobit estimates.         Like previous studies, all

specifications in the table indicate that the presence of a match raises contributions.

However, conditional on offering a match, the point estimates suggest that increases in

the match rate may increase or decrease contributions, but none of these effects are

statistically significant. The estimated elasticity of contributions with respect to the

match rate (conditional on having been offered a match) is shown in the last row of the

table for each specification, with standard errors in parentheses.



IX. Estimation and Identification in the Non-Linear Budget Set Framework




                                             22
           The estimation of the parameters in (15) employs an instrumental-variable

technique that linearizes the budget set at the observed outcome to calculate the price and

virtual income terms and then instruments to correct for endogeneity. In particular, for

all observed 401(k)-contribution outcomes in the dataset, the tax and match prices, p IRA ,

 p m , and p 401k , the net wage, ω , and full income, y , must be calculated in order to

construct Δp / y ln(ω ) and κ in (18). Because budget-set slopes are not defined at kink

points, a variant of the method of MaCurdy, Green, and Paarsch (1990) was used to

calculate p IRA , p m , and p 401k for each individual in the sample. Specifically, the

matching formulas in the SPDs, tax-rate information from NBER’s TAXSIM calculator,

and detailed household financial and demographic characteristics were used to lay out the

budget set in detail, then the kinks in the budget set were smoothed non-parametrically

using kernel regression of the implicit (negative) tax rate from the employer matching

and tax subsidy to contributions on AGI over the federal legally allowable range of

401(k) contributions of 0 to $9500 using a second-order Gaussian kernel,
                           2
K ( z ) = (1 / 2π )e − z       /2
                                    , with bandwidth chosen by Silverman’s rule of thumb,

h = 0.9m / n1 / 5 , where m = min( varx , iqrx / 1.349) and iqrx is the inter-quartile range. 10

This regression was done on an individual-by-individual basis, so that the smoothing is

individual-budget-set specific, and the estimates allow for budget-set slopes to be

measured for those individuals located at kink points.

           Full income, y , can be expressed as

                        y it ≡ ΔAitTA + wit Ll + y ito − QitVOL − QitIRAC + QitIRAW − Tit ,   (20)

10
     See Appendix A for details.


                                                       23
and includes the market value of the leisure endowment. Under two-stage budgeting, the

capital income and net (dis-)saving terms embodied in ΔA are sufficient statistics for the

past and the expectations of future variables (Blundell and Macurdy, 1999). Because of

the non-linear structure of matching and marginal tax rates, the tax and match prices,

 p IRA , p m , and p 401k , change depending upon the budget-set segment (either because the

marginal match rate or tax rate changes), and, hence, the taxes-paid measure, T , which,

in turn, incorporates the dollar amount of the implicit tax liability from the employer-

matching and tax subsidies, will change depending upon the budget-set segment as well.

Therefore, full income is actually measured as “virtual” full income, y v , according to the

respective budget segment, where T v denotes the associated implicit tax liability, which

is calculated by numerically integrating the estimated kernel-smoothed implicit tax

function described above.

         Unfortunately, the explanatory variables in (18) have components based on choice

variables. Therefore, the instrument set, Z , includes the vector of demographics, z , and

                                        mz
three additional variables, Z itFC
                                 −1 , p    ⋅ p IRAz , and p 401kz : the first is a dummy variable if

the household was in poor financial condition in 1990, and the second and the third are

based on “first-dollar” match and marginal tax rates for a synthetic taxpayer in 1989. 11

There are two primary sources of variation in the instruments. First, p mz varies by plan,

 j.   That is, it is assumed that the variation in matching schedules across plans is

exogenous. Second, p IRAz and p 401kz vary across synthetic individuals because the tax

11
   We also estimated the model by additionally controlling for directly for demographic characteristics by
including the vector z in x . We could not reject the null hypothesis that these additional variables jointly
had no impact on 401(k) participation. This suggests that the demographic characteristics do not have an
effect separate from their interactions with the matching terms. We do not report these results, but they are
available upon request.


                                                    24
function is non-linear in income and marital status.        Appendix B gives a detailed

description of the construction of the instruments and discusses the sources of

identification in detail.

        A final issue is that the sample is likely non-random because it is based on

individuals for whom the HRS was able to obtain an employer-provided SPD for the

401(k) plan. Although previous pension studies using the HRS employer-provided SPDs

have not corrected for selection because of the lack of plausible exclusion restrictions,

two exclusion restrictions based on IRS Form 5500 data were used to estimate the model

using a number of methods to correct for selection. The first exclusion is the incidence of

pension-plan outsourcing by Census region, employment-size category, one-digit SIC

code, and union status (union plan vs. non-union plan) cell in 1992, where outsourcing

means the plan was administered by an entity other than the employer. The intuition is

that the HRS is less likely to obtain an SPD from the employer if (on average in its cell)

plan administration is outsourced, because more than one contact is needed (first the

employer, then the plan administrator) to receive the SPD. The second exclusion is the

incidence of pension-plan consolidation due to mergers and acquisitions by cell from

1988-1992. The intuition is that the HRS is less likely either to obtain an SPD from the

employer or match it to the employee if (on average in its cell) there has been a lot of

plan consolidation, because plan names and detail are often changed upon consolidation.

Finally, two other variables based on HRS data were used as exclusions in the selection

equations: dummies for whether the individual left the job because the business closed or

was laid off, respectively. These help to measure whether the employer possibly was in

financial difficulty at severance, which, if that resulted in a business failure, would have




                                            25
made it more difficult for the HRS to have obtained an SPD. The construction of the

exclusions and the selection equation are discussed in detail in Appendix B.



X. Estimation Results

        The parameters in (15) are estimated in the baseline specification, in which the

vector x in is limited to a constant, by maximum likelihood, where u ~ N (0, σ 2 ) . Panel

A of Table 7 presents parameter estimates with standard errors in parentheses. 12 Panel B

lists the set of additional explanatory variables in the models. Column 1 shows the

parameter estimates for the baseline specification without instrumenting. The marginal

effect for a one unit change in the match rate represents an increase of one dollar of

match per dollar of employee contribution and is shown in Panel. 13 The estimated

marginal effect of an increase in the match rate by one dollar is an increase in

participation of 0.0091 or nine-tenths of a percentage point, which is economically

extremely small and statistically different than zero, based on the p-value for the test of

the null hypothesis of no impact of employer matching shown in panel A. The estimated

marginal effect for virtual full income is negative, consistent with consumption and

leisure as normal goods, statistically significantly different than zero, but, again, the

economic magnitude of the income elasticity is very small.

        Column 2 gives the instrumental-variable estimates. In panel B, an increase in the

match rate of one dollar increases contributions by an estimated 27 percentage points and

is statistically different than zero. This estimate is substantially larger than the one in

column 1 without instrumenting, which indicates substantial downward bias in the
12
   The standard errors account for the presence of the estimated selection-correction and the use of
instrumental variables.
13
   The 95% bias-corrected bootstrapped confidence interval is shown in square brackets.


                                                26
estimated match effect from endogeneity. In column 2, the income effect is negative and

indicates that an increase of one unit in virtual full income, which represents an increase

of $100,000, results in an estimated reduction in the probability of participation of eight

percentage points. The income effect, as well as the impact of the net wage and the

marginal tax rate, are all significant at less than the 0.0001 level of significance for all of

the specifications in Table 7.

           To get a better sense of the economic magnitude of these marginal effects, Panel

D shows the estimated elasticity of participation with respect to the employer match rate,

evaluated at the sample means. In column 2, the estimated elasticity is 0.07: if the

employer match were raised from twenty-five to fifty cents (i.e., doubled), participation

would rise by seven percent (not percentage points). 14                        Thus, 401(k) participation

appears to be quite inelastic with respect to the employer match. The estimated income

elasticity is -0.10; the estimated net wage elasticity is − 0.04 ; and the estimated elasticity

with respect to the marginal tax rate is 0.04, so that 401(k) participation also is very

inelastic with respect to the tax price.

           Panel A also shows the parameter estimates on the exclusion restrictions in the

selection model. 15 The p-value for the test of the null hypothesis that the exclusions

jointly do not explain who has a matched SPD, though not shown in the table, is less than

0.01, which indicates the exclusions have predictive power for who is in the sample. In

particular, greater plan outsourcing, consolidation, business closure and layoffs

significantly decrease the likelihood of having a matched SPD. The parameter estimate

on the selection term in the participation equation is negative, and, based on the


14
     The estimated elasticities are very similar when based on individual characteristics.
15
     Parameter estimates for the full selection model are available upon request.


                                                        27
associated standard error, the null hypothesis of no selection bias can be rejected at the 3

percent level of significance. This is evidence of selection: high savers are less likely to

have an employer-provided SPD in the HRS, consistent with the reduced-form analysis

of Gustman and Steinmeier (1999). To gauge whether this selection is economically

important, column 3 shows the IV results without selection correction. The estimated

participation elasticity with respect to the match rate in Panel E is now 0.19, which is

more than double the selection-corrected elasticity of 0.07 in column 2. This indicates

that the bias from estimating the determinants of 401(k) participation on the selected

sample of the respondents in the HRS who have matched SPDs has a substantial effect on

the economic magnitude of the employer match estimates.



Robustness Checks and Extensions

       There are two practical concerns in the estimation that fall outside of the scope of

the theoretical framework. First, firms may offer employer matching contributions as a

way to try to avoid failing federal pension non-discrimination rules because they have

low-saving employees (McGill, et al., 1996). This would tend to bias downward the

estimated match elasticity. Second, firms that match may adopt other plan features to

stimulate employee saving (e.g., allow for borrowing against plan balances, self-directed

investment, offer after-tax saving options, offer retirement seminars, etc.) or offer

different fringe benefit packages that might affect saving behavior than firms that do not

match. This would tend to bias upward the estimated match elasticity.

       The reduced-form relationship between employer match rates and these factors

using the HRS data was examined in a companion paper, Engelhardt and Kumar (2004a).




                                            28
As described there, the non-discrimination rules are set up so that employers with a

greater proportion of workers with earnings large enough to be deemed “highly-

compensated employees” under federal law face greater pressure to meet non-

discrimination rules if they offer a 401(k). In particular, a variable that measured the

share of workers with earnings above the federal threshold for the definition of a “highly-

compensated” employee under federal non-discrimination regulations in the respondent’s

Census-region-by-employment-size-category-by-one-digit-SIC-code-by-union-status cell

in 1989 was constructed from the March CPS. This measure was then weighted by the

difference in combined federal and state marginal tax rates on earnings for the median

highly- and non-highly-compensated workers in the cell to reflect the value a highly-

compensated worker would put on a dollar of tax-deferred salary through a 401(k)

relative to that for a non-highly-compensated worker. This tax-difference-weighted share

was used as a measure of the non-discrimination “pressure” faced by the typical

employer in the respondent’s cell in a reduced-form model of the determinants of match

rates in the HRS data.

       The estimation results in Engelhardt and Kumar (2004a) showed that the measure

of pressure and other plan characteristics were highly significant. For example, the

greater the pressure (tax-difference-weighted share) the more likely the respondent’s plan

offered a match and the higher the match rate. Also, plans that allowed borrowing, self-

directed investment, had other traditional features, had limits less than the federal limit,

and after-tax saving options had significantly higher first-dollar employer match rates, as




                                            29
was suggested in the comparison of unconditional means in Table 3 of the current

paper. 16

         With this in mind, two groups of additional explanatory variables were included

in the vector x in (15) for the specification in Table 7: 1) fringe benefits offered: dummy

variables for whether the firm offered long-term disability and group term life insurance,

respectively, as well as the number of health insurance plans, number of retiree health

insurance plans, weeks paid vacation, and days of sick pay; 2) other plan characteristics:

dummy variables for whether the 401(k) allowed borrowing, hardship withdrawals, self-

directed investment, had an after-tax saving option, a 401(k) contribution limit less than

the federal limit, respectively, whether the firm offered other traditional pensions, and the

measure of non-discrimination “pressure” described above.

         Column 4 Table 7 shows the estimation results for this specification.                            In

particular, in panel B, the estimated marginal effect of a one-dollar increase in the match

rate is an increase in participation of 0.09, or nine percentage points. The estimated

match rate elasticity, Panel E, is 0.02, compared to 0.07 in column 2, so that the addition

of the fringe benefit and other plan characteristics has an important impact on the results.

The estimated marginal effects for income, net wage, and the marginal tax rate also

decline relative to those in the baseline specifications in column 2.

         In column 5, a third set of explanatory variables was added to x in (15): 3)

additional employment characteristics: dummy variables for both the worker and spouse

for whether the firm offered a retirement seminar, discussed retirement with co-workers,

16
   Another potential concern is that high-saving individuals, such as those with long horizons, might sort to
firms that offer employer matching contributions (Ippolito, 1997). This would tend to bias upward the
estimated elasticity of voluntary contributions to matching. However, the estimation results in Engelhardt
and Kumar (2004a) showed no correlation of the employer match rate with measures of the demographics
and horizon and offered no support for endogenous sorting.


                                                    30
whether responsible for the pay and promotion of others, the number of supervisees,

spousal pension coverage, as well as controls for firm size, Census division, and union

status.    These additional employment characteristics were interacted with the fringe

benefit and plan characteristics described above to allow a more flexible functional form

for α x in (15). The estimated marginal effects for the match rate, income, net wage,

and marginal tax rate are shown in column 5, respectively, are similar to those in the

baseline specifications in columns 2 and 4, respectively. The estimated elasticity of

participation to the match rate rises to 0.05 in Panel E.

          Finally, to allow for a significantly more flexible functional form for αx in (15),

in column 6, occupation dummies were added; the fringe benefit, plan, and other

employment characteristics were interacted with occupation; and, the other plan

characteristics were interacted with the fringe benefit variables. Hence, the specification

in column 6 is essentially fully interactive in the elements of x . The estimated elasticity

of participation to the match rate rises to 0.06 (column 6, Panel E).

          As noted in section IV, the demographic characteristics enter (15) parsimoniously,

in a manner that allows the impact of employer matching to be heterogeneous across

demographic groups. Across columns in Table 7, the demographic group for which the

employer match consistently appears to have statistically significant differential effects

on contributions is the relatively highly educated.         To highlight any differences in

responsiveness across groups, Table 8 shows the estimated marginal effect and

elasticities for the employer match rate by sex and education group for the richest

specification, shown in column 6 of Table 7. In columns 1 and 2 of Table 8, an increase

in the match rate of one dollar increases participation of females and males by an




                                              31
estimated 22.6 and 17.5 percentage points, respectively. However, the estimated 95%

confidence intervals around these estimates overlap substantially and these effects are not

statistically different from each other.           In columns 3-7, the marginal effect as well as

elasticities rises sharply by education group. 17



Estimates from the Censored Regression Model

         We also estimated (15) as a two-limit censored regression model of 401(k) saving

in an instrumental-variable Tobit framework using the estimator of Newey (1986,

1987b), which allowed us to decompose the overall saving responses between the

extensive and the intensive margins, respectively, based on the method of McDonald and

Moffitt (1980). In addition, we used an instrumental-variable version of the

Symmetrically Censored Least Squares (SCLS) estimator of Powell (1986) and Newey

(1986, 1987b). The primary advantage of this semi-parametric estimator is that it robust

to heteroscedasticity and any departures to normality that were assumed for the Tobit

error term.




17
   The marginal effect and elasticity with respect to the match rate rises monotonically with education until
college degree. For those with graduate degrees, however, the elasticity is lower even though marginal
effects are higher. This is due to lower match rate and higher participation rates at which the elasticity has
been calculated for this group. In addition to the robustness checks indicated in Table 7, specifications
were estimated based on the more general Box-Cox functional form for indirect utility from Blundell,
Browning, and Meghir (1994),
                                                        λ
                                                  ⎛ y ⎞
                                                  ⎜⎜       ⎟⎟ − 1
                                                   ⎝ a (p) ⎠         ⎛ Ψ (z ) ⎞
                                   V (p, y; z ) =                 ⋅ ⎜⎜          ⎟⎟ ,
                                                         λ           ⎝ ln[b(p)] ⎠
which nests the PIGLOG function we use. These results, which appeared in the version of the paper
presented at the TAPES conference, were very consistent with the results shown in Tables 7 and 8, and,
therefore, were not included in the current version for the purposes of exposition. They are available from
the authors upon request.



                                                     32
        Table 9 presents a parallel set of results from the censored specification to those

in Table 7 for the discrete choice model of participation. 18 Overall, the general pattern of

estimated responses is very similar to those from the binary choice specification in Table

7. Panel E shows the decomposition of the total elasticities into elasticities along the

extensive (participation) and intensive (contributions conditional on participation)

margins, respectively. 19 Columns 5 and 6 present results from the richest specification

using IV Tobit and IV SCLS, respectively.                   The latent marginal effects from the

parametric and semi-parametric estimates in these two columns indicate that an increase

in the match rate by one dollar per dollar of employee contribution raises 401(k) saving

by $2261 and $1522 (in 1991 dollars) respectively. The estimated elasticity of

contributions to the match rate is 0.12 (column 5, Panel E), with more than one half of

this elasticity on the extensive margin which suggests that participation is relatively more

responsive to variation in the employer match than contributions. The elasticities on the

extensive (participation) margin are very similar the estimates from the discrete choice



18
    The estimation uses methods laid out in Vella (1992) and Das, Newey, and Vella (2003) for the Tobit
and SCLS estimators, respectively, to correct for potential sample selection. Parameter estimates for the
full selection model are available upon request. The first-stage regressions for the endogenous variables in
(15) were selection corrected as well.
19
   One drawback of the SCLS estimator is that the total, extensive-, and intensive-margin match rate
elasticities shown in panel E cannot be calculated from the estimates. In addition to SCLS, the
specifications were estimated using an instrumental-variable version of Powell’s CLAD estimator extended
to allow for two limits, with the upper limit varying across individuals, as is dictated by these data,
accounting for selection using the method of Blundell and Powell (2004) for semiparametric estimators.
The CLAD point estimates produced marginal effects that were very similar to the SCLS and Tobit
estimated marginal effects shown in Table 8. However, when bootstrapping the standard errors, the
estimator frequently failed to converge. In particular, as is well-known for LAD estimators, the estimator
can fail to converge when the specification becomes more and more saturated with control variables and
the cells become thin, as in the richer specifications in subsequent columns in Table 8. This is a
particularly severe problem for CLAD estimators that rely on iterative trimming of the data when the
analysis dataset is not large, because the estimation dataset becomes smaller with each iteration, even
though the number of explanatory variables remains the same. In this application, the estimation algorithm
trimmed the original 1,042 observations down to around 400 by the last iteration. For this reason, reliable
bootstrapped standard errors were not able to be obtained for CLAD estimates and they are not shown in
Table 8.


                                                    33
participation model in Table 7. Finally, Based on a Hausman-type test (Newey, 1987a),

we could not reject the IV Tobit model in favor of the IV SCLS specification.

       Table 10 shows the estimated marginal effect and elasticities for the employer

match rate by sex and education group for the richest specification, shown in column 10

of Table 9. In columns 1 and 2 of Table 10, an increase in the match rate of one dollar

increases contributions of females and males by an estimated $1,153 and $1,752,

respectively. The results for the education groups echo those from the discrete choice

model of participation in Table 8, both marginal effects and elasticities rise sharply with

education.



XI. Summary and Implications

       Previous studies have produced a puzzling array of estimates of the impact of

employer matching on 401(k) saving. This probably stemmed from the use of less than

ideal data and, more importantly, the failure to incorporate into estimation match-induced

kinks in the budget set. Overall in this analysis, based on the life-cycle consistent

specification derived, the estimated elasticity of 401(k) participation with respect to the

match rate ranged from 0.02-0.07, and, hence, participation was quite inelastic with

respect to employer matching, a pattern that was apparent even in a simple comparison of

means. The estimated elasticities of 401(k) saving from a censored regression model

ranged from 0.09-0.12 with just under half of this response on the intensive margin.

       There are two obvious limitations of these findings. First, the focus was on older

workers, for whom the very detailed data for this type of study were available; whether

the estimates apply to younger workers is an open question. Second, this study has




                                            34
nothing to say about the broader question of to what extent 401(k) saving constitutes new

private saving, a point of substantial debate in the literature.

        Given these caveats, there are a number of potential implications of these

findings. First, because of the estimated inelastic response on both the intensive and the

extensive margins, the analysis reveals that for employers and policy makers interested in

promoting retirement saving by older workers through greater 401(k) participation and

saving, matching is a rather poor policy instrument. Roughly speaking, the estimated

marginal effects in this paper suggest that an increase in the employer match rate of $1

per $1 of employee contribution would be needed to achieve the same increase in

participation as the implementation of automatic enrollment, based on the estimates in

Madrian and Shea (2001) and Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2002, 2004).

Automatic enrollment would seem to be a much more effective way to increase

retirement saving. Second, a number of commonly-advocated reforms to Social Security

call for the introduction of voluntary private accounts, to which individuals could choose

to contribute additional funds toward Social Security. Under some proposals, the federal

government would match those contributions as an incentive.          In designing such a

system, it would be instrumental for policy makers to know how individual contributions

would respond to the government match.             Our analysis suggests that government

matching of voluntary contributions to any type of Social Security personal account

would be relatively ineffective in promoting personal-account contributions (Engelhardt

and Kumar, 2005). Third, beyond personal accounts, there is substantial policy interest

in the government provision of matching contributions designed to stimulate targeted

forms of saving among lower income households, which has led researchers to evaluate




                                              35
the impact of Individual Development Accounts (IDA) [Mills, Gale, Patterson, and

Apostolov, 2006], federal programs for matching IRA contributions, and the adoption of

the Saver’s Credit [Duflo, Gale, Liebman, Orszag, and Saez, 2006]. In particular, the

Mills, et al. and Duflo, et al. analyses, which were based on randomized field

experiments, have shown substantially more elastic responses from matching

contributions on IDA and IRA contributions, respectively.

         Our reading of these two studies suggests that their findings are difficult to

extrapolate to employer matching contributions in corporate 401(k) plans for three

reasons.    First, eligible employees in 401(k) plans are not typically lower income

individuals. They are more likely to be substantially better off economically. For

example, individuals in the Mills et al. analysis had incomes below 150 percent of the

poverty line.     Second, institutional features differ substantially.    For example,

contributions to a 401(k) plan that are matched are typically done through automatic

payroll deduction, whereas contributions to IDAs and IRAs in the Mills, et al. and Duflo,

et al. analyses were not. Third, the matching contributions in the Duflo, et al. analysis

were offered as part of an unannounced, take-it-or-leave-it decision, whereas employees

in a 401(k) can respond to a match by contributing at any point in a given calendar year,

or even a different calendar year, without foregoing the option of being eligible for a

match.     Overall, although these are fascinating studies that will have important

implications for policy targeted to lower income households and, through randomization,

have convincingly addressed important issues in the econometric identification of the

causal effects of matching, these studies are of limited use in formulating policy

concerning 401(k) plans.




                                           36
       Finally, a number of prominent companies have reduced or eliminated matching

contributions recently due to declining profits. Although it remains to be seen if this is a

long-term trend, understanding the impact of matching is critical to understanding the

impact of these changes on retirement income security for a workforce increasingly

dependent on 401(k) plans for retirement.        The fact that the estimated response of

contributions to the employer match in this paper was quite inelastic suggests that overall

401(k) activity at these firms might not be greatly affected by these changes in matching.




                                            37
                                     References

Agnew, Julie, Pierluigi Balduzzi, and Annika Sunden, “Portfolio Choice and Trading in a
Large 401(k) Plan,” American Economic Review 93:1 (2003): 193-215.

Amronin, Gene, Jennifer Huang, and Clemens Sialm, “The Tradeoff between Mortgage
Prepayments and Tax-Deferred Retirement Savings,” Mimeo., University of Michigan,
2006.

Andrews, Emily S., “The Growth and Distribution of 401(k) Plans,” in Trends in
Pensions 1992, John A. Turner and Daniel J. Beller, eds. (Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Labor) 1992, pp. 149-176.

Attanasio, Orazio P., and Guglielmo Weber, “Is Consumption Growth Consistent with
Intertemporal Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey,” Journal
of Political Economy 103:6 (1995): 1121-1157.

Barksy, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro,
“Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the
Health and Retirement Study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112:2 (1998): 537-580.

Bassett, William F., Michael J. Fleming, and Anthony P. Rodrigues, “How Workers Use
401(k) Plans: The Participation, Contribution, and Withdrawal Decisions,'” National Tax
Journal 51:2 (1998): 263-289.

Bayer, Patrick J., B. Douglas Bernheim, and John Karl Scholz, “The Effects of Financial
Education in the Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Employers,” NBER Working
Paper No. 5655, 1996.

Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler, “Naïve Diversification Strategies in Defined
Contribution Saving Plans,” American Economic Review 91:1 (2001): 79-98.

Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler, “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behaviorial
Economics to Increase Employee Saving,” Journal of Political Economy 112: S1 (2004):
S164-S187.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Taxation and Saving,” in Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein,
eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 3 (Amsterdam: North Holland), 2003, pp.
1173-1249.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Daniel M. Garrett, “The Effects of Financial Education in the
Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Households,” Journal of Public Economics 87
(2003): 1487-1519.




                                          38
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Daniel M. Garrett, and Dean M. Maki, “Education and Saving:
The Long-Term Effects of High School Curriculum Mandates,” Journal of Public
Economics 80 (2001): 435-465.

Blomquist, Soren, and Whitney Newey, “Nonparametric Estimation with Nonlinear
Budget Sets,” Econometrica 70 (2002): 2455-2480.

Blundell, Richard, Martin Browning, and Costas Meghir, “Consumer Demand and the
Life-Cycle Allocation of Expenditures,” Review of Economic Studies 61:1 (1994): 57-80.

Blundell, Richard, and Thomas MaCurdy, “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics,
Volume 3A, (Amsterdam: North Holland), 1999, pp. 1559-1695.

Blundell, Richard W., and James L. Powell, “Endogeneity in Semiparametric Binary
Response Models,” Review of Economic Studies 71:3 (2004): 655-680.

Brown, Jeffrey R., Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner, “401(k) Matching Contributions
in Company Stock: Costs and Benefits for Firms and Workers,” NBER Working Paper
No. 10419, 2004, forthcoming in the Journal of Public Economics.

Browning, Martin, Angus Deaton, and Margaret Irish, “A Profitable Approach to Labor
Supply and Commodity Demands over the Life-Cycle,” Econometrica 55:3 (1985): 503-
544.

Buchinsky, M., “Changes in the U.S. Wage Structure 1963-1987: Application of Quantile
Regression,” Econometrica, 62(2) (1994): 405-459.

Burtless, Gary, and Jerry Hausman, “The Effect of Taxation on Labor Supply: Evaluating
the Gary Income Maintenance Experiment,” Journal of Political Economy 86 (1978):
1103-1130.

Campbell, John Y., and Joao Cocco, “Household Risk Management and Optimal
Mortgage Choice,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118:4 (2003): 1449-1494.

Carroll, Christopher D., “The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic
Evidence,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2 (1992): 61-156.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, “Plan Design and 401(k) Savings
Outcomes,” National Tax Journal, forthcoming, 2004.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, “Defined
Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Decisions, and the Path of Least
Resistance,” in James M. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 16 (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press), 2002.




                                         39
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, “Optimal
Defaults,” American Economic Review 93:2 (2003a): 180-185.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, “Passive
Decisions and Potent Defaults,” NBER Working Paper No. 9917, 2003b.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, “Optimal
Defaults and Active Decisions: Theory and Evidence from 401(k) Saving,” Harvard
University Working Paper, 2003c.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, “For Better or
Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior,” in David A. Wise, ed.,
Perspectives in the Economics of Aging (Chicago: University of Chicago Press),
forthcoming, 2004.

Clark, Robert L. and Sylvester J. Schieber, “Factors Affecting Participation Rates and
Contribution Levels in 401(k) Plans,” in Living with Defined Contribution Pensions:
Remaking Responsibility for Retirement, Olivia S. Mitchell and Sylvester J. Schieber,
eds. (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press), 1998, pp. 69-97.

Coile, Courtney, and Jonathan Gruber, “Social Security and Retirement,” NBER
Working Paper No. 7830, 2000.

Cunningham, Christopher R., and Gary V. Engelhardt, “Federal Tax Policy, Employer
Matching, and 401(k) Saving: Evidence from HRS W-2 Records,” National Tax Journal,
55 (2002): 617-645.

Dammon, Robert M., Chester S. Spatt, and Harold H. Zhang, “Optimal Consumption and
Investment with Capital Gains Taxes,” Review of Financial Studies 14:3 (2001): 583-
616.

Dammon, Robert M., Chester S. Spatt, and Harold H. Zhang, “Optimal Asset Location
and Allocation with Taxable and Tax-Deferred Investing,” Journal of Finance 59:3
(2004): 999-1037.

Das, Mitali, Whitney K. Newey, and Francis Vella, “Nonparametric Estimation of
Sample Selection Models,” Review of Economic Studies 70:1 (2003): 33-63.

Deaton, Angus, “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica 59:5 (1991), 1221-
1248.

Diamond, Peter, and Botond Koszegi, “Quasi-hyperbolic Discounting and Retirement,”
Journal of Public Economics 87 (2003): 1839-1872.

Duflo, Esther, William Gale, Jeffrey Liebman, Peter Orszag, and Emmanuel Saez,
“Saving Incentives for Low- and Middle-Income Families: Evidence from a Field



                                         40
Experiment with H&R Block,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(4): 2006,
forthcoming.

Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez, “Participation and Investment Decisions in a
Retirement Plan: The Influence of Colleagues’ Choices,” Journal of Public Economics 85
(2002): 121-148.

Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez, “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in
Retirement Plan Decisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118:3 (2003): 815-842.

Dynan, Karen E., “How Prudent Are Consumers?” Journal of Political Economy 101:6
(1993): 1104-1113.

Elmendorf, Douglas W., “The Effect of Interest-Rate Changes on Household Saving and
Consumption: A Survey,” Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion
Series Paper No. 1996-27, 1996.

Employee Benefit Research Institute, Salary Reduction Plans and Individual Saving for
Retirement, Issue Brief No. 155 (Washington, DC: Employee Benefit Research Institute),
1994.

Engelhardt, Gary V., “Consumption, Down Payments, and Liquidity Constraints,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 28:2 (May) 1996: 255-271.

Engelhardt, Gary V., “Have 401(k)s Raised Household Saving? Evidence from the
Health and Retirement Study,” Mimeo., Syracuse University, 2001.

Engelhardt, Gary V., “Pre-Retirement Lump-Sum Pension Distributions and Retirement
Income Security: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study,” National Tax Journal
55:4 (December) 2002: 665-686.

Engelhardt, Gary V., “Reasons for Job Change and the Disposition of Pre-Retirement
Lump-Sum Pension Distributions” Economics Letters 81:3 (December) 2003a: 333-339.

Engelhardt, Gary V., “Nominal Loss Aversion, Housing Equity Constraints, and
Household Mobility: Evidence from the United States,” Journal of Urban Economics
53:1 (January) 2003b: 171-195.

Engelhardt, Gary V., “Defined Contribution Pension Plans and the Measurement of
Retirement Wealth: Implications for Studies of Pension Knowledge, Saving, and the
Timing of Retirement,” Mimeo, Syracuse University, 2004.

Engelhardt, Gary V. and Anil Kumar, “Understanding the Impact of Employer Matching
on 401(k) Saving,” TIAA-CREF Institute Research Dialogue No. 76, 2003.




                                         41
Engelhardt, Gary V. and Anil Kumar, “Sorting and 401(k) Employer Matching,”
Syracuse University Mimeo., 2004a.

Engelhardt, Gary V. and Anil Kumar, “Social Security Personal-Account Participation
with Government Matching,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 4:2 (2005):
155-179.

Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale, and John Karl Scholz, “The Illusory Effects of Saving
Incentives on Saving,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10:4 (1996): 113-137.

Even, William E., and David A. Macpherson, “Factors Influencing Employee
Participation in 401(k) Plans,” Mimeo, Miami University (Ohio), 1996.

Feenberg, Daniel, and Elisabeth Coutts, “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model,”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 12 (1) (Winter) (1993): 189-194.

General Accounting Office, “401(k) Pension Plans: Loan Provisions Enhance
Participation But May Affect Income Security for Some,” Report GAO/HEHS-98-5,
1997.

Gomes, Francisco, Alexander Michaelides, Valery Polkovnichenko, “Portfolio Choice
and Wealth Accumulation with Taxable and Tax-Deferred Accounts,” Mimeo., London
Business School, 2004.

Gorman, W.M., “Separable Utility and Aggregation,” Econometrica 27:3 (1959): 469-
481.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Jonathan A. Parker, “Consumption over the Life-Cycle,”
Econometrica 70:1 (2002): 47-89.

Gruber, Jonathan, “A Tax-Based Estimate of the Elasticity of Intertemporal
Substitution,” NBER Working Paper No. 11945, 2006.

Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier, “What People Don’t Know About
Pensions and Social Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data from the Health and
Retirement Study,” NBER Working Paper No. 7368, 1999.

Gustman, Alan L., Olivia S. Mitchell, Andrew A. Samwick, and Thomas L. Steinmeier,
“Pension and Social Security Wealth in the Health and Retirement Study,” in Wealth,
Work, and Health: Innovations in Measurement in the Social Sciences, James Smith and
Robert Willis, eds. (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press) 1999, pp. 150-208.

Hall, Robert, “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption,” Journal of Political Economy
96 (1988): 339-57.




                                          42
Hausman, Jerry A., “The Econometrics of Nonlinear Budget Sets,” Econometrica
(November) 53 (1985), 1255-1282.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Jonathan S. Skinner, “Assessing the Effectiveness of Saving
Incentives,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10:4 (1996): 73-90.

Ibbotson Associates, “Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation, 2003 Yearbook (Chicago:
Ibbotson Associates), 2003.

Ippolito, Richard A. Pension Plans and Employee Performance, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1997.

Jappelli, Tullio, Jorn-Steffen Pischke, and Nicholas S. Souleles, “Testing for Liquidity
Constraints in Euler Equations with Complementary Data Sources,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 80:2 (1998): 251-262.

Johnson, Richard W., Usha Sambamoorthi, and Stephen Crystal. "Pension Wealth at
Midlife: Comparing Self-Reports with Provider Data." Review of Income and Wealth
46(1) (2000): 59-83.

Joulfaian, David, and David Richardson, “Who Takes Advantage of Tax-Deferred
Savings Programs? Evidence from Federal Income Tax Data,” National Tax Journal 54
(2001): 669-688.

Kusko, Andrea, James M. Poterba, and David Wilcox, “Employee Decisions With
Respect to 401(k) Plans,” in Living with Defined Contribution Pensions: Remaking
Responsibility for Retirement, Olivia Mitchell and Sylvester Schieber, eds. (Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press) 1998, pp. 98-112.

Laibson, David, “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112 (1997): 443-477.

Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and J. Tobacman, “Self-Control and Retirement
Savings,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (1998): 91-196.

MaCurdy, Thomas E., David Green, and Harry Paarsch, “Assessing Empirical
Approaches for Analyzing Taxes and Labor Supply,” Journal of Human Resources 25
(Summer 1990): 415–90.

Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea, “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2001): 1149-
87.

McDonald, John F., and Robert A. Moffitt, “The Uses of Tobit Analysis,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 62 (1980): 318-321.




                                           43
McGill, Dan M., Kyle N. Brown, John J. Haley, and Sylvester J. Schieber, Fundamentals
of Private Pensions, Seventh Edition (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press),
1996.

Mills, Gregory, William G. Gale, Rhiannon Patterson, and Emil Apostolov, “What Do
Individual Development Accounts Do? Evidence from a Controlled Experiment,”
Mimeo., Brookings Institution, 2006.

Mitchell, Olivia S., “Worker Knowledge of Pension Provisions,” Journal of Labor
Economics 6 (1988): 21-39.

Mitchell, Olivia, Jan Olson, and Thomas Steinmeier, “Construction of the Earnings and
Benefits File (EBF) for Use with the Health and Retirement Survey,” HRS/AHEAD
Documentation Report No. DR-001, Institute for Social Research, University of
Michigan, 1996.

Mitchell, Olivia S., and Stephen P. Utkus, “The Role of Company Stock in Defined
Contribution Plans,” NBER Working Paper No. 9250, 2002.

Moffitt, Robert A., “The Econometrics of Piecewise-Linear Budget Constraints,” Journal
of Business and Economic Statistics 4 (1986): 317-328.

Moffitt, Robert A., “The Econometrics of Kinked Budget Constraints,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 4 (1990): 119-139.

Munnell, Alicia H., Annika Sunden, and Catherine Taylor, “What Determines 401(k)
Participation and Contributions?” Mimeo., Boston College, 2001.

Newey, Whitney K., “Linear Instrumental Variable Estimation of Limited Dependent
Variable Models with Endogenous Explanatory Variables,” Journal of Econometrics 32
(1986): 127–141.

Newey, Whitney K., “Specification Tests for Distributional Assumptions in the Tobit
Model,” Journal of Econometrics 34 (1987a): 125–145.

Newey, Whitney K., “Efficient Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with
Endogenous Explanatory Variables,” Journal of Econometrics 36 (1987b): 231–250.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. “Incentives for Procrastinators.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114:3 (1999a): 769-816.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. “Doing It Now or Later.” American Economic
Review 89:1 (1999b): 103-124.

Papke, Leslie E., “Participation in and Contributions to 401(k) Pension Plans: Evidence
from Plan Data,” Journal of Human Resources 30:2 (1995): 311-325.



                                          44
Papke, Leslie E., Poterba, James M, “Survey Evidence on Employer Match Rates and
Employee Saving Behavior in 401(k) Plans”, Economics Letters 49, 313-317, 1995.

Poterba, James M., “Employer Stock and 401(k) Plans,” American Economic Review,
93:2 (2003): 398-404.

Poterba, James M., Clemens Sialm, and John B. Shoven, “Asset Location for Retirement
Savers,” in William G. Gale, John B. Shoven, and Mark J. Warshawsky, eds. Private
Pensions and Public Policies. Washington: Brookings Institution, 2001.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise, “How Retirement Saving
Programs Increase Saving,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10:4 (1996): 91-112.

Powell, James L., “Symmetrically-Trimmed Least Squares Estimation of Tobit Models,”
Econometrica 54 (1986): 1425-1460.

Rohwedder, Susann, “Empirical Validation of HRS Pension Wealth Measures,” Mimeo.,
Rand Corporation, (2003a).

Rohwedder, Susann, “Measuring Pension Wealth in the HRS: Employer and Self-
Reports,” Mimeo., Rand Corporation, 2003b.

Shoven, John B., “The Location and Allocation of Assets in Pension and Conventional
Savings Accounts,” NBER Working Paper No. 7007, 1999.

Shoven, John B., and Clemens Sialm, “Long Run Asset Allocation for Retirement
Savings,” Journal of Private Portfolio Management 1 (2) (1998): 13-26.

Shoven, John B., and Clemens Sialm, “Asset Location in Tax-Deferred and Conventional
Savings Accounts,” Journal of Public Economics 88 (2003): 23-38.

Staiger, Douglas, and James H. Stock, “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
Instruments,” Econometrica 65:3 (1997): 557-586.

Starr-McCluer, Martha, and Annika Sunden, “Workers’ Knowledge of Their Pension
Coverage: A Reevaluation,” Mimeo., Federal Reserve Board of Governors, 1999.

Summers, Lawrence H., “Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Model,”
American Economic Review 71 (1981): 533-544.

U.S. Department of Labor, 1993 Private Pension Plan Bulletin (Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Labor), 1995.

U.S. Government Printing Office, 2004 Economic Report of the President (Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office), 2004.



                                        45
Vanderhei, Jack, and Craig Copeland, “A Behavioral Model for Predicting Employee
Contributions to 401(k) Plans: Preliminary Results,” North American Actuarial Journal
5:1 (2001): 80-94.

Vella, Francis, “Simple Tests for Sample Selection Bias in Censored and Discrete Choice
Models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 7:4 (1992): 412-421.

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, “Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of
Intertemporal Substitution,” Journal of Political Economy 110:4 (2002): 825-853.

Ziliak, James, and Thomas Kniesner, “Estimating Life Cycle Labor Supply Tax Effects,”
Journal of Political Economy 107 (April 1999): 326-359.




                                          46
                                               Appendix A

        This appendix lays out the theoretical model in more detail. Additional detail can
be provided upon request. This appendix is intended to be supplemental and, given its
length, not published.

        Previous studies have had two important shortcomings. First, they have not
couched their analyses in formal models of intertemporal choice, even though saving
involves the substitution of resources across time. This means that previous estimates
cannot be interpreted as estimates of life-cycle-consistent determinants of 401(k) saving
necessarily, because the empirical specifications may not have been consistent with
underlying utility maximization. So, while the existing literature has provided quite
informative descriptive analyses, it has said little about how 401(k) saving may respond
to prospective changes in employer matching or what the optimal match rate should be to
achieve a saving target. Second, with the exception of Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and
Metrick (2002) and VanDerhei and Copeland (2001), previous studies have failed to
exploit the fact that multiple-match-rate schedules and caps on matching induce kinks in
the budget set. 20

       To illustrate the kink, Figure 1 shows budget sets with and without matching in a
simple two-period model of consumption (without borrowing) typically used in
undergraduate textbooks. Let C1 and C 2 be consumption in period 1 when working and
period 2 when retired, respectively, and y1l be first-period gross labor earnings. For
simplicity, assume federal marginal income tax rates, θ1F , in the first period, and θ 2F , in
the second period, and no labor earnings in the second period. Let W SS be the present
value of traditional Social Security wealth, r be the gross return, and assume that Social
Security is not taxed when retired. Assume that the 401(k) is the only form of voluntary
saving, and contributions, Q VOL , measured in dollars from right to left on the horizontal
axis, are matched at a fixed rate, mVOL , up to a cap, Q match , based on the amount of the
voluntary contributions. The upper limit on voluntary contributions is Q max . The budget
constraint without matching is abcd . With matching, it is abkhi , and from 0 to Q match
(reading    right   to    left,   beginning   at   point      a ),    the   slope     is

20
   Both of these studies examined the impact of match rates and caps on 401(k) participation and
contributions, but from rather different perspectives than in this paper. Specifically, Choi, Laibson,
Madrian, and Metrick (2002) examined large samples of employee administrative data from two firms, one
that introduced a match of 25 percent up to 4 percent of pay and another that held the match rate constant
but increased the match cap. Their reduced-form estimates were not inconsistent with a relatively moderate
substitution effect and a very small income effect. Copeland and VanDerhei (2001) estimated the impact of
match rates and caps using a reduced-form sequential-response regression model for 137 matching
formulas and a very large sample of participants, in which a separate equation was estimated for each
match rate the participant faced. They, too, found evidence that matching raised participation and
contributions. Probably the biggest difference between these studies and the current paper is that the
analysis below is based on a life-cycle-consistent empirical specification, constructs the household’s budget
set (rather than the employee), and incorporates virtual income into the estimation. A companion paper,
Engelhardt and Kumar (2003), provided a further discussion of the previous literature.


                                                    47
− (1 − θ 2F )(1 + mV )(1 + r ) /(1 − θ1F ) ,   from        Q match   to    Q max ,    the     slope       is
− (1 − θ 2F)(1 + r ) /(1 − θ1F                   max
                           ) , and beyond Q , the slope is zero. At the match cap, Q           ,      match


there is a kink point, k , at which the match is exhausted.
        The introduction of the employer match with a cap has differential effects
depending upon the location on the budget set. For low levels of contributions, the
budget set rotates outward, and there are opposing income and substitution effects, but
for higher levels of contributions, the budget set shifts out in parallel, and there is only an
income effect, for which contributions fall with the imposition of the match.
Furthermore, once the match cap is in place, changes in the match rate, mV , may not
induce changes in contributions if individuals are bunched at the kink point, k , and
standard income and substitution effects are not well defined. Instead, income and
substitution effects on each budget segment are defined by the slopes given above and the
virtual incomes shown in the figure, y v1 and y v2 , respectively.

        By specifying a detailed theoretical framework, this paper represents a stark
departure from the previous literature. There were eight criteria that guided the model
detailed below. First, it should incorporate non-linear budget sets explicitly. In
particular, the budget sets individuals actually face are substantially more complicated
than the ones depicted in Figure 1, because they may have multiple kinks due to variable-
rate matches, and there may be multiple kinks because there are multiple marginal tax
rates, and contributions are tax-deductible, so that making a contribution may change the
marginal tax rate. Surprisingly, none of the previous studies even have accounted for the
effect of taxation on 401(k) saving. Second and third, respectively, the model should
allow for goods other than consumption, such as leisure, that enter utility—because a
change in the match rate may induce intratemporal substitution across goods—and for
uncertain lifetimes and bequests, facets that are important to individuals of the ages found
in the HRS. Fourth, the model should allow for wealth accumulation in many forms,
because 401(k) plan participants can save through means that differ from 401(k)s in
terms of tax treatment and liquidity, especially those that have been identified by
previous studies as potential channels for 401(k)-saving offsets: taxable and IRA wealth
(Poterba, Venti, and Wise, 1996; Hubbard and Skinner, 1996; Engen, Gale, and Scholz,
1996); Social Security, defined-benefit and non-401(k) defined-contribution pensions
(Gale, 1998; Engelhardt, 2001); and mortgage debt (Engen and Gale, 1998). 21 Fifth,
when formulating the household budget constraint, the model should specify in detail the
tax treatment of 401(k) and IRA contributions, respectively, IRA withdrawals, and the
interrelationship between employer matching, 401(k) plan characteristics, and the price of
leisure. This is a critical part of the analysis because the non-linear-budget-set estimation
requires that non-linearities be well specified, and it is something that has been omitted
from previous reduced-form studies. Sixth, it should allow for an uncertain rate of return
and liquidity constraints, two central features of models of consumption in the literature.
Seventh, in addition to the optimal asset allocation decision across the different forms of
21
   Technically, 401(k)s are defined-contribution plans under federal law, but a distinction will be made
throughout this analysis between 401(k)s and all other DC plans, where the latter category will be referred
to as “non-401(k)” DC plans and includes plans such as money-purchase, ESOP, target benefit, and profit-
sharing plans. The exact type of plan is indicated in the pension plan data used in the analysis.


                                                      48
wealth, the model should follow a series of papers, including Shoven (1999), Shoven and
Sialm (1998, 2003), Poterba, Sialm, and Shoven, (2001), Dammon, Spatt, and Zhang
(2004), and Gomes, Michaelides, and Polkovnichenko (2004), among others, and allow
for an optimal asset location decision, whereby the consumer must decide which assets to
hold in taxable and tax-deferred forms. Finally, it should be tractable enough to be used
directly to formulate an econometric model of 401(k) saving that is consistent with
intertemporal optimization.

        Formally, intratemporal direct utility, U (C , l ; z ) , is derived from leisure, l , with
an associated price, p l , consumption of a composite good, C , with an associated price,
 p c , and a vector of demographics, z . Intratemporal utility is weakly separable, and
intertemporal utility is additively separable. The consumer faces a per period probability
of survival of ρ , with period T being the known maximum length of life. With
probability 1 − ρ , the consumer dies and receives the terminal payoff Φ (W T ) , the utility
of bequests, which is a function of total wealth, W T . The lifetime is composed of two
parts: from period N to Τ , the consumer is retired and no hours of labor are supplied to
the market, so leisure equals the time endowment, Ll ; from period 0 to N - 1 , the
consumer works, and the timing of retirement in period N is endogenous. Total wealth
is accumulated in seven forms when working: wealth from IRAs, W IRA ; wealth from
401(k)s, W 401k ; wealth from non-401(k) defined-contribution pension plans, W DC ;
wealth from defined-benefit pension plans, W DB ; Social Security wealth, W SS ; housing
equity, W H ; and taxable wealth, W TA . Each period when working, the consumer
chooses consumption, leisure, voluntary 401(k) contributions, Q VOL , IRA contributions,
Q IRAC , IRA withdrawals, Q IRAW , and the housing loan-to-value ratio, φ , (discussed
below).    Each period when retired, the consumer chooses consumption, IRA
contributions, IRA withdrawals, the housing loan-to-value ratio, and receives eligible
pension and Social Security benefits. Because 401(k) contributions can be made only
while employed, the remaining description of the model focuses on the period when
working, in the interest of exposition. 22

       The literature on optimal asset allocation and location to taxable and tax-deferred
accounts has argued that, because capital gains are taxed more lightly than interest
income in the United States, the consumer has the incentive to hold relatively heavily
taxed bonds in tax-deferred accounts and relatively lightly taxed stocks in taxable
accounts. 23 The model allows the consumer to choose the optimal allocation of IRA, DC,
401(k), and taxable wealth between stocks and bonds, in addition to the choice variables
described above. Specifically, the model follows this literature and collapses IRA, DC,
and 401(k) wealth into a single group, called retirement-account wealth,
W RA ≡ W IRA + W DC + W 401k , when formulating the intertemporal budget constraint.

22
  Details of the complete model are available upon request.
23
  The obvious exception to this result is that tax-exempt municipal bonds should be held in the taxable
account.


                                                  49
This is done for three reasons. First, IRAs, DC plans, and 401(k)s are all tax-deferred
forms of saving, in that contributions are not taxed when made, they allow for inside
build-up at the pre-tax rate of return, and qualified withdrawals are taxed as ordinary
income at the time of withdrawal, so, in principle, there is little, if any, difference
between vehicles. 24 Second, federal law allows an employee to roll a DC or 401(k)
account balance over to an IRA upon job severance, so, in practice, assets that were once
accumulated in an employer-provided pension may appear on the household balance
sheet as IRA wealth (Engelhardt, 2002 and 2003a). 25 Third, this assumption helps keep
the model tractable. Therefore, total wealth is defined as
                         W T ≡ W RA + W TA + W DB + W SS + W H .                    (A.1)
Let s h be the beginning-of-period share of total wealth in asset type h ,
h = RA, TA, DB, SS , H .

         Defined-benefit pension and Social Security wealth evolve, respectively, as
                                      1 = (1 + α t ) s t Wt ,
                                 Wt +DB           DB    DB T
                                                                                     (A.2)
and
                                         +1 = (1 + α t ) s t Wt .
                                      Wt SS           SS   SS  T
                                                                                                     (A.3)
For defined benefit plans, the accrual, α DB , is determined by a plan formula that is
usually a complicated function of age, earnings, and years of service. The Social
Security accrual, α SS , is determined by benefit formulas in the federal law. The model
assumes that DB and Social Security wealth are illiquid until retirement and cannot be
used as collateral. 26

        Following Gomes, Michaelides, and Polkovnichenko (2004), retirement-account
and taxable wealth can be invested either in bonds, with riskless pre-tax return r B , or in
stocks, with a risky pre-tax return
                                  ~      1 + g~t + d
                                  rt S =             − 1,                                (A.4)
                                            1+ π
where π is the constant inflation rate, d is the constant nominal dividend yield, and g~ is
the stochastic nominal capital gain earned from the beginning of period t to the
beginning of period t + 1 . 27 Throughout the analysis, a return with a tilde will indicate an

24
     There is a clear distinction in the model between deductible and non-deductible IRA contributions.
Related to this, note that Roth IRAs were not available in 1991, the calendar year of the empirical analysis
below.
25
    There is very clear evidence of these rollovers in the HRS data used below. In particular, there are
individuals who have IRA wealth that is substantially higher than what they would have accumulated had
they made limit contributions since 1981, when IRAs became legally widely available, at plausible rates of
return. Theses individuals also self-reported having rolled pension assets over to an IRA.
26
    Federal law prevents the use of Social Security or pension assets as collateral for loans, so that the
illiquidity of these assets is a standard assumption in the literature.
27
    With respect to the empirical analysis described below, the HRS pension data tell whether employer
stock was an investment option both for the employee voluntary contributions and the employer match, but
only for plans that allowed individual-directed investment. Unfortunately, for plans that did not allow for
individual-directed investment, the HRS did not electronically code this information off of the SPDs, so
that it is not known whether employee and employer contributions were required to be invested in


                                                    50
ex ante uncertain return, whereas one without will indicate either an ex post realization or
a certain return. Let R RA be the weighted-average return on wealth in retirement
accounts,
                          RtRA ≡ (1 − ϑtRA )(1 + rt B ) + ϑtRA (1 + ~
                                                                    rt S ) ,           (A.5)
where ϑ RA is the share of retirement-account wealth invested in stocks. Then retirement-
account wealth evolves as
 Wt +RA1 = RtRA [ stRAWtT + Ft + QtVOL + M tVOL + QtMAN + M tMAN + QtIRAC − QtIRAW ]. (A.6)
Some employers mandate 401(k) contributions, shown as Q MAN in (A.6), and the
employer may match those mandatory contributions (Cunningham and Engelhardt,
2002). In (A.6), M MAN is the employer’s matching contribution in dollars on the
employee’s mandatory contribution, and M VOL is the employer’s matching contribution
in dollars on the employee’s voluntary contribution, Q VOL . The matching functions are
                             M tVOL = M VOL (QtVOL , y tl , m VOL
                                                              t   )                               (A.7)
and
                             M tMAN = M MAN (QtMAN , y tl , m tMAN ) ,                            (A.8)
respectively, and are twice continuously differentiable; y l is labor earnings; mVOL and
m MAN are vectors of plan-specified match rates for voluntary and required contributions,
respectively. In (A.6), F is the employer’s non-matching contribution for the plan. 28
The model assumes that DC and 401(k) wealth are illiquid until retirement and cannot be
used as collateral, but allows IRA withdrawals when working (discussed below). 29

        Housing equity is defined as W H ≡ P − D . Housing value, P , evolves as
                                Pt +1 = (1 + rt P ) P t ,                                         (A.9)
where r P is the return on housing value. Mortgage debt is D = φP , where φ is the loan-
to-value (LTV) ratio, and D evolves as
                               Dt +1 = (1 + rt D ) Dt ,                          (A.10)
where r D is the real mortgage-interest rate,


employer stock. Therefore, it is not possible to model and estimate the impact of employer stock on
contribution behavior here specifically. Poterba (2003), Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner (2004), and
Mitchell and Utkus (2002) have studied various aspects of investment in company stock.
28
   These would be contributions the employer makes on a periodic basis, as specified in the SPD, but are
not related to any voluntary or mandatory contributions by the employee: for example, those defined as a
percentage of pay in a money purchase plan or as a function of some measure of firm performance in a
profit-sharing plan.
29
   There are 401(k) plans that allow hardship withdrawals and/or borrowing against plan balances when
working that provide some liquidity to 401(k) saving. However, even though the SPD for each plan
indicates whether, the extent to which, and the terms under which, hardship withdrawals and borrowing can
occur, these features were not electronically coded by the HRS. Therefore, liquidity through hardship
withdrawals and borrowing could not be incorporated as choice variables directly into the intertemporal
budget constraint. Instead, the existence of these liquidity channels, for plans that offer them, are
controlled for directly as explanatory variables in the empirical analysis.


                                                   51
                                             1 + ntD
                                    rt D ≡           −1,                                         (A.11)
                                             1+ π
and n D is the nominal mortgage-interest rate. Equations (A.9) and (A.10) can be used to
write housing equity in period t + 1 in terms of the LTV:
                                                  1                             φ
                          Wt +H1 = (1 + rt P )          stH WtT − (1 + rt D ) t stH WtT .       (A.12)
                                               1 − φt                         1 − φt
In the model, the real mortgage-interest-payment portion on the right-hand side of (A.12),
defined as B ≡ r D (φ / 1 − φ ) s H W T , is required to be paid out of cash on hand and appears
in (14) below, so that the evolution equation for housing equity reduces to
                                               (1 + rt P ) − φt H T
                                     Wt +H1 =                  st Wt .                          (A.13)
                                                   1 − φt
        Finally, the equation of evolution for taxable wealth is
Wt +1 = RtTA [ stTAWtT + wt ( Ll − lt ) + y to − ptc Ct − QtVOL − QtIRAC + QtIRAW − Bt − Tt ] ,
   TA

(A.14)
where R TA is the return on taxable wealth,
                            RtTA ≡ (1 − ϑtTA )(1 + rt B ) + ϑtTA (1 + ~rt S ) ,                 (A.15)
ϑ TA is the share of taxable wealth invested in stocks, y o is other income, w is the gross
hourly wage rate, w( Ll − l ) ≡ y l is labor earnings, and B is the real mortgage-interest
payment. 30 In (A.14), T is the sum of income and payroll tax liability. It is a twice
continuously differentiable function,
                Tt = f T (θ tF , θ tP , θ tE ; I tF , min( ytl , LPt ), DtAge59−1 / 2 ⋅ QtIRAW ) , (A.16)
of a vector of statutory marginal income tax rates, θ F , Social Security and Medicare
payroll tax rates, θ P , and the penalty-tax rate, θ E , on early, non-qualified IRA
withdrawals, which are defined by D Age59−1 / 2 ⋅ Q IRAW , where D Age59−1 / 2 is a dummy
variable that is one if the individual is under age 59½ and is zero otherwise. 31 Federal
taxable income is
                I tF = {( y tl − QtVOL − QtMAN ) + λt QtIRAW + K t − ζ t QtIRAC } − Gt . (A.17)
The term in parentheses within the braces in (A.17) is income for federal tax purposes
reported on Form W-2, the term in braces is adjusted gross income (AGI), and the term
G represents the sum of personal exemptions and deductions, and includes deductible

30
    Because the mean age in the HRS sample below is 55, and Carroll (1992) and Gourinchas and Parker
(2002), among others, have estimated that most lifetime income uncertainty has been resolved by this age,
at which point households have transitioned from buffer-stock to life-cycle savers, income uncertainty
likely was not central to the households under study and is not included in the model, but would be an
important consideration in comparing the empirical results below to those based on a younger sample.
However, note that, as stressed by MaCurdy and Blundell (1999), the two-stage budgeting empirical
approach adopted below explicitly can handle multiple forms of uncertainty, including, for example, wage
uncertainty, and, therefore, in principle, this assumption does not compromise the basic framework
underlying the empirical specification.
31
   For simplicity in exposition, we have suppressed notation for state income taxes. However, we include
them in the empirical analysis below. Engelhardt (2002) discussed lump-sum distributions in detail.


                                                   52
nominal mortgage interest for homeowners. 32 The term K is taxable capital income and
is the sum of taxable interest income from bonds and taxable dividend and realized
capital-gain income from stocks. 33 The factor λ is the fraction of IRA withdrawals that
is federally taxable and depends on age and whether the withdrawal was qualified or
not. 34 The factor ζ is the fraction of IRA contributions that is federally tax-deductible.
It depends on adjusted gross income (AGI), and itself is a function of 401(k)
contributions and IRA withdrawals, because 401(k) contributions are excluded from AGI
and the taxable portion of withdrawals enters AGI. 35 LP is a vector of covered-earnings
caps for payroll taxes.

       Equations (A.2), (A.3), (A.6), (A.13), and (A.14) sum to yield the intertemporal
budget constraint that determines WtT+1 . In addition, there are five other constraints on
behavior. First, following Deaton (1991), there is a liquidity constraint,
                                        WtTA ≥ 0 ,                                   (A.18)
which means that total per period full expenditure (also referred to as “full income” in the
two-stage budgeting literature), y , defined as
                                  y t ≡ ptc Ct + wt lt + Bt ,                     (A.19)
must be less than or equal to total net cash on hand, X , defined as beginning-of-period
liquid taxable wealth and other income on hand, plus the market value of the leisure
endowment, less the tax liability, plus any IRA wealth made liquid through a withdrawal,
less any tax-deferred saving:
                 X t ≡ WtTA + y to + wt Ll − Tt − QtVOL − QtIRAC + QtIRAW .       (A.20)
Let μ t be the associated Kuhn-Tucker multiplier. This formalizes the assumption that
401(k), defined-contribution, defined-benefit pension, and Social Security assets are
illiquid prior to retirement. Second, although IRA withdrawals help to loosen the


32
     In the model, the housing service flow enters the composite commodity, C, and its rental cost for renters
and the implicit rental cost for homeowners is subsumed into the price index, p c .
33
   Dammon, Spatt, and Zhang (2001, 2004) have provided detailed models of consumption and investment,
with and without tax-deferred assets, which specified detailed tax treatment of realized and unrealized
capital gains.
34
   Engelhardt (2002) outlined and examined empirically in the HRS the federal tax treatment of non-
qualified pre-retirement withdrawals from 401(k) and IRA plans. Federal law allows penalty-free
withdrawals from IRAs at age 59½, at which point IRA assets become liquid; prior to 59½, tax-qualified
withdrawals are allowed for a very limited number of reasons, and non-qualified withdrawals are assessed a
penalty tax. The HRS surveyed individuals who were 51-61 in 1992, so some in the sample analyzed
below are eligible for qualified withdrawals.
35
    Prior to the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86), IRA contributions were fully tax-deductible up to the
limit of $2,000 for single individuals and $2,250 for married couples. TRA86 limited the deductibility of
contributions. For single individuals, contributions remained fully deductible if adjusted gross income was
less than $25,000, were linearly phased out for incomes between $25,000 and $35,000, and not deductible
for incomes above $35,000. For married couples, contributions remained fully deductible if adjusted gross
income was less than $40,000, were linearly phased out for incomes between $40,000 and $50,000, and not
deductible for incomes above $50,000. Therefore, ζ varies according to a non-linear interaction of
income, and marital status.


                                                      53
liquidity constraint by increasing total net cash on hand in (A.20), there are the following
minimum and maximum constraints on withdrawals, with multipliers in square brackets:
                                                        W IRA
                                QtIRAW ≥ DtAge70−1 / 2 ⋅ t ,                  [ ϕ t0 ] (A.21)
                                                         ht
                                     QtIRAW ≤ Wt IRA .                                     [ ϕ tL ] (A.22)
In (A.21), D Age70−1 / 2 is a dummy variable that is one if the individual is age 70½ or older
and is zero otherwise, and h is the individual’s life expectancy. Thus, if under age 70½,
the withdrawal must be greater than or equal to zero, and, if age 70½ or older, the
withdrawal must satisfy the minimum-distribution requirements under federal law that
are a function of life expectancy. Equation (22) states that the withdrawal cannot exceed
the beginning-of-period IRA wealth. 36 Third, the minimum- and maximum-contribution
constraints on 401(k)s and IRAs with multipliers in square brackets, respectively, are
                                        QtVOL ≥ 0 ,                             [ η t0 ] (A.23)
                                              QtVOL ≤ LVOL
                                                       t   ,                               [ η tL ] (A.24)
                                              QtIRA ≥ 0 ,                                  [ υ t0 ]   (A.25)
and
                                              QtIRA ≤ LtIRA .                              [ υ tL ] (A.26)
The terms LVOL
           t   and LtIRA are the upper limits on 401(k) and IRA contributions,
respectively.     LtIRA is governed by federal law and depends on marital status and pension
coverage. 37 LVOL
                t   is governed by the employer’s plan, but may not exceed the federal
statutory maximum. 38 Fourth, the loan-to-value ratio must lie in the unit interval for
homeowners, but there may be a minimum home-equity constraint─such as a
downpayment constraint (Engelhardt, 1996 and 2003b; Campbell and Cocco, 2003)─that
further constrains the LTV to be below some exogenous threshold, φ . Formally, these
constraints are
                                      φt ≥ 0 ,                          [ ς t0 ] (A.27)
                                              φt ≤ φt ,                                    [ ς tL ] (A.28)
where φ ≤ 1 . Finally, there are constraints on the shares of retirement-account and
taxable assets allocated to stocks:
                                    ϑtRA ≥ 0 ,                         [ϖ t0 ] (A.29)
                                              ϑtRA ≤ 1 ,                                   [ϖ tL ] (A.30)
                                              ϑtTA ≥ 0 ,                                   [ χ tL ] (A.31)
and


36
   Note that the penalty tax on non-qualified withdrawals (e.g., those prior to age 59½) is accounted for in
the taxes-paid function in (A.16).
37
   These limits apply to the sum of deductible and non-deductible IRA contributions.
38
   Leisure is not modeled as bounded by zero and the leisure endowment because 401(k) matching
contributions are available only to those who work.


                                                    54
                                                  ϑtTA ≤ 1 .                 [ χ tL ] (A.32)
        To summarize, the only forms of “active” saving when working are through
contributions to 401(k), IRA, or taxable assets; adjustments can be made to the mortgage-
debt position as well. 39 However, the primary technology for smoothing resources across
periods when working is through taxable-asset saving, because 401(k) saving is illiquid;
IRA contributions are not necessarily illiquid because of the availability of withdrawals,
but IRA withdrawals may incur a tax penalty; traditional pensions and Social Security are
illiquid; and the extent of mortgage borrowing is limited. This means that the consumer’s
optimization does not imply automatically that all active saving be allocated first to the
tax-preferred asset with the highest net return, because, in the face of uncertainty, the
consumer must balance the desire for a high return with the need for liquidity.

        Consumption and hours are not fully observed in the HRS, so that, from the
perspective of the empirical analysis, it is desirable to work with the indirect, rather than
the direct, utility function. Specifically, let V (p, y; z ) be the intratemporal indirect utility
function. It takes as arguments the vector of prices of leisure and consumption, p , full
income, y , given in (A.19), and the vector of demographics, z . Following Browning,
Deaton, and Irish (1985), let Vt * (WtT ) be the sum of current and future expected utility
based on total wealth in period t . The individual makes all decisions at the beginning of
the period, based on the information set, Ω t , after which, r s is realized. E is the
expectations operator conditional on the information set, and β is the discount rate.
Then for any time t , t < N , the dynamic optimization problem can be written as
                              {
      Vt * (WtT ) = max V (p t , y t ; z ) + E t [ ρ t β Vt*+1 (WtT+1 ) + (1 − ρ t ) β Φ(WtT+1 )] + μ t ( X t − y t )
                        {c}

                              + ς tL (φ t − φ t ) + ς t0 (φ t − 0) + η tL ( LVOL
                                                                             t   − QtVOL ) + η t0 (QtVOL − 0)
                              + υ tL ( LtIRAC − QtIRAC ) + υ t0 (QtIRAC − 0) + ϕ tL (Wt IRA − QtIRAW )
                              + ϕ t0 (QtIRAW − DtAge 70−1 / 2 ⋅ (Wt IRA / ht ))
                        + ϖ tL (1 − ϑtRA ) + ϖ t0 (ϑtRA − 0) + χ tL (1 − ϑtTA ) + χ t0 (ϑtTA − 0) ,        }
                                                                                                  (A.33)
where c contains the choice variables: y t , Qt , Qt VOL   IRAC
                                                                , Qt IRAW
                                                                          , φt , ϑt , ϑt ; and there is
                                                                                   RA   TA

                                           40
a two-stage budgeting interpretation.             In the first-stage, the individual chooses full
income, dis-saving through IRA withdrawals, the mortgage-debt position, and the
portfolio allocations to stock of retirement-account and taxable wealth, and must allocate
total “active” saving to three asset categories─401(k), IRA, and taxable wealth─to
maximize the expected present discounted value of lifetime indirect utility. Note that the

39
   Amronin, Huang, and Sialm (2006) examine the tradeoff between prepaying mortgages and saving
through tax-deferred assets in detail.
40
   The necessary condition for two-stage budgeting is that utility be weakly separable (Gorman, 1959). The
model assumes strongly intertemporally and weakly intratemporally separable preferences, so that a two-
stage budgeting interpretation is valid. The choices of 401(k) contributions and portfolio shares do not
apply when not working, where with regard to the latter it is assumed for simplicity that pension wealth is
annuitized at retirement.


                                                        55
choice variable for taxable-asset saving is made redundant by the intertemporal budget
constraint and does not appear explicitly in c . In the second stage, optimal full income,
 y * , in each period is allocated statically between the goods that enter direct utility:
consumption and leisure.

       The first-order conditions when working for 401(k) contributions, IRA
contributions, and full income can be expressed as
                       ⎧                                                                                                                 ⎫
      η tL − η t0 = E t ⎨[ RtRA (1 + M V 401k ) − RtTA (1 − T It (1 − ζ          QtIRA ))] ⋅ [ ρ t β V*
                                                                                                             + (1 − ρ t ) β Φ           ]⎬
                                                                          yl t                       WtT+1                      WtT+1
                       ⎩                   Qt
                                                                                                                                         ⎭
                  − μ t (1 − T It (1 − ζ          QtIRA )),
                                           yl t

                                                                                                                            (A.34)
                  ⎧                                                                  ⎫
υ tL − υ t0 = E t ⎨[ RtRA − RtTA (1 − T It ζ t )] ⋅ [ ρ t βV *T + (1 − ρ t ) βΦ T ]⎬ − μ t (1 − T It ζ t ),                 (A.35)
                  ⎩                                         W
                                                             t +1
                                                                               W
                                                                                t +1 ⎭
and
                                                ⎧                                         ⎫
                     V y (p t , y t ; z ) = E t ⎨ RtTA [ ρ t β V *T + (1 − ρ t ) β Φ T ]⎬ + μ t ,                           (A.36)
                                                ⎩               W
                                                                 t +1
                                                                                    W
                                                                                     t +1 ⎭
respectively. Note that subscripts indicate a partial derivative (other than t , which
denotes time): for example, TI is simply the marginal tax rate; M QV 401k is the marginal
employer match rate for an additional dollar of 401(k) contribution; ζ y l is the change in
the fraction of an IRA contribution that is deductible for an additional dollar of AGI; and
V y is the marginal utility of full income. 41




41
   The first-order conditions for the other choice variables are available upon request and are not shown
here simply in the interest of exposition.


                                                              56
                                        Appendix B

        This appendix describes the construction of and gives background on the analysis
dataset. Additional detail can be provided upon request.

         The sample consists of 1,042 individuals from wave 1 of the HRS who were
employed in 1991, eligible for a 401(k), whose employer provided a SPD for the plan,
and who had linked administrative W-2 and Social Security earnings data. The
restricted-access employer-provided SPDs are distributed as the HRS Wave 1 Pension
Plan Detail Data Set (Gustman, Mitchell, Samwick, and Steinmeier, 1999). This dataset
contains plan type, eligibility rules, benefit formulae, employer contribution and
matching formulae, early and normal retirement dates, and other information described in
the SPD, but not any information for individual employees. The W-2 data are distributed
as the HRS Wages and Self-Employment Income in Covered and Non-Covered Jobs
dataset (Mitchell, Olson, and Steinmeier, 1996). The dataset is a cross-section for 1991
because even though there are earnings and deferral data prior to 1991, there are no data
on other income and wealth needed to construct full income prior to 1991 in the HRS.
Some of the individuals in the sample worked in 1991 but were retired at the time of the
first interview in 1992. Exclusion of these individuals had no impact on the estimation
results.

        There are four types of employer matching: fixed-rate, discretionary, profit-
sharing, and variable-rate matching. Engelhardt and Kumar (2003) discussed these in
detail. Because the extent of matching is not always known in advance to employees
making deferral decisions in profit-sharing and discretionary plans, these plans were not
included in our sample. The SPDs were used to construct the complete schedule of
employer matching contributions for each individual in our sample and applied all
relevant restrictions on plan eligibility in the SPD, including those due to tenure, hours,
earnings, age, and vesting of the employer matching contributions.

          Because workers’ budget sets can have multiple kinks and, therefore, multiple
points of non-differentiability, from changes in match and marginal tax rates, a smooth,
differentiable budget set around all kink points was constructed, following the
methodology of MaCurdy, Green, and Paarsch (1990). Specifically, kernel regression of
the implicit subsidy from employer matching and tax deductibility on the set of potential
contributions from 0 to $9500 (the federal maximum contribution in 1991) by $50
increments was used to smooth the budget set, using the Gaussian kernel,
                         2
 K ( z ) = (1 / 2π )e − z / 2 , with bandwidth chosen by Silverman’s rule of thumb,
h = 0.9m / n1 / 5 , where m = min( varx , iqrx / 1.349) and iqrx is the inter-quartile range. A
smooth marginal implicit subsidy function was constructed from the kernel-regression
estimates. The respondent-reported income in wave 1 of the HRS referred to behavior in
calendar year 1991; hence, ΔA was formed by using taxable wealth in 1992 taken from



                                             57
wave 1, taxable wealth in 1991, which was capitalized from 1991 capital income, a
technique is commonly used in the literature, and R TA constructed from a weighted-
average gross return based on returns in Ibbotson (2003). Tax rules from 1991 were used
to construct an IRA phase-out calculator to determine ζ and ζ l , and household income,
                                                                 y
tax, and demographic data and NBER’s TAXSIM calculator (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993)
were used to construct marginal tax rates and taxes paid for each household. The
estimated kernel-regression function was numerically integrated to obtain the dollar
amount of implicit subsidy for every level of potential 401(k) contribution, which, with
full income, was used to construct virtual full income along all portions of the budget
sets.

       For the private and public pension components in ω in (18), individuals were
divided into cells based on exogenous demographic characteristics and the Social
Security covered earnings from 1951-1991 and W-2 earnings records from 1980-1991
were used to calculate earnings histories for a synthetic-cell individual. These synthetic
earnings histories were input as follows: 1) into the University of Michigan’s Pension
Estimation Program to calculate defined benefit pension wealth, W DB , accrual, α DB ,
and change in accrual for additional earnings, α DB l , for individuals with DB plans; 2)
                                                   y
into the HRS DC/401(k) Calculator (Engelhardt, 2004) developed to calculate for
individuals with defined contribution plans their DC pension wealth, W DC , non-
matching contributions and the effect of additional earnings thereon, F and F l ,
                                                                                         y
respectively; the impact of additional earnings on employer match on voluntary
contributions, M VOL
                  l ; required 401(k) contributions and the impact of additional earnings
                 y

thereon, Q MAN and Q MAN
                      l  , respectively; and, 3) into the Social Security benefit
                         y
calculator developed by Coile and Gruber (2000) to calculate Social Security wealth,
W SS , accrual, α SS , and change in accrual for additional earnings, α ySSl . The effect of
additional earnings on the employer match to voluntary contributions, M VOL
                                                                         l , was  y
calculated assuming a 401(k) contribution of 50 dollars for all individuals (regardless of
actual contribution level).

        Finally, the sample is likely non-random because it is based on individuals for
whom the HRS was able to obtain 1) an employer-provided SPD for the 401(k) plan, and
2) permission from the individual to match SSA covered earnings and IRS W-2 earnings
histories. To understand the exclusion restrictions that were developed, it is useful to
note the manner in which the HRS obtained the SPDs and administrative earnings data.
The HRS asked all respondents who reported being in a (current or past) pension-covered
job to provide the name and address of the employer. To maintain respondent
confidentiality, the HRS attempted to contact the employer, not about the respondent’s
pension(s), but more generally as part of a survey of pension providers in which the HRS
requested copies of SPDs for the universe of pensions the employer provided (to all
employees). The HRS then “matched” from this universe the appropriate pension(s) to


                                            58
the respondent based on the respondent’s characteristics, e.g., union status, method of pay
(hourly, salaried, commission, piece rate), occupation, tenure, etc. The “match” rates
were well below 100 percent: 65 percent of those currently working in pension-covered
jobs, 66 percent for the last job for those not working, and 35 percent for jobs held five
years or longer prior to the current (last) job for those working (not working).

        There are a number of important reasons for the failure to match an SPD to the
respondent. First, the respondent may not have given correct employer name and
address. Second, the HRS may have failed to receive the SPD because the employer may
have refused to comply with the pension provider survey, the employer could not be
located at the address given, or the employer went out of business or merged with another
company and no longer existed under the name given by the respondent. Third, the
employer may have submitted an SPD, but the HRS was unable to match the SPD to the
respondent based on the plan detail and the respondent’s characteristics. This is less
likely for union and public sector workers, who are easy to identify and whose plans are
easy to obtain, and more likely for workers whose employers had undergone mergers and
acquisitions with subsequent plan modifications.

        The exclusion restrictions were constructed as follows. First, Form 5500 data for
1988-1992 from the Department of Labor, Employee Benefit Security Administration, on
the universe of pension plans with 100 or more participants and a 5 percent random
sample of plans with less than 100 participants were obtained. Second, plans were
divided into cells defined by Census region, employment size category, one-digit SIC
code, year, and union status (union plan vs. non-union plan). The first exclusion is the
incidence of pension plan outsourcing by cell in 1992, where outsourcing means the plan
was administered by an entity other than the employer (weighted using sampling weights
provided by DOL). The intuition here is that the HRS was less likely to have obtained an
SPD from the employer if (on average in its cell) plan administration was outsourced,
because more than one contact was needed (first the employer, then the plan
administrator) to have received the SPD. (It may well have been that plans that were
outsourced were better administered and, therefore, employers that outsourced were more
likely to have returned the pension provider survey. However, this was likely more than
offset because the SPD request was significantly less likely to have been fulfilled when
multiple entities needed to be contacted.) The second exclusion was the incidence of
pension plan consolidation due mergers and acquisitions by cell from 1988-1992. The
intuition here is that the HRS was less likely either to have obtained an SPD from the
employer or to have matched it to the employee if (on average in its cell) there had been a
lot of plan consolidation, because plan names and detail were often changed upon
consolidation. Two other variables were used as exclusions for pensions on past jobs in
our selection equations: dummies for whether the individual left the job because the
business closed or was laid off, respectively. These helped to measure whether the
employer possibly was in financial difficulty at severance, which, if that resulted in a
business failure, would have made it more difficult for the HRS to have obtained an SPD.

       There were three important considerations in constructing the instruments. First,
the instruments were drawn from the information set Ω t . Because t is 1991, all



                                            59
information from 1989 and 1990 is in the information set and orthogonal to decisions
made in 1991 under rational expectations. Second, because the observed marginal match
and tax rates depend upon 401(k) and IRA contributions, p mz ⋅ p IRAz and p 401kz are based
on first-dollar measures: the employer match on the first dollar contributed and the
marginal tax rate at which the first dollar contributed is deductible (which equals the tax
rate on the last dollar of earnings). Third, to minimize dependence on individual-specific
income and family size that might be correlated with saving behavior, the first-dollar
rates were calculated for a synthetic individual of each marital status assumed to have no
capital income, no children, under age 65, and taking the standard deduction—where
marital status is assumed exogenous—with synthetic annual labor earnings constructed as
follows: individuals were divided into cells based on exogenous demographic
characteristics, and the cell mean gross hourly wage rate, w•t − 2 , was multiplied by 2,000
annual hours, H . Let the subscript • denote a synthetic measure and the superscript 0
denote a first-dollar measure, then
                                     t − 2 ≡ (1 + M 401k ) ⋅ (1 − TI •t − 2ζ •t − 2 )
                          p•mzj ⋅ p•IRAz           V0               0        0
                                                                                      (B.1)
                                                  Q      •j

and
                                     t − 2 ≡ 1 − TI •t − 2 (1 − ζ l
                                  p•401  kz        0              0
                                                                            Q IRA ) ,    (B.2)
                                                                 y •t − 2

where Q IRA was set to one dollar for all individuals.

       It is important to note that the tax function for Δp in the endogenous variable
 Δp / y v ln(ω ) , is based on the tax system in 1991, but the tax function for the instruments
is different because it is based on the tax system in 1989 (indicated by the subscript t − 2
in (B.2)-(B.3) above). Figure 2 plots the federal marginal tax rate by real AGI (in 1991
dollars) for a single individual under 65 in 1989 and 1991. For individuals with AGI
below $50,000, the functions are essentially the same, but differ for those above this
level. Specifically, above this income level in 1989, the marginal tax rate increased from
28 to 33 percent due to the phase-out of the personal exemption. However, the Budget
Act of 1990 raised the top marginal tax rate to 31 percent and changed the phase-out of
the personal exemption. Therefore, the non-linearity in the instruments’ tax function
differs from that for the endogenous regressor due to the tax-law change, which is taken
as exogenous to the individual. About 15 percent of the sample is affected by this
differential non-linearity in the instruments.




                                                60
                                              Figure 1. Distribution of 401(k) Contributions for Match-Eligible Individuals

Percent of Individuals Eligible for a Match
  1     2    3     4 0  5      6     7




                                                                                         0
                                                -10000




                                                                                                                        10000
                                                         -7500



                                                                   -5000



                                                                            -2500




                                                                                               2500



                                                                                                        5000



                                                                                                                 7500
                                                         Contributions in $200 Intervals Relative to the Kink Amount




                                                                                    61
                   Table 1. Cap on Matching Contributions, as a Percentage of Pay, for
                       Plans that Offer Employer Matching in the Analysis Sample
                                          (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)
   Cap on Employer Matching
          Contributions                Number of       Percent of        Number of          Percent of
     as a Percentage of Pay              Plans           Plans           Individuals       Individuals
          Less than 2%                     7               3.3                10               2.7
                2                         11               5.3                12               3.2
               2.5                         1               0.5                 1               0.3
                3                         19               9.1                24               6.5
              3.75                         1               0.5                4                1.0
                4                         23              11.0                40              10.8
                5                         17               8.1                53              14.2
               5.5                         1               0.5                 1               0.3
               5.7                         1               0.5                 1               0.3
                6                         56              26.8               109              29.3
        Greater than 6%                   32              15.3                57              15.3
             No Cap                       41              19.6                60              16.1

              Total                       209               100.0              372              100.0
Note: Authors’ calculations from the HRS restricted-access pension plan data for the 209 plans associated
with the 372 of the 1,042 HRS individuals in the analysis sample in plans with matching provisions.
            Table 2. Distribution of First-Dollar Match Rates as a Percentage of Contributions
              (1)                          (2)              (3)                (4)               (5)

                                      Number of          Percent of       Number of          Percent of
  First-Dollar Match Rate (%)           Plans              Plans          Individuals       Individuals
             0 to 24                      9                 4.3                11               3.0
                25                       23                15.3                43              11.6
            26 to 49                      5                 2.4                 9               2.4
                50                       90                43.1               143              38.4
            51 to 99                     22                 8.1                34              12.4
               100                       57                27.2               116              31.2
               200                        3                 1.4                 4               1.1

              Total                       209               100.0              372              100.0
Note: Authors’ calculations from the HRS restricted-access pension plan data for the 209 plans associated
with the 372 of the 1,042 HRS individuals in the analysis sample in plans with matching provisions.




                                                   63
                    Table 3. Sample Means of Selected Variables in the Empirical Analysis Sample,
                            Standard Deviations in Parentheses, Medians in Square Brackets
                                    (1)              (2)               (3)                 (4)           (5)

                                                 Subsample                         Subsample with    Subsample
                                                  without         Subsample           Positive       with Zero
Variable                       Full Sample        Matches        with Matches       Contributions   Contributions
401(k) Contributions (in          1377              1232             1640               2446              0
1991 dollars)                    (1920)            (1895)           (1938)             (1982)            (0)
                                  [500]             [100]            [900]             [1892]            [0]

Match Rate (in percent)             23               0                 65                 28             17
                                   (37)             (0)               (32)               (38)           (33)
                                    [0]             [0]               [50]                [0]            [0]

After-Tax Wage                    10.04            10.09              9.96              10.91           8.91
(in 1991 dollars per hour)        (5.55)           (5.56)            (5.54)             (5.96)         (4.75)
                                  [8.92]           [9.12]            [8.51]             [9.66]         [8.23]

Age (years)                        54.9             54.9              54.8               54.7           55.1
                                   (5.2)            (5.1)             (5.4)              (5.0)          (5.5)
                                  [55.0]           [55.0]            [55.0]             [55.0]         [55.0]

Education (years)                  13.3             13.5              13.0               13.8           12.7
                                   (2.7)            (2.7)             (2.6)              (2.5)          (2.7)
                                  [13.0]           [13.0]            [12.0]             [14.0]         [12.0]

Percent Female                     47                47                47                 48             45

Percent White                      82                81                85                 86             78

Number of Dependents               0.70             0.68              0.75               0.71           0.70
                                  (0.93)           (0.93)            (0.94)             (0.95)         (0.91)
                                   [0.0]            [0.0]             [0.0]              [0.0]          [0.0]

Percent Married                    80                79                82                 81             79

Spouse’s Education                 10.6             10.6              10.6               11.0           10.1
(Years)                            (5.5)            (5.7)             (5.2)              (5.5)          (5.5)
                                  [12.0]           [12.0]            [12.0]             [12.0]         [12.0]

Percent with Plans that            36                19                68                 42             29
Allow Borrowing

Percent with Plans that             4                4                 5                   6             2
Allow Hardship
Withdrawals




                                                          64
                                (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)

                                             Subsample                         Subsample          Subsample
                                              without         Subsample       with Positive       with Zero
Variable                    Full Sample       Matches        with Matches     Contributions      Contributions
Percent with Plans that          63             46                92               66                 58
Allow Self-Directed
Investment

Percent with Other              47               53               34                45                 48
Pensions at the Firm

Percent with Plan Limit         80               73               92                76                 85
less than Federal Limit

Percent with Plan that          23               9                47                26                 18
Allows After-Tax Saving

Percent that had                23               23               23                25                 20
Employer-Sponsored
Retirement Seminar

Percent with a Spouse           39               39               38                42                 35
who has a Pension

Percent in a Union              34               39               27                28                 43

Number of Observations        1042              670             372                588                454
Note: Authors’ calculations based on the sample of 1042 HRS individuals working in 1991 with matched
employer-provided pension plan data and W-2 data, excluding those in plans with discretionary and profit-sharing-
based employer matching provisions, as described in the text.
 Table 4. Mean Potential and Unused Employer Matching Contributions for the
   Sub-sample of Individuals Eligible for Employer Matching Contributions,
        Standard Deviations in Parentheses, Medians in Square Brackets
                                 (1)               (2)                (3)

                                            Sub-sample with     Sub-sample
                                                Positive         with Zero
Variable                     Overall         Contributions     Contributions
Potential Employer            1249               1362              1021
Matching Contributions in    (1409)             (1153)            (1804)
1991 dollars                  [939]             [1068]             [714]

Potential Employer              3.8               3.9               3.8
Matching Contributions         (4.1)             (2.8)             (5.8)
as a Percentage of Pay         [3.0]             [3.5]             [3.0]

Unused Employer                 550               319              1013
Matching Contributions in     (1243)             (741)            (1798)
1991 dollars                   [205]              [0]              [710]

Unused Employer                    1.9               1.0         3.7
Matching Contributions            (4.0)             (2.0)       (5.9)
as a Percentage of Pay            [1.0]              [0]        [3.0]
Note: Authors’ calculations based on the sub-sample of 372 HRS individuals
working in 1991 eligible for employer matching contributions.




                                       66
      Table 5. Selected Parameter Estimates of the Effect of Liquidity Constraints on the Extent that
                   Contributions are Less than the Cap, Standard Errors in Parentheses
                              (1)              (2)                  (3)                     (4)
                                                       Estimator and Dependent Variable
                                             Probit                Tobit                   Tobit

                                           Dummy if           Dollar Amount       Amount Contribution is
                            Sample        Contribution       that Contribution     Below the Cap as a
Explanatory Variables        Mean        Below the Cap       is Below the Cap        Percent of Pay
Dummy if Has a Home          0.19            -0.524                -649.4                -0.014
Equity Line of Credit                       (0.198)               (171.3)               (0.004)

Dummy if Financial            0.11            0.725                 81.1                   0.004
Distress Due to                              (0.291)              (202.4)                 (0.004)
Unexpected Medical
Expenses

Dummy if Financial            0.06           -0.569               -733.8                  -0.017
Distress Due to                              (0.366)              (360.8)                 (0.014)
Unemployment

Dummy if No Capital           0.23            0.552                220.1                   0.009
Income                                       (0.180)              (136.0)                 (0.003)

Education (years)            12.97              -0.077              -41.4                  -0.002
                                               (0.036)             (26.5)                 (0.001)
Note: This table shows selected parameter estimates from ad hoc reduced-form selection-corrected
specifications of the impact of selected variables that proxy for the ability to borrow on whether and to
what extent employer matching contributions go unused on the sub-sample of 372 individuals in 401(k)
plans that offer employer matching. Standard errors are in parentheses. The fraction of individuals with
contributions below the cap is 0.54. The average dollar amount that the contribution is below the cap is
$953, which, for average pay of $33,377, represented 3 percent of pay. The specifications also control for
age, dummy variables if married, white, home owner, and can rely on private income transfers under
financial distress, as well as a constant. The selection equations for the specifications used the same
exclusion restrictions as in Table 7 and explained in the text.




                                                   67
Table 6. Selected Parameter Estimates from Ad Hoc Reduced-Form Specifications Similar
                  to Previous Literature, Standard Errors in Parentheses
                        (1)              (2)                 (3)            (4)
                            Estimator and Dependent Variable
                                                                         One-Limit
                         Probit            OLS               OLS           Tobit

 Explanatory         Dummy if
 Variables           Contributed       Contribution       Contribution      Contribution

 Dummy if Plan           0.284             595.4             549.4              865.7
 Offers a Match         (0.175)           (209.7)           (206.9)            (331.7)

 First-Dollar            0.220             -255.2            -170.3             -42.6
 Match Rate             (0.228)           (271.2)           (266.3)            (427.2)

 Dummy if                0.316             389.1             304.7              639.3
 Female                 (0.112)           (121.2)           (135.6)            (224.9)

 Dummy if                0.262             302.1             275.6              617.1
 White                  (0.107)           (133.2)           (131.2)            (223.2)

 Education               0.043            105.8               89.4             147.6
 (Years)                (0.018)           (22.4)             (22.5)            (38.2)

 Earnings               Quartic           Linear            Quartic            Quartic
 Entered as

 Match Rate              0.037            -0.042            -0.028             -0.005
 Elasticity             (0.043)           (0.045)           (0.044)            (0.003)

  R2                      ---              0.31               0.34               ---
 Note: This table shows selected parameter estimates for ad hoc reduced-form models
 similar to those in the previous literature, estimated with the sample of 1042
 individuals described in the text. Standard errors in parentheses. In columns 1, 3, and
 4, earnings were entered as a quartic function and in column 2 linearly. Additional
 explanatory variables in the specifications included a quartic in age, married, number
 of children, spouse’s education, a quartic in spouse’s age, and a constant. For the Probit
 equation in column (1) and the Tobit equation in column (4) bootstrapped standard
 errors reported for the match rate elasticity.




                                            68
                  Table 7. Selected Parameter Estimates, Marginal Effects, and Elasticities of 401(k) Participation, Standard Errors in Parentheses
                                           (1)                  (2)                     (3)                    (4)                   (5)                 (6)
                                                                 IV                     IV                     IV                     IV                  IV
Explanatory Variable                  with Selection       with Selection      without Selection        with Selection         with Selection       with Selection
A. Parameter Estimates

Δp / y ln(ω )                               -2.567                0.384              -0.093                  -4.522               -7.209                -7.486
                                           (2.233)               (7.227)             (6.983)                (6.712)              (8.004)               (7.504)
Age × Δp / y ln(ω )                          0.009                -0.083             -0.073                  -0.024               -0.010                0.044
                                           (0.033)               (0.084)             (0.081)                (0.078)              (0.093)               (0.092)
Female × Δp / y ln(ω )                      0.283                 -0.520              -0.565                 0.639                0.857                 0.913
                                           (0.367)               (0.861)             (0.848)                (0.891)              (1.076)               (1.030)
White × Δp / y ln(ω )                        1.070                1.570               1.406                  1.498                1.057                 1.006
                                           (0.492)               (1.131)             (1.126)                (1.076)              (1.209)               (1.166)
Married × Δp / y ln(ω )                     -0.409                -0.792              -0.842                 0.279                0.848                 0.745
                                           (0.460)               (1.175)             (1.145)                (1.089)              (1.234)               (1.192)
Education × Δp / y ln(ω )                    0.145                0.600               0.604                  0.519                0.677                 0.438
                                           (0.066)               (0.181)             (0.182)                (0.165)              (0.188)               (0.190)
κ                                            0.251                0.653               0.665                  0.390                0.293                 0.129
                                           (0.059)               (0.442)             (0.424)                (0.416)              (0.478)               (0.500)
Selection Term                            -2.3140                -1.4202                                    -2.8518              -2.1514               -1.7861
                                          (1.3683)              (0.6495)                                   (1.3841)             (1.2562)              (1.0074)
p-Value for Test of Null of
   No Match Effect                         0.0001               0.0001                0.0001               0.0001                0.0001                0.0001
   No Selection                            0.0908               0.0288                                     0.0394                0.0868                0.0762

Selection-Equation Exclusions:
    Plan Outsourcing                      -0.0829                -0.0929                                    -0.0929              -0.1173               -0.1321
                                          (0.0272)              (0.0267)                                   (0.0267)             (0.0275)              (0.0278)
    Plan Consolidation                    -0.1207                -0.1510                                    -0.1510              -0.1910               -0.1868
                                          (0.0360)              (0.0368)                                   (0.0368)             (0.0402)              (0.0400)
    Business Closure                       -0.0683               -0.0530                                    -0.0530              -0.0530               -0.0481
                                          (0.0172)              (0.0173)                                   (0.0173)             (0.0170)              (0.0172)
    Laid Off                              -0.0225                -0.0110                                    -0.0110              -0.0067                0.0018
                                          (0.0238)              (0.0239)                                   (0.0239)             (0.0240)              (0.0239)
                                                (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)                  (5)                  (6)
B. Additional Controls

Fringe Benefit, and Plan
                                                No                   No                 No                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Characteristics?
Interaction of firm size with Fringe
                                                No                   No                 No                  No                   Yes                 Yes
Benefits and Plan characteristics
Occupation and Interactions of
Occupation with Demographics,
Fringe Benefits, Plan
                                                No                   No                 No                  No                   No                  Yes
Characteristics, and Other
Employment Characteristics?

C. Marginal Effect on Probability of Participation with Respect to

Match Rate
                                              0.0091             0.2695               0.4724              0.0944               0.1833               0.1997
(additional $1 per $1 contributed)
                                       [0.00001,0.0907]      [0.0243,0.5918]     [0.2747,0.6843]     [0.00007,0.4798]     [0.0017,.6551763]    [0.0173,0.7522]
Virtual Full Income
                                              -0.0027            -0.0807              -0.1416             -0.0283              -0.0549             -0.0598
(additional $100,000)
                                                                                 [-0.2050,-0.0823]
                                       [-0.0271,-0.00001]   [-0.1773, -0.0073]                       [-0.1438,-.00002]    [-0.1963,-0.0005]    [-0.2254,-0.0052]
Net Wage
                                              -0.0001            -0.0026              -0.0046             -0.0009              -0.0018             -0.0019
(additional $1 per hour)
                                       [-0.0008,-0.00001]   [-0.0057,-0.0002]    [-0.0066,-0.0026]   [-0.0046,-0.00001]   [-0.0063,-0.00001]   [-0.0073,-0.0002]
Marginal Tax Rate
                                              0.0053             0.1583               0.2775              0.0555               0.1077               0.1173
(increase of 10 percentage points)
                                        [0.00001,0.0533]     [0.0143,0.3477]     [0.1614,0.4020]     [0.00004,0.2819]      [0.0010,0.3849]     [0.0102,0.4419]
Predicted Probability of
                                               0.97                  0.86              0.57                0.94                 0.88                 0.81
Participation

D. Participation Elasticity with Respect to

Match Rate                                   0.0021               0.0721             0.1907                0.0231              0.0479              0.0567
                                        [0.0000,0.0216]      [0.0073,0.1641]     [0.1139,0.2789]         [0,0.1149]        [0.0005,0.1743]     [0.0048,0.2043]
Full Income                                   -0.0032            -0.1053              -0.2785             -0.0337              -0.0700             -0.0828
                                        [-0.0316,0.0000]    [-0.2397,-0.0106]    [-0.4074,-0.1664]      [-0.1679,0]       [-0.2546,-0.0008]    [-0.2984,-0.0070]




                                                                                 70
                                              (1)                  (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)                   (6)

Net Wage                                    -0.0013                -0.0416              -0.1101               -0.0133                -0.0277              -0.0327
                                       [-0.0125,0.0000]      [-0.0946,-0.0042]     [-0.1611,-0.0658]       [-0.0663,0]          [-0.1006,-0.0003]   [-0.1179,-0.0028]
Marginal Tax Rate                            0.0013                0.0439               0.1162                0.0141                 0.0292               0.0346
                                        [0.0000,0.0132]       [0.0044,0.1000]       [0.0694,0.1701]         [0,0.0701]           [0.0003,0.1063]      [0.0029,0.1245]
Note: Columns 1-6 of Panel A of this table present parameter estimates of (15) in the text. For all columns, the sample consists of 1,042 individuals. All the columns
except the first assume prices, net wage, and virtual income are endogenous. Columns 2 and 4-6 present selection-corrected estimates using the exclusion restrictions
discussed in the text and the appendix. The parameter estimates for the selection term in the participation equation are shown in Panel A. Panel A also presents
parameter estimates for the exclusion restrictions from the selection equations. The estimates in column 3 are not selection corrected. Panel B presents the additional
controls included. Marginal effects evaluated at the mean of the regressors are shown in panel C. Panel D presents estimates of elasticities of 401(k) participation
based on the parameter estimates in panel A, evaluated at the sample means. For marginal effects and elasticities, bias-corrected bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals
are reported in square brackets.




                                                                                  71
                                 Table 8. Estimated Marginal Effects and Elasticities for PIGLOG Utility by Demographic Groups
                                       (1)              (2)                 (3)                 (4)                (5)                 (6)               (7)

                                                                        High School          High School       Some College      College Degree       Graduate
Measure                              Female             Male             Dropout              Diploma                                                  School

Participation Marginal Effect        0.2259             0.1750             0.0670              0.1725              0.2177            0.2532            0.2633
from the Match Rate
                                 [0.0081,0.5900]   [0.0012,0.7843]    [-0.1326,0.7177]     [0.0071,0.6336]    [0.0075,0.5620]    [0.0146,0.8546]   [0.0147,0.8736]

Participation Elasticity with
                                     0.0761             0.0714             0.0289              0.0729              0.0809            0.1323            0.0483
Respect to the Match Rate
                                  [0.0047,0.2030] [0.0005,0.3192] [-0.0530,0.3131]             [0.0028,0.2667]    [0.0028,0.2057] [0.0078,0.4518] [0.0028,0.1620]
Note: This table shows estimated marginal effects and elasticities of participation with respect to the employer match rate by sex and education group based on the
parameter estimates from the richest specification, shown in column 6 of Table 7, evaluated at the sample means. The elasticities are based on group specific
participation probability and match rate. Bias-corrected bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals are reported in square brackets.




                                                                                72
                  Table 9. Instrumental-Variable Parameter Estimates of 401(k) Contributions for Selected Variables, Standard Errors in Parentheses
                                     (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)                   (5)                    (6)
                                                                                Estimator
                                  Tobit with         IV Tobit with           IV Tobit          IV SCLS with             IV Tobit               IV SCLS
                                  Selection            Selection         without Selection        Selection               with                   with
Explanatory Variable                                                                                                    Selection              Selection


Δp / y ln(ω )                       -11251                12602                 12588               -8046                -12087                 -41197
                                    (5,629)              (20,400)              (20,314)            (18,199)             (15,811)               (18,411)
Age × Δp / y ln(ω )                    41                   -367                  -369                -106                  32                    231
                                      (86)                 (238)                 (238)               (211)                (194)                  (222)
Female × Δp / y ln(ω )                 -12                 -7386                 -7169              -5885                 -2692                   -127
                                     (891)                (2471)                (2429)              (2236)               (2173)                 (2611)
White × Δp / y ln(ω )                2970                   3636                 3402                4639                  2430                  9228
                                    (1326)                (3291)                (3274)              (3244)               (2523)                 (3774)
Married × Δp / y ln(ω )               -473                 -4672                 -4632              -4258                  398                   2334
                                    (1083)                (3314)                (3283)              (3014)               (2501)                 (2987)
Education × Δp / y ln(ω )             578                  1906                   1898               1858                  1290                  1867
                                     (159)                 (521)                 (515)               (475)                (405)                  (514)
κ                                    1006                   4097                 4047                3791                  1712                  1371
                                     (141)                (1203)                (1202)              (1095)               (1064)                 (1226)

B. Latent Marginal Effects

Match Rate                            159                 3925                    3849              2389                 2261                   1522
                                     (159)                (649)                   (638)             (602)                (601)                  (752)
Full Income                           -48                 -1176                   -1153              -716                 -678                   -456
                                      (48)                (195)                   (191)             (180)                (180)                  (225)
Net Wage                                -2                 -38                     -38                -23                  -22                    -15
                                       (2)                 (6)                     (6)                (6)                  (6)                    (7)
Marginal Tax Rate                      94                 2306                    2262              1403                 1328                    894
                                     (278)                (901)                   (900)             (795)                (666)                  (788)




                                                                             73
                                       (1)                 (2)                    (3)                 (4)                  (5)      (6)

C. Parameter Estimates for Selection Term in Contribution Equation and Exclusion Restrictions in the Selection Equation

Selection Term in                    -7093                -7336                                     -6468                 -4172    -3981
contribution Tobit
                                     (3593)              (3368)                                     (3157)                (2104)   (2611)
p-Value on Selection Term            0.0486              0.0296                                     0.0409                0.0476   0.1282

Selection-Equation
Exclusions:
    Plan Administration               0.08                 0.08                                      0.08                  0.12     0.13
    Outsourcing                      (0.03)               (0.03)                                    (0.03)                (0.03)   (0.03)

   Plan Consolidation                -0.12                -0.12                                      -0.12                 -0.19    -0.19
                                     (0.04)               (0.04)                                    (0.04)                (0.04)   (0.04)

   Left Job Due to Business           -0.07               -0.07                                      -0.07                 -0.05    -0.05
   Closure                           (0.02)               (0.02)                                    (0.02)                (0.02)   (0.02)

   Left Job Because Laid off          -0.02                -0.02                                     -0.02                 -0.01    0.00
                                     (0.02)               (0.02)                                    (0.02)                (0.02)   (0.02)

D. Additional Controls

Fringe Benefit, and Plan              No                   No                     No                  No                   Yes      Yes
Characteristics?
Interaction of firm size with         No                   No                     No                  No                   Yes      Yes
Fringe Benefits and Plan
characteristics
Occupation and Interactions           No                   No                     No                  No                   Yes      Yes
of Occupation with
Demographics, Fringe
Benefits, Plan Characteristics,
and Other Employment
Characteristics?




                                                                             74
                                            (1)                (2)                   (3)                 (4)                  (5)                    (6)

  E. Estimated Elasticity with Respect to
                                                                                       Total
  Match Rate                             0.0061             0.0937                 0.1193                                    0.1202
                                    [-0.007,0.0202]     [0.0649,0.1818]        [0.0719,0.213]                           [0.0736,0.2667]
  Full Income                           -0.0206             -0.3213                -0.4085                                  -0.4115
                                   [-0.0696,0.0241]    [-0.6226,-0.2222]      [-0.729,-0.2468]                         [-0.9132,-0.2519]
  Net Wage                              -0.0082             -0.1270                -0.1615                                  -0.1626
                                   [-0.0274,0.0094]    [-0.2461,-0.0876]     [-0.2882,-0.0975]                         [-0.3609,-0.0996]
  Marginal Tax Rate                      0.0087             0.1340                 0.1704                                    0.1718
                                   [-0.0101,0.0291]     [0.0926,0.2599]       [0.1029,0.3042]                            [0.105,0.381]
                                                                             Extensive Margin
                                         0.0007              0.0483                 0.0745                                   0.0659
  Match Rate                       [-0.0002,0.0197]     [0.0265,0.1003]       [0.0448,0.1331]                           [0.0366,0.1687]
                                        -0.0023             -0.1654                -0.2554                                  -0.2254
  Full Income                      [-0.0675,0.0014]    [-0.3433,-0.0907]      [-0.456,-0.1537]                         [-0.5777,-0.1254]
                                        -0.0009             -0.0654                -0.1010                                  -0.0891
  Net Wage                         [-0.0265,0.0005]    [-0.1357,-0.0359]     [-0.1802,-0.0607]                         [-0.2282,-0.0494]
                                        0.0009               0.0691                 0.1066                                   0.0940
  Marginal Tax Rate                [-0.0005,0.0281]     [0.0377,0.1432]       [0.0642,0.1903]                           [0.0523,0.2411]

                                                                             Intensive Margin
  Match Rate                             0.0054               0.0455                0.0448                                    0.0544
                                   [-0.0049,0.0157]      [0.026,0.0816]       [0.0267,0.0797]                            [0.0337,0.098]
  Full Income                           -0.0183              -0.1556               -0.1530                                   -0.1863
                                   [-0.0539,0.0169]    [-0.2791,-0.0898]      [-0.273,-0.0919]                         [-0.3353,-0.1158]
  Net Wage                              -0.0073              -0.0616               -0.0605                                   -0.1327
                                   [-0.0213,0.0066]    [-0.1104,-0.0354]     [-0.1078,-0.0363]                         [-0.0457,0.0195]
  Marginal Tax Rate                      0.0077              0.0649                0.0637                                    0.0778
                                    [-0.007,0.0225]     [0.0373,0.1165]       [0.0382,0.1139]                           [0.0483,0.1399]

Note: Columns 1-10 of Panel A of this table present parameter estimates estimating (15) in the text. For all columns, the sample consists of 1,042 individuals, and the upper
contributions limits are individual varying, as described in the text. All the columns except column (1) assume prices, net wage, and virtual income are endogenous. The IV
SCLS estimator of Newey (1986) described in the text is used in Columns 4, 6, 8, and 10. The remaining columns use the IV Tobit estimator of Newey (1986). Columns 2 and




                                                                                75
4-10 present selection-corrected estimates using the exclusion restrictions discussed in the text and the appendix. Marginal effects evaluated at the mean of the regressors are
shown in panel B. The units of measure for the marginal effects are the same as those in Table 7: for the match rate, an additional $1 per $1 contributed; for virtual full income,
an additional $100,000; for the net wage, an additional $1 per hour; and for the marginal tax rate, an increase of 10 percentage points. The parameter estimates for the selection
term in the structural contribution equation are shown in Panel C. Panel C also presents parameter estimates for the exclusion restrictions from the selection equations. The
estimates in column 3 are not selection corrected. Panel D presented the additional controls included. Panel E presents estimates of elasticities of 401(k) contributions based on
the structural parameter estimates in panel A, evaluated at the sample means. The elasticities on the extensive and intensive margins were calculated using the McDonald and
Moffitt (1980) decomposition, respectively. For elasticities, bias-corrected bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals are reported in square brackets.




                                                                                   76
                                            Table 10. Estimated Marginal Effects and Elasticities by Demographic Groups
                                   (1)               (2)                 (3)                      (4)               (5)               (6)                (7)

                                                                    High School            High School         Some College     College Degree        Graduate
Measure                          Female             Male             Dropout                Diploma                                                    School

Marginal Effect                   1153              1752                396                    1178                1700              2366              2693
from the Match Rate            [742,3013]        [902,3480]         [-232,2484]             [611,3042]          [1080,3415]       [1545,3963]       [1788,4434]

Total Match Elasticity            0.1202            0.1934             0.0540                0.1478               0.1804            0.3352             0.1306
                             [0.0773,0.3141]   [0.0995,0.3842]    [-0.0317,0.3383]       [0.0766,0.3819]      [0.1146,0.3624]   [0.2189,0.5614]    [0.0867,0.215]

Extensive Margin                  0.0671            0.1035             0.0320                0.0825               0.0971            0.1726             0.0656
(Participation) Elasticity   [0.0361,0.1996]   [0.0524,0.2491]    [-0.0197,0.2172]       [0.0349,0.2426]      [0.0557,0.2296]   [0.0875,0.3709]    [0.0341,0.1384]

Intensive Margin
Elasticity                        0.0532           0.0900              0.0223                 0.0654              0.0833            0.1630             0.0648
                             [0.0344,0.1146]   [0.055,0.1697]     [-0.0071,0.1212]        [0.037,0.1393]      [0.0576,0.1453]   [0.1195,0.2706]    [0.0493,0.1059]

Note: This table shows estimated marginal effects and elasticities of contributions with respect to the employer match rate by sex and education group based on the
parameter estimates from the richest specification, shown in column 9 of Table 10, evaluated at the sample means. Bias-corrected bootstrapped 95% confidence
intervals are reported in square brackets.




                                                                                77
                                                            Appendix Figures


                        Figure 1



C2




                                    F                 F
     f       h     slope = −(1 − θ 2 )(1 + r ) /(1 − θ1 )
     i                     k
             c
     d
                                                                   F                                 F
                                                  slope = −(1 − θ 2 )(1 + mVOL )(1 + r ) /(1 − θ1 )
                                                                        v
                                                                   y2
                                                                         v
                                                                    y1
                                                                   b
                                                                                    F
                                                                             (1 − θ 2 )(1 + r)W SS

                                                                   a
         Q   max
                          Q match                                 C1




                                                                   78
                                                  Figure 2. Marginal Tax Rates in 1989 and 1991



Federal Marginal Tax Rate (in Percent)
                                         35



                                         30



                                         25



                                         20



                                         15
                                              0      100000          200000           300000         400000
                                                       Real Adjusted Gross Income (in $1991)
                                                  Marginal Tax rate 1989           Marginal Tax rate 1991




                                                                    79
