                     I'BER JRKING PAPER SERIES




                ACTIVIST MONETARY POLICY, IMPERFECT
                     CAPITAL M3BILTY, AND THE
                      OVERSHOOTING HYPOTHESIS


                          David H. Papell



                      Working Paper No. 1244




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 1983




        I am grateful to Eleanor Brown, Larry Christiano, John
Huizinga, Howard Kaufold, and to participants at seminars at the
University of Florida, the University of Pennsylvania, the
International Finance Division of the Federal Reserve Board, and
tl 1983 Econontric Society Sumner Meetings for their comiients.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                       NBER Working Paper #1244
                                                       December 1983


                ACTIVIST MONETARY POLICY, IMPERFECT CAPITAL
                 MOBILITY, AND THE OVERSHOOTING HYPOTHESIS




                                   ABS TRACT




 The hypothesis of exchange rate
                                   overshooting is investigated in the context
of a model that incorporates activist
                                          monetary policy, variable output,
imperfect capital mobility, and slow
                                        price adjustment. Monetary policy
which accommodates prices and/or interest rates is shown to increase the

likelihood of undershooting.
                                Using constrained maximum likelihood methods,
the model is estimated for
                             Germany and Japan since the advent of generalized
floating in 1973. Based on the estimated
                                               parameter values, the mark exhibits
overshooting while the yen is characterized
                                                by undershooting. The constraints
implied by the model cannot (by likelihood
                                               ratio tests) be rejected at standard
significance levels for either country.




                                     David H. Papell
                                     Department of Economics
                                     University of Florida
                                     Gainesville, FL 32611

                                     (904) 392-2999
   I.    Introduction

         After a decade of experience with
                                              flexible exchange rates, it is clear
  that exchange rate variability exceeds national price level
                                                                   variability.
  The resultant variability of the "reaP exchange rate has had important

  macroeconomic ramifications during the 1970's.
                                                      These ramifications, often
  considered adverse by governments, have led some analysts to reconsider

  their support for flexible exchange rates and/or to advocate increased

  intervention in the foreign exchange market.

        The best known explanation for
                                           high exchange rate variability s
 Dornbusch's (1976) overshooting hypothesis. According to this
                                                                hypothesis,
 when (for example) the
                        money supply permanently increases, the exchange
 rate will first depreciate by
                               more than its long run depreciation, and then
 appreciate back to the steady state. In
                                               contrast, undershooting occurs
 when, following the money supply increase, the exchange rate first
                                                                    depreci—
 ates by less than its long run
                                depreciation, followed by further depre-
 ciation until the steady state is attained.

        This paper considers three reasons why, in an economy which would

Otherwise be characterized by
                                overshooting, undershooting may occur:
imperfect capital mobility, variable output, and activist monetary policy.

The analysis builds on previous
                                  work, especially Frenkel and Rodriguez
(1982), who show that sufficiently
                                         imperfect capital mobility can cause
exchange rate undershooting, Dornbusch (1976), who shows that
                                                              overshooting
is not necessary if output is
                              variable, Papell (1982), who demonstrates
that monetary policy which accommodates prices can cause
                                                         undershootjng,an
Frenkel (1983), who advocates
                                using monetary policy to target both interest
rates and exchange rates. The paper shows, both theoretically and empiri-

cally, how these factors combine to produce over- or uridershooting.




                                     1
    The model is then estimated for Germany and Japan, using quarterly

data from 1973-1981. The major finding is that, based on the estimated
                                                                        is
parameter values, the Deutsche Mark exhibits overshooting while the yen

characterized by undershooting. The model is estimated by constrained
                                       constraints caused by the form of the
maximum likelihood methods, with the

structural equations and assumption of rational expectations. It is
                                                  the constraints cannot be
noteworthy that, using likelihood ratio tests,

rejected at standard significance levels for either country. This is far

more empirical support than can generally be claimed for open economy

macroeconomic models using data from the 1970's.

     The paper is organized as follows. The model is presented in Section
                                                     and activist monetary
II. Imperfect capital mobility, variable output,

policy are shown to combine to produce over- or undershooting in Section

III and the model is estimated in Section IV. Conclusions and extensions

are presented in Section V.

 II. The Model
                                                          it differs from his
     The model is based on Dornbusch (1976), although

work in a number of respects. It is a two-country model, incorporating
                                                    in which the domestic and
 variable output and imperfect capital mobility,
                                           endogenously. The two country
 foreign money supplies are determined

 specification, rather than a single, small country specifications was

 chosen for two reasons. First, the small country specification requires
                                             foreign prices and interest rates
 making exogeneity assumptions regarding
                             empirically) Second, the two country specifica-
 which cannot be supported

 tion allows for the foreign money supply, as well as the domestic money

 supply, to be determined endogenously.      This is shown below to be quite

                                                    regarding the existence of
 important, both theoretically and empirically,



                                       2
  overshooting.       The model consists of the following equations.

  (1) rn -   m
                  -         =
                                 a1(y      -y) -     a2(it
                                                                 -
                                                                     i)   +

  (2) y -    y    =
                      (y0
                             -
                                 y)    +
                                           a3(et
                                                     -
                                                                 - a4(rt      -
                                                                                   r) +
 (3)                             - et)     -
                                               a5(       -
                                                             )+
 (4) +1 -             = a6(et      -
                                    c) a7(r r) +
                                               -             -


 (5)                              a9+ ai0(i -
        m=m0+                   +
                                                 C
 (6) mt=m_            :8         - a12q            a13                        6t
             where m is the logarithm of the domestic money supply,

                      y is the logarithm of domestic real output,

                      i is the domestic nominal interest rate,

                      r is the domestic real interest rate,

                      e is the logarithm of the exchange rate (domestic
                                                                        currency
                        price of foreign exchange),
                      *   associated with a variable indicates that it refers to
                          the foreign country,

                      q is the logarithm of the ratio of domestic to foreign
                        prices, i.e., q = p -
                        the domestic price lvel,
                                                                     p
                                                   where p is the logarithm of

                      " over a variable indicates deviation from the
                                                                     steady state
                          level,

                      y0 is the exogenous component of output,

                      m0 is the exogenous component of the money supply,

                      e+1 is the expectation of the exchange rate for period t+1,
                           conditional on information available in period t,

            the c's are random variables, which
                                                                          may be serially correlated.
       The specifications of the asset markets are conventional. Supply and

demand for real balances for each country are equated in equilibrium, and

the demand for money depends positively on income and negatively on the

interest rate.2

(la) m   _Pt=aiYt_a2i÷n1

                                                     3
1b'/ m*
          t   rt
                   = a 'i
                         lt - a2t '2t 1* +

Equation (1) is obtained by subtracting (ib) from (la) and defining
                                                                                       =


      - 2t      The income elasticities and interest rate semi-elasticities of

the two countries need to be equated for the model to be tractable. This

is the principal drawback to using the two—country model.3

          Real output in each country depends on the relative price of domestic

and foreign goods, the real interest rate, an exogenous term and a stochas-

tic disturbance term. If the relative price of foreign goods is high, (et

>
     q,    i.e., et +     p   >   p.1.), domestic output is above and foreign output is
below the values that would be attained under instantaneous purchasing

power parity. While deviations from purchasing power parity are allowed in

the short run, it is assumed that long run purchasing power parity holds

(     =

                     +            -          — a4r   +
(2a)          = y0       b2(e                            113t

(2b) y =        y    -
                         b3(et
                                  -          — a4rt +

Equation (2) is obtained by setting a3 = b2
                                            +
                                              b3,               c2t =   3t   4t'   and by

subtraction

          If capital were perfectly mobile, the domestic interest rate would

equal the foreign interest rate plus the expected rate of depreciation. In

order to incorporate imperfect capital mobility into our analysis, we adopt

the specification used by Frenkel and Rodriguez (1982),                 The current

account balance is assumed to depend on the relative price of domestic and

    foreign goods.
                         -        +
    (3a) Tt =   b4(t
    where Tt is the current account surplus (not in logarithms). Capital flows

    are assumed to depend on the difference between rates of return on secu-

    rities denominated in the two currencies (net of expected exchange rate



                                                     4
  depreciation),

  (3b) C =     bs(it
                           -
                                  - (e÷1          -
                                                          er))   +
                                                                     6t'
 where C. is the capital account surplus (not in logarithms). In the

 absence of Central Bank intervention, balance of
                                                                                    payments equilibrium
 requires that the sum of the current and capital account
                                                                                            surpluses equal
 zero. This is represented in equation (3), with a5 =                                                  =
                                                      b4/b5 and
 —(n5t+n6)Ib5.             Notice that if capital were perfectly mobile, b5 =

 implies that a5           =      =

        As in Dornbusch (1976), the rate of inflation in
                                                         each country is
 assumed to depend on excess demand in the goods market,6

                                  -           +
 (4a) t÷i -Pt =            b7(y
 (4b) p11 -        p   =
                           b8(y *) +  -
                                                      118t

                       a4 and j' = y
where     =        -                                  -
              y0                                           a4*       are the steady state levels of

output. The steady state real interest rates,                                       and r, are equal because
the long run equilibrium is assumed to be characterized by constant ex-

change rates and prices. The assumption of purchasing power parity then

implies uncovered interest rate parity, which in turn causes nominal

interest rates to be equated. Real interest rates are then equated by the

Fisher relation.

     Substituting (2a,b) into (4a,b), and subtracting (4b) from (4a), we

obtain equation (4), where a5 =      +                  =
                                b2b7    b3b8, a7 = b7a4   b8a4,
and c4t =
          b7n3t
                +             —   - bn Note that we have
imposed the constraint that b7 =
                                                          b8, which is necessary because the
real interest rate enters equation (4) in difference form, on
                                                              a7 but not

on a6. If applied consistently, equation (4) would read,

(4c) ÷1 -           = b7a3(e              -
                                                  - b7a4(r            -
                                                                          r)   +
                                                                                   c4t.
When the model was estimated with this constraint, it was clearly rejected



                                                           5
in favor of the model reported in the text. We felt that the

misspecification from the unsupported constraint was worse than the incon-

sistency in the less constrainted model. It should also be noted that both

domestic and foreign prices are pre-determined.7

     The money supply for each country depends on the exchange rate, the

difference between domestic and foreign prices, and the interest rate

differential.8 If the exchange rate depreciates (increases), the domestic

money supply is accommodative i.f a8 >     0,   offsetting if a8 <    0.   Thus, an

offsetting rule would decrease the money supply in response to a depre-

ciation in order to cause the exchange rate to appreciate.            For the foreign

country, since a depreciation is a decrease in e, an accommodative rule

consists of a11 >   0,   an offsetting rule of a11 <    0.   Mussa (1981b) argues

that the behavior o-f exchange rates has influenced the conduct of monetary

policy of a number of countries since generalized floating began in 1973.

     If the logarithm of the ratio of domestic to foreign prices increases

monetary policy is accommodative if 89 and/or a12 >          0,   offsetting if a9

and/or a12 <   0.   The money supply is constrained to respond to the price

ratio, rather than to the levels separately, because, in the reduced form

of the model, prices appear only in ratio form. While allowing the money

supplies to respond separately to domestic and foreign levels would be

desirable, it would make the model analytically intractable.10 Taylor

 (1980), using annual data for the period 1955—1978, provides econometric

evidence that the money supply accommodated the domestic price level for a

 number of countries. The money supply could have been postulated to

 respond directly to output movements without affecting the theoretical

 results. This involves having the money supply respond to movements of the

 real exchange rate, instead of to the exchange rate and price ratio sepa-



                                       6
  rately, and would constrain a8 =         and a11 =
                                     -a9               -a12.    In this sense,

  monetary policy that offsets exchange rate movements and accommodates price

  movements can be interpreted as attempting to stabilize output.

       Frenkel (1983) has recently proposed that, if the monetary authorities

 wish to stabilize the exchange rate, they should have the money supply

  respond to the interest rate as well as to the level of the exchange rate.

 He suggests that, if there is a combination of a high nominal interest rate

 differential and a depreciation of the
                                            currency, the money supply should
 not be increased but, if there is a combination of a high nominal interest

 rate differential and an appreciation of the
                                                  currency, then expansionary

 monetary policy is appropriate. This argument is based on the grounds that

 the interest rate contains additional information that is useful for

 exchange rate stabilization.

      In the context of our model, we
                                         interpret Frenkel's proposal by
 allowing the domestic and foreign money supplies to respond to the interest

 rate differential. This allows the monetary authorities to use information

regarding the expected rate of depreciation (from equation (3)) that is not

contained in the exchange rate or price level.         A policy of accommodating
interest rate differentials requires
                                         a10 and/or a13 >      0;   offsetting them
implies a10 and/or a13 <   0.   For example, if the domestic interest rate

increased relative to the foreign rate and a10 >       0,   the domestic money

supply would increase, requiring, by equation (1), the domestic rate to

decrease relative to the foreign rate to maintain asset market equilibrium.

Finally, the money supply rule for each country includes an exogenous term

and a stochastic disturbance term.

     Frenkel's proposal can be implemented
                                              by offsetting the exchange rate
and accommodating the interest rate differential in a particular manner.



                                     7
When the nominal interest rate differential is positive and the exchange

rate appreciates, this policy increases the money supply whatever the

magnitudes of the coefficients. On the other hand, the combination of a

positive nominal interest rate differential and a depreciation of the

currency requires that the coefficient on the exchange rate (a8) be large

enough (in absolute value) so that the money supply does not increase. It

is interesting to note that this policy cannot be implemented solely by

targeting the exchange rate or the interest rate differential. Accomrnodat-

ing a positive interest rate differential will increase the money supply

regardless of the value of the exchange rate. Offsetting the exchange

rate, without targeting the interest rate, implies that the money supply

will decrease in response to a depreciation. With a positive interest rate

differential, the combination policy will mitigate this decrease, producing

the desired result.

     It is illustrative to compare this model to earlier work.      If both

output and the domestic and foreign money supplies are exogenous, the

resultant model is that of Frenkel and Rodriguez (1982). If, in addition,

capital is perfectly mobile (a5 =   0),   the model becomes that of Dornbusch

 (1976). Dornbusch's variable output case can be produced by allowing

output to be endogenous as in equation (2). It also should be noted that,

 in both Dornbusch (1976) and Frenkel and Rodriguez (1982) inflation depends

only on excess demand in the goods market (a7 =     0).   This, however, does

 not affect the conditions for over— and undershooting.

 III. Theoretical Results: Overshooting and Undershooting

      In this section, we show how variable output, imperfect capital

 mobility, and monetary policy that accommodates price and/or offsets

 interest rate movements can combine to produce exchange rate undershooting.



                                     8
  Since any of the above three factors alone
                                                                             can produce undershooting, the
  focus of this section is to show their effects in conjunction with one

  another.

        The clearest way to derive and illustrate these results is through a

 deterministic specification with perfect foresight expectations. Assuming

 that expectations are perfect foresight, setting the disturbances equal to

 zero, and substituting equation (3) into (5) and (6), we obtain:

 (7)



 where c1 =              -                                            +
                    a8           a5a10                  c2 =
                                                                 a9       a5a10
        c3 = a11             -
                               c5 = a12 +
                                 a5a13    a5a13
 Some of the effects of using interest rate
                                            targets for monetary policy can
 be seen directly from (7). rf the money supply accommodates the interest

 rate differential, (a10,a13 >                         0),   then monetary policy becomes more offset-

ting towards the exchange rate but more accommodative towards prices. The

magnitude of these effects also depends on the degree of
                                                                                             capital mobility.
If capital were perfectly mobile (a5 =                                0),   interest rate targeting would
not affect the degree of accommodation.

       It will prove useful to simplify the price equation. Assuming the

Fisher relation for each country, where the real interest rate equals the

nominal interest rate minus the expected rate of
                                                                                  inflation, remembering
that prices are predetermined, and substituting (3) into (4), we obtain:

(4') +1        -         = di(et         -
                                                      - d2(et÷i       -
                                                                          et),
where d1 =               +                        -
                                                      a7) and d2 = a7/(1
                                                                                  -
                   (a6           (a5a7))/(i                                           a7).   Substituting (3)
and (4') into (2) and using the Fisher relation; the output equation

becomes,

           -
(2')                = (Yo         -
                                      y)     +
                                                 d3(et
                                                         -
                                                             ) - d4(et+i          -
                                                                                      et),

                                                             9
where d3 =            +               +         and d4 =              +
                 a3       a4(a5           d1)                a4(1         d2).
      Substituting (2'), (3), and (7) into (1), taking deviations from

steady state equilibrium, and substituting into (4'), we obtain



      De                  61     62               e_e
             =
(8)


      Dq                  63     64


where D is the forward difference operator, i.e., Dxt =                                   x1   -
                                                                                                   x.   for x =

(e,q),   and,

                          +           -                               1 -          -      -
           - a1d3              a2a5         C1 -c3               -        a1d3   a2a5   C2 - C4
                  +             +            +              62        a2 + a10 +     +
             a4           a10         a13       a1d4                             a13   a1d4

      63 = d1             d261
                                                            64 =      d1    +
                                                                                 d262).
      In order to illustrate the cases of over- and undershooting, we will

assume that the money supply either offsets or is not too accommodative of

exchange rate movements, so that                             >   0.11 We also assume, for the purpose

of illustration, that 63 > 0 and 64 < 0 so that the slope of the Dq = 0

curve is positive.'2 The behavior of the model is now determined by the

income (a1) elasticity and the interest rate (a2) semi-elasticity of the

demand for money, the elasticity of demand for output with respect to

relative prices (d3), the degree of capital mobility (a5), and the degree

of accommodation of domestic (c2) and foreign (c4) monetary policy to price

movements.

      Exchange rate oversflooting is illustrated in Figure •13 If output is

not too variable, capital not too immobile, and/or policy not too accommod-

ative, 62 >       0.          With both           and 62 >       0,   the slope of the De = 0 schedule

is negative. An unanticipated, permanent increase in the exogenous compo-

nent of the domestic money supply, starting from a position of long run




                                                       10
  equilibrium (E), shifts the Det = 0 and the                =    0 schedules to the right.

  (To simplify the figures, the schedules are drawn only after the distur-

  bance occurs.) The motion of the variables is indicated by the direction

  of the arrows. The unique
                                 perfect foresight equilibrium path, the saddle
  path, is downward sloping. At the time of the disturbance, the price

 level, being predetermined, is fixed. The exchange rate must jump (depre-

 ciate) to E1 so as to be on the new saddle path, and then appreciate along

 the saddle path towards the new long run equilibrium E2. Long run purchas-

 ing power parity ensures that     e =       at   both the initial (E) and final
 (E') equilibria.

      Exchange rate undershooting occurs when, by some combination of high

 output variability, low capital mobility, and high monetary accommodation

 to price movements,    <   0.    With 61 > 0 and        <       0,   it is shown in Figure
 2 that the slopes of the   De = 0 curve and the saddle path are both posi-
tive. Following the increase in ii, the exchange rate depreciates to E1 and

continues to depreciate until the long run equilibrium is attained at E2.

     Since the intuition behind exchange
                                                  rate undershooting caused by
flexible output or imperfect capital mobility is familiar from Dornbusch

(1976) and Frenkel and Rodriguez (1982), we will focus on accomodative

monetary policy. Recall that accommodative monetary policy involves both

accommodating prices and/or interest rates, so that                             0.     The
                                                                  c2 and c4 >
increase in the domestic steady state
                                            money supply ()            increases,    because
of the long run purchasing
                             power parity assumption, the steady state
exchange rate () and price ratio (i).         Assuming that both countries'
policies are accommodative, and remembering that prices are predetermined,

this causes the component of the domestic
                                                  money supply that responds to
prices to decrease and the foreign
                                         money supply to increase. If capital



                                    11
were perfectly mobile (a5 = 0) and output did not respond to relative

               0),   undershooting would require c2 +   C4 > 1.   In that case, an
prices (d3 =
increase in the domestic steady state money supply causes a decrease in the

                                    which is consistent with asset market
money supply ratio (mt -     mt),
equilibrium only if the domestic interest rate exceeds the foreign interest

rate. This in turn requires expected (and actual by perfect foresight)

exchange rate depreciation, which implies undershooting. Once

accommodative monetary policy is combined with variable output and

imperfect capital mobility, theconditionS for overshooting are greatly

relaxed. In particular, it is no longer necessary that either the money

supply ratio decrease or that the domestic interest rate exceed the foreign

interest rate to have undershooting.

     Frenkel's (1983) proposal for accommodating interest rate differen-

tials and offsetting exchange rates can now be evaluated. Accommodating

 interest rates acts to offset exchange rates and accommodate prices, which

 stabilizes the real exchange rate and output. The accommodation of prices

 inherent in accommodating interest rates increases the likelihood of

 undershooting. In addition, it is clear from (7) that accommodating

 interest rates causes the money supply to accommodate expected exchange

 rate depreciation. This lowers 2 (in absolute value), decreasing the

 magnitude of either overshooting or undershooting.        In this manner, the

 additional information contained in the interest rate is used to stabilize

 the exchange rate.

 IV. Empirical Results: Germany and Japan

      The theory derived above relates exchange rate behavior to activist

 monetary policy, imperfect capital mobility,
                                                    and variable output. In this

 section, using quarterly data since the advent of generalized floating in



                                        12
  1973, the model is estimated for Germany and
                                                                                 Japan. The empirical results
 are consistent with overshooting for the mark and undershooting for the

 yen.

        The model is estimated by constrained maximum
                                                                                      likelihood techniques,
 with the constraints on the parameters caused by the form of the structural

 equations, assumption of rational expectations, and the stability Condition

 necessary to achieve a unique solution. The policy (a8 -
                                                          a13) and struc-.
 tural (a1 -
             a7) coefficients are jointly estimated. Combined with the
 imposition of rational expectations, this satisfies several aspects of

 Lucas' (1976) critique of econometric policy evaluation. Using likelihood

 ratio tests, the constrained model cannot be rejected at standard signifi—

 cance levels for either country, although the evidence is stronger for

 Japan than for Germany.

        Estimation of the model first requires deriving the reduced form.

Substituting equations as in the perfect foresight solution, and interpret-

ing all variables as deviations from their long
                                                                                  run equilibrium values, we
obtain:

                              +
(9)               =
                      Ii          1
                                                62 1 e                 +     uitl
                      [    53                64 +
                                                    ij q                     u2tj

(10) y -      y   =


              i
                              -                 -         -                  +
                      (d3             d461)et       (d3       d462)q             u3
(11)      -       =           -
                      (6
                  a5)e + (62                          +
                                                          a5)q         +
                                                                           u4
(12) m = a8e + a9q + a10(it -                                 +

(13) m =      _aiie       -
                              a12q
                                         -
                                             ai3(i    -
                                                              i)   +
                                                                        u6
where the u's are combinations of the c's.

       rn order to derive the reduced form, the error terms must be finite

moving average processes. We assume that they are generated by first order

autoregressive processes, i.e.,                           =
                                                               au1 + jt' j=1,...,6, where the
                                                    13
'i!'s are serially uncorrelated. We then take the infinite moving average

representation implicit in the above autoregressive process and truncate it

appropriately.14 Assuming that expectations are determined rationally and

solving by the method of undetermined coefficients,15 we obtain:

                    —
(14)                      +B(L)
                  [t_ij           [v2t
where A and B are 2x2 matrices.

       The model to be estimated consists of equations (10) -   (14).   The

elements of A and B are non-linear combinations of the 6's and the ct's.

The v's are combinations of the 'Y's, written so as to make the zero lag

coefficient matrix the identity matrix.16 By truncating the implicit

moving average representation of the disturbances at third order for u1 and

fourth order for the others, a first order autoregressive fourth order

moving average model is derived. Maximum likelihood estimates (conditional

on the initial disturbances being set equal to zero) are obtained under the

assumption that (v1v2u3tu4tustu6t)' is multivariate normal.

       As described above, the model is estimated for Germany and Japan,

using quarterly data for 1973 (II) - (1981) (IV).17 We use the effective

exchange rate (MERM) calculated by the International Monetary Fund. Real

GNP (or GDP) is used to measure output, MI for the money supply, the GNP

deflator for the price level, and representative three month money market

 rates for the interest rate. The foreign variables were constructed by

 taking weighted averages, with the weights taken from those used to con-

 struct the MERM rates.18

       The large number of structural and policy parameters (13) relative to

 the sample size (35) caused us to take several steps to limit the number of

 parameters to be estimated. One, described above, was to specify the error



                                     14
  terms as first order autoregressions. Another was to estimate the money

  market equilibrium equation (1) by a single equation method,19 and then use

  the estimates from this regression as constants for the constrained maximum

  likelihood estimates. This enabled us to get estimates of the income

 elasticity and the interest rate semi-elasticity of the demand for money

 directly from data on income and interest rates, and to reduce the number

 of parameters to be estimated by maximum likelihood.20

         The maximum likelihood estimates of the structural (a3 -
                                                                     a7),   policy
 (a8 -
         a13),   and serial correlation (a1 —
                                                a6) parameters are given in Table
 1 along with their asymtotic st-ratios," the ratio of the coefficients to

 their standard errors computed from the inverse of the second derivative

 matrix of the likelihood function. Single equation estimates for
                                                                  a1 and
 a2, as well as parameter values for the reduced form coefficients implied

 by the estimates (c's, d's and cS's) are also presented. For Japan, allow-

 ing the domestic and foreign money supplies to respond to the interest rate

differential added virtually no explanatory power to the model; the results

presented constrain a10 and a13 to equal zero. For Germany, on the other

hand, allowing the money supplies to respond to the interest rate differen-

tial was quite important.

     The most important aspect to the estimates is that          is positive for
Germany and negative for Japan, implying exchange rate overshooting for the

mark and undershooting for the yen.21 Domestic
                                                      (a9) and foreign (a12)
monetary policy that accommodates prices, output (d3) that responds to

relative price movements, and imperfect capital mobility (a5) all contrib-

ute towards undershooting for Japan.     It is interesting to note that, while

neither accommodative monetary policy, imperfect capital mobility, nor

variable output were, by themselves, sufficient to produce undershooting,



                                    15
any two of the above three factors would suffice. The combination of all

three, of course, strengthens the case for undershooting.

      Exchange rate overshooting for Germany is caused by a number of

factors, the most important of which being that German monetary policy

strongly offsets price movements. Even though foreign monetary policy is

accommodative, the combination (c2 +           is offsetting. In addition, the
                                         c4)
                                                           which also contrib—
relative price elasticity of output (d3) is negative,
                                                     is imperfect, it is not
u.tes to overshooting.22 While capital mobility

sufficiently imperfect to outweigh these other factors and produce under-

shooting.23
      More support for the over and undershooting results comes from es-

timating a htsemi_constrainedli version of the model. In this version,

and       are estimated directly, rather than being implied by the structural

and policy coefficients. All of the other coefficients of the model are

estimated as in the constrained version above. This enables us to test the

overshooting hypothesis directly by examining the sign and significance

level of         The results of this procedure support the results found

above, with 52 equaling 3.84 (2.77) for Germany and -.67 (-1.81) for Japan,

 (asymptotic "t-ratios11 are in parentheses).      This indicates that not only

 does the mark exhibit overshooting and the yen undershooting, but that

 these results are significant. The values of          are .76(2.09) for Germany

 and 1.03(2.76) for Japan, indicating that the stability condition is

 sufficient to provide a unique solution. The structural, policy, and

 serial correlation coefficients (not reported) are very similar to those of
 the constrained model. Another piece of evidence in support of these
 results   is found by examining the correlation between e and q, which is

 positive (.22) for Japan and negative (-.20) for Germany. This is




                                    16
  consistent, as illustrated in Figures 1 and 2, both with undershooting for

  Japan and overshooting for Germany.24

      The empirical results illustrate a number of facets of the model.

  Imperfect capital mobility is strongly supported, with a5 positive and

 significant for both countries. The coefficient on the real interest rate

 differential in the price adjustment
                                        equation (a7) is positive and signifi-
 cant for both countries. The coefficient
                                              on relative prices (a6) is
 positive for Japan and negative for Germany. For the single equation

 estimates, the income elasticities and interest rate semi—elasticities of

 the demand for money are of the expected signs and magnitudes. Finally,

 the correlations between the actual and estimated parameter values are

 quite high for Japan and lower for Germany.

     More formal support for the model is provided by the likelihood ratio

test. The model is compared to an "unconstrained version, which imposes

the same policy equations (12-13) and serial correlation structure as the

"constrained" version described above, but does not impose the forms of the

structural equations or the rational expectations restrictions. Using the

likelihood ratio test, we cannot reject the constrained model at the 50

percent level for Japan or at the 10 percent level for Germany.5     This is
in contrast to previous work for the current flexible exchange rate period,

such as the models of Driskill and Sheffrin
                                               (1981), Glaessner (1982a), and
Papell (1983), which are all rejected by the likelihood ratio or chi—

squared test. These results also compare favorably with the results of the

likelihood ratio tests performed by
                                      Sargent (1978) and Taylor (1980) for
closed economy models. They provide quite strong confirmation that the

data does not contain too much evidence against the model.

    The estimates reported above are conditional on the single equation



                                17
                                             We also estimated the model with
estimates of the money demand parameters.
                                             likelihood. These results are
all of the parameters estimated by maximum
                                      income elasticity of the demand for
reported in Table 2. For Japan, the
                                                                  does not
money (a1) decreases while the interest rate semi-elasticitY (a2)
                                             insignificant. There is little
change. Both parameters, however, become

change in either the levels or significance of the other parameters and

virtually no change in the s's. Neither the finding of undershooting nor

the support of the estimates by the likelihood ratio test are affected.

     Both a1 and a2 increase and are significant for Germany. The other

parameters change more, but not very much more, than they do for Japan and

there is not much change in the s. The finding of overshooting is not

affected. The results of the likelihood ratio test are slightly worse.

The constrained model can now not be rejected only at the 5 percent level,

although it comes very close to not being rejected at the 10 percent
                                                                               for
level.26 The support given to undershooting for Japan and overshooting

Germany by the semi-constrained model, reported above, is not affected

 because the estimates of the semi-constrained model do not involve the

                            En summary, the model with all of the parameters
 money demand parameters.
                                                     the same results as the
 estimated by maximum likelihood gives virtually

 model with a1 and a2 estimated by a single equation method.

      The final estimates of the model are prompted by the fact that, for

 Japan, the serial correlation coefficients for the exchange rate (c) and

 price (a2) equations are quite high, with
                                                 >   i.27   In order to attempt to

                                              first-differeflCed, rather than
 reduce these, we estimate the model using

 detrended, data. These results are reported in Table 3 with all of the
                                   likelihood. Although the levels and
 parameters estimated by maximum

 significance of the coefficients change considerably, the basic result,
 that the yen exhibits undershooting, is not affected. Estimation of the

 semi-constrained model using first-differenced data supports the finding of

 undershooting.28 The major improvement in the results comes from the

 estimation of the unconstrained model.     Using the likelihood ratio test,

 the constrained model cannot be rejected at the 99 percent level.29 This

 is a very strong result, especially in contrast to the previous work cited
        30
 above.

      In addition to Germany and Japan, we attempted, without much success,

 to estimate the model for the United States and the United Kingdom. For

 the United States, although the coefficients were all of the expected sign

 and magnitude, very few were significant and the constrained model clearly

failed the likelihood ratio test. For the United Kingdom, we were not even

able to get the estimates to converge. One plausible explanation for these

unsuccessful estimates is that, for the United States and the United

Kingdom, the money supply rule changed during the period to become less

accommodative.3' Compared to the change in monetary policy with the advent

of the Thatcher government in May, 1979 in the United Kingdom or the change

in the Federal Reserve Board's
                                  operating procedure in October, 1979 in the
United States, no such dramatic change has occurred in Germany or Japan.

     We conclude by looking at the estimated policy parameters in the

context of Frenkel's proposal, concentrating, since Japanese monetary

policy was not responsive to interest rates, on the results for Germany.

As described above, Frenkel's proposal is for monetary policy to accommo-

date the interest rate differential and offset the exchange rate. While

German monetary policy did accommodate interest rate movements, it also

accommodated the exchange rate.    In response to the combination of a

positive interest rate differential and a depreciation of the Deutsche Mark




                                  19
(above the steady state), the German money supply increases (relative to

trend). Frenkel's policy would have it stay constant or contract.    In the

context of our model, implementation of Frenkel's proposal for Germany

would not alter the overshooting result. Exchange rate overshooting (or

undershooting) is caused by the combination of capital mobility, output

variability, and the responsiveness of monetary policy to prices (directly

or through the interest rate differential). Since German monetary policy

already accommodates the interest rate differential, the overshooting

result is invariant to whether or not, in addition, it offsets exchange

rate movements.

V.   Conclusions and Extensions

     This paper has shown how, in the context of a model with slow price

adjustment, imperfect capital mobility, variable output, and activist

monetary policy can combine to produce exchange rate undershooting. It

also provides evidence that, for the period of generalized floating since

1973, the mark exhibited overshooting and the yen exhibited undershooting.

The estimation is quite successful, in contrast with most models of ex-

change rate determination for the same time period.

     Possible extensions of the model are stimulated as much by our fail-

ures as our successes. While we were not able to produce satisfactory

estimates for the United States or the United Kingdom, we can conjecture

that this was caused, at least in part, by the dramatic shift towards less

accommodative monetary policy in both countries. We intend to test for

changes in the conduct of monetary policy by estimating the model over

various sub-periods. Our model predicts that a less accommodative monetary

policy will increase exchange rate overshooting or decrease undershooting.

We hope to investigate whether the recent changes in exchange rate



                                  20
variability for the United States and the United
                                                   Kingdom can be accounted
for by changes in the conduct of
                                   monetary policy.32




                               21
                              Footnotes



    1Glaessner (1982b) and Meese and Rogoff (1981) discuss this in detail.

     2Mussa (1982) argues that the appropriate deflator for nominal bal-
ances is a weighted average of domestic and foreign goods price levels
(denominated in domestic currency). This complicates but does not substan-
tially affect the theoretical results. In addition, as shown by Flood
(1981), if the income elasticity of the demand for money is equal to unity
equation (1) would be unchanged under the Mussa formulation.

     3Frankel (1979) and Driskill and Sheffrin (1981) make the same assump-
tion, which seems to be unavoidable without greatly complicating the model.

     41t is necessary to equate the real interest rate semi-elasticities of
output demand in the two countries (a-) in order for the model to be
tractable. Allowing lags in the outpt equation produces another differ-
ence equation, which greatly complicates the model.

     5We use a flow capital mobility specification, while recognizing its
deficiencies, to limit the model to a system of two first order difference
equations. Modeling imperfect capital mobility as a stock adjustment
process produces a much more complicated model, one which cannot be solved
analytically, Allowing the current account to also depend on the interest
rate differential does not affect the results.

     6Mussa (1981a,1982) argues that a superior formulation to Dornbusch's
price equation would have the rate of inflation equal the expected rate of
                                                            (<1) of the
change of the equilibrium price level, plus some proportion
difference between the equilibrium and the actual price level.  As em-
phasized both by Mussa and by Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983), Dornbusch's  price
equation is inappropriate either when disturbances become anticipated long
before they occur or when the long run equilibrium of the economy moves
over time. Neither situation is considered in this paper.

     7Both Dornbusch's and Mussa's formulations assume that prices are
predetermined. Assuming that prices are perfectly flexible, so that
purchasing power parity holds at all times, does not accord with evidence
from the 197Os. The recent work of Flood and Hodrick (1982), in which
prices are neither flexible nor predetermined, provides another alternative
for future empirical research.

      8Allowing the money supply to depend on contemporaneous, rather than
 past, values of the variables greatly simplifies the analysis. For the
 theory, assuming perfect foresight, this is equivalent to having the money
 supply depend on expectations of the current values of the variables,
 conditional on information available at the end of the previous period.

      9Our definition of accommodative, while clear with regard to domestic
 price moments, may cause some semantic difficulties in considering foreign
 price movements. In some of the discussion of supply shocks, an increase
 in the foreign price level (price of the imported good) would cause the




                                  22
 domestic price index to increase. In that context, accommodative monetary
 policy implies that the domestic money supply increases when the foreign
 price level increases. In our context, accommodative
                                                       monetary policy
 implies that the domestic money supply decreases when the foreign price
 level increases.

      10The only tractable way to accomplish this is to assume that the
 domestic and foreign money supplies respond identically to price movements,
 an assumption that does not seem tenable.

      11By "the money supply" we mean the sum of the coefficients of the
 domestic and foreign money supplies. The possibility that ô < 0 which can
 lead to a non-unique solution, will be considered in a subseuent paper.

        12The over- and undershooting results are invariant to the slope of
 the Dq = 0 curve, which is drawn to be positive and less than unity solely
 for eae of illustration. With Dornbusch's price adjustment formulation
 (a7 = 0), the SiOC of the Dq    0 schedule would be unity (3 =
                                                                   -4) and
 the figures would replicate (ith the axes reversed) those found in Frenkel
 and Rodriguez (1982).

      13While these diagrams are more familiar in continuous time, Mussa
 (1982) uses them in a discrete time model. We present the theoretical
 results in discrete time for the purpose of comparison with the empirical
work.

     14We represent the errors as first order autoregressive
                                                             processes,
rather than higher order moving average processes, in order to limit the
number of parameters to be estimated.

        15me model could, of course, have been solved by other methods. The
derivation of (14) is straightforward but lengthy, and therefore not
presented.

     16We do not impose the cross error constraints on the v's. Otherwise,
there would be cross correlation among the errors and the estimates would
be inconsistent.

     17The end of our sample period was caused by data availability when
the paper was first written.

     18The interest rates used for the estimation were representative
market rates, taken from World Financial Markets. All other data were
                                                                      money
taken from International Financial Statistics. The real output, price
level, and money supply data were seasonally adjusted. In order to achieve
stationarity, all variables, after taking logarithms (except for the
interest rate), were detrended by regression on a constant and linear time
trend. The countries used for constructing the foreign variables were
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United
States, with the weights proportional to the MERM weights.

     19We used the AR1 procedure of TSP, which 5rovides efficient estimates
of an equation whose disturbances display first order serial correlation.




                                 23
            procedure raises two questions regarding consistency of the
estimates. On one hand, estimating the money demand coefficients by a
single equation method may introduce inconsistency into the model. On the
other hand, if these parameters are still inconsistently estimated when
estimated by maximum likelihood, then the inconsistency would be spread
throughout the model. Another problem with our procedure is that, because
for the maximum likelihood procedure it is assumed that a1 and a9 are
estimated without error, the standard errors of the other variables are
biased downward. We report estimates where all of the parameters are
estimated by maximum likelihood below.

     21Dornbusch's concept of overshooting describes the behavior of the
exchange rate after a permanent increase in the money supply while, for the
empirical work, all disturbances are temporary. In this context, over—
shooting is interpreted as the existence of estimated parameter values such
that, in the deterministic model, a permanent increase in the money supply
would cause the exchange rate to overshoot.

     22Both d3 and dA are negative for Germany because a4, the real inter-
est rate semi-elastiity of output demand, is negative. This, of course,
does not accord with the theory. In an earlier version of this paper, we
estimated the model with aA constrained to equal zero, In that version, a3
was negative. This issue Ts explored at greater length, but no more
satisfactorily, in Papell (1983).

          Papeli (1983), we estimate a similar model (with perfect capital
mobility) for the Deutsche Mark/Dollar exchange rate. While American
monetary policy is accommodative of prices, German monetary policy is
sufficiently offsetting to produce overshooting. These results are consis-
tent with the findings for Germany in this paper.

     24The value of (53 implied by the estimates was quite close to zero for
                                                                = 0 schedule
both countries. This could be illustrated with a vertical
in the figures.

     25Let L(u) be the log of the likelihood function for the unconstrained
model, L(c) the log of the likelihood function for the constrained model, u
the number of parameters estimated for the unconstrained model, and c the
number of parameters estimated for the constrained model. Then
2[L(u)—L(c)] is distributed chi-squared (u—c). There are 22 parameters in
                                                                =     = 0).
the unconstrained model for Germany and 20 for Japan (since a     a1
The unconstrained log likelihood for Japan is 575.804: thus
= 3.682. The unconstrained log likelihood for Germany is 638.487:
2[L(u)—L(c)] = 7.348. With u-c = 5 for both countries, the constrained
model cannot be rejected at the 50 percent level for Japan or at the 10
percent level for Germany.

     26Using the notation in footnote 25, with u—c = 3 for both countries,
2[L(u) — L(c)] equals 2.278 for Japan and 6.462 for Germany. The 10
percent marginal significance level is 6.251.

     27Allowing the third order moving average process u1.f. to be represent-
ed by a second order autoregression or a third order movt'1g average,
instead of the first order autoregression adopted in the paper, does not


                                   24
affect this result.

     286 equals 11.35 (93.21) and 62 equals
                                            -11.69 (-76.12). Asymtotic
"t—ratio" are in parentheses.

     29The log likelihood of the unconstrained model is 518.928, so that
2[L(u) — L(c)] = .098.

     30We experimented with estimating a model using first-differenced data
for Germany, even though the serial correlation coefficients using detrend-
ed data were not overly high. The precision of the estimates of the
parameters decreased, and the constrained model was rejected when compared
to the unconstrained model by the likelihood ratio test.

     31For the United Kingdom, other changes during the period include the
relaxation of capital controls and exploitation of North Sea oil. Haache
and Townend (1981), using single equation estimation techniques, are
unsuccessful at modeling sterling's effective exchange rate for 1972-80.

         preliminary attempt to accomplish this, using considerations of
exchange risk not present in this paper, is made for the United States in
Papell (1983b).




                               25
                               References


Dornbusch, R. (1976). "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal
    riicjonom, 85, December, 1161-1176.
Driskill, R. and S. Sheffrin (1981). "On the Mark: Coirnient," American
     Economic Review, 71, December, 1068-1074.

Flood, R. (1981). "Explanations of Exchange-Rate Volatility and Other
     Empirical Regularities in Some Popular Models of the Foreign Exchange
     Market," in K. Brunner and A. Meitser (eds.), Carnegie-Rochester
     Conference Series, Vol. 15.

________ and R. Hodrick (1982). "Optimal Price and Inventory Adjustment
                                                               Federal
                                                                        in
     an Open-Economy Model of the Business Cycle," unpublished,
     Reserve Board.

Frankel, J. (1979). "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates
     Based on Real Interest Differentials," American Economic Review, 69,
     September, 610—22.

Frenkel, J. (1983). "Monetary Policy: Domestic Targets and International
     Constraints," American Economic Review, 73, May, 48-53.

________ and C.A., Rodriguez (1982). "Exchange Rate Dynamics and the
     Overshooting Hypothesis," International
     March.

Glaessner, 1. (1982a). "Formulation and Estimation of a Dynamic Model of
     Exchange Rate Determination: An Application of General Method of
     Moments Techniques," International Finance Discussion Paper No. 208,
     Federal Reserve Board.

________ (1982b). "Theoretical and Empirical Essays on the Determination
     of Spot and Forward Exchange Rates," Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
     University of Virginia.

Haache, G. and J. Townend (1981). "Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy:
     Modeling Sterling's Effective Exchange Rate, 1972-80," in Eltis, W.A.
     and P.J.N. Sinclair, The Mone Su I and the Exchan e Rate, (Oxford,
     Clarendon Press, 1981

Lucas, R. (1976). "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in K.
     Brunner and A. Meltzer (eds.), fl  fhillis vndLaor Markets.
Meese, R. and K. Rogoff (1981). "Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the
     Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?" International Finance
     Discussion Paper No, 184, Federal Reserve Board.

Fiussa, M. (1981a) "Sticky Prices and Disequilibrium Adjustment in a
     Rational Expectations Models of the Inflationary Process, American
     Economic Review, 71, December, 1020-1027.



                                 26
__________ (1981b).  "The Role of Official Intervention," Group of Thirty
     Occasional Paper No. 6, New York.

__________ (1982).  "A Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
     Political Economy, 90, February, 74-104.

Obstfeld, N. and K. Rogoff (1983). "Exchange Rate Dynamics with Sluggish
     Prices Under Alternative Price Adjustment Rules," International
     Finance Discussion Paper No. 223, Federal Reserve Board, May.

Papell, D. (1983a). "Activist Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate
     Overshooting: The Deutsche Mark/Dollar Rate," National Bureau of
     Economic Research Working Paper No. 1195, August.

__________ (1983b). "Monetarist Monetary Policy, Exchange Risk, and
     Exchange Rate Variability," unpublished, University of Florida, July.

Sargent, 1. (1978). "Estimation of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules Under
     Rational Expectations," Journal of Political Economy, 86, December,
     1009-1044.

Taylor, J. (1980). "Output and Price Stability: An International
     Comparison," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, February,
     109—132.




                                27
                                     Table 1

                       Japan                         Germany
                      Constrained Maximum Likelihood Estimates

                               Asymptotic                               Asymptotic
Parameter   Estimate           hlt_ratioH           Estimate            "t-rati o

              .17                   .96                   .03               .07
   a3                             1.21                  -.74              —1.42
              .53
   a4                             2.22                    .75              2.91
              .80
   a5                             1.96                  - .04             -1.52
              .07
   a5                             1.93                    .07              2.03
   a          .24
              .02                  .30                    .27               .67
              .50                 6.94                  -6.74             —2.65
   a9                                                    2.30              3.50
   a10                            -1.74                  —.17              -.36
             —.13
   a11                             1 .37                 6.06              3.16
               .15
   a12                                                  -1.86             -3.03
   a13                             8.87                   .48              4.05
             1.05
   c1                                                                     -2..64
               .1-7                9.70
               .60                 6.33                   .65              6.45
   ct3                             2.62                   .70             19.80
               .33
               .75                11.03                   .80             22.74
               .42                 3.42                   .67             16.60

                                Single Equation Estimates

            -Estimate       t Statistic             Estimate            t statistic

               .82                 5.63
   a1                             —2.91                  —.43              —1.81
              —.67
  —a2
                      Parameter Values Implied by the Estimates

                        1.03                                     .61
   61                                                           2 .93
                        -.66
                                                                - .04
                         .02
                        -.14                                 -.24
                                                            -1.46
                                                            -5.02
   C2                                                        1.23
   C3                                                        4.67
   c
   d                     .34                                     .01
   d                     .32                                     .08
                                                                - .53
                         .77
                         .70                                     .80
        4
                  Correlation Between Actual and Estimated Values

    e                    .88                                     .80
                         .97                                     .56
    q
    iii                  .91                                     .94
    m*                   .77                                     .67
                         .77                                     .85
   y_y*
    i-i*                 .82                                     .78

                                       Log Likelihood

                       573. 963                            634.813

                                           28
                                   Table 2

                       Japan                        Germany
                     Constrained Maximum Likelihood Estimates

                              Asymptotic                             Asymptotic
Parameter   Estimate          "t-ratio"            Estimate          "t-ratio"

  a            .26               .38                3.36               3.94
  a            .66             1.16                 2.69               8.45
              .17              1.00                   .05                .55
  a           .56              1.29                 -.74              -6.82
              .80              2.15                   .85              3.88
              .08              2.12                 -.03              -1.48
  a           .26              2.14                   .06              2.44
  a          —.01              -.05                   .20                .92
  a           .66              4.05                -4.12              -1.66
                                                    1.19               1.38
             —.13
  a           .17
                              -1.80
                               1.54
                                                     .09
                                                    4.12
                                                                        .23
                                                                       2.60
  a          1.06              8.95
                                                   —1.07.
                                                      .47
                                                                      —2.11
                                                                       5.44
              .76              9.19                 -.11              —2.48
              .60              6.17                  .64               9.87
              .33              2.63                  .69              19.13
              .74             10.15                  .84              13.85
              .43              3.35                  .63               9.92

                    Parameter Values Implied by the Estimates
  6                    1.03                                    .60
                       -.67                                   3.15
                        .03                                   -.02
                       —.15                                   —.21
  C1                                                          —.81
  C2                                                        -3.11
                                                              1.00
  c'                                                          3.21
 d                     .39                                     .02
 d                     .35                                     .06
 d                     .84
                       .76
                                                              -.59
 d4                                                           -.78

             Correlation Between Actual and Estimated Values

 e                     .88                                     .80
 q                     .97                                     .57
 m                     .91                                     .95
 m*                    .77                                     .68
 y_y*                  .77                                     .84
 i—it                  .82                                     .78

                                  Log Likelihood

                     574.665                         635.256




                                 29
                                  Table 3

               Estimates with First-Differenced Data

                               Japan
              Constrained Maximum Likelihood Estimates

                                                      Asymptotic
Parameter                 Estimate                    "t-ratio"

                            2.79                         3.48
   a1                       7.11                         1.17
   a2                       1.70                         2.64
   a3                       —.95                         -.55
   a4                       4.70                          .37
   a5                        .21                         1.84
   a5                        .44                         1.82
   a7                       3.33                         1.74
   a8                      —1.85                         —.78
   a9                       —.60                        -.1.73
   a11                                                   —.97
                            -.71
                             .48                        10.03
                            —.29                        —1.79
                             .45                         7.76
                             .0                           .52
                             .49                         9.05
                             .69                         8.34

              Parameter Values     Implied by the Estimats
                                            5.15
                                            -4.80
                                                .01
                                            -.28
   d                                        4.07
   d                                            .79
                                            -6.63
   d                                        -1.70
   d4
            Correlation   Between Actual and Estimated Values

   e                                            .52
   q
                                                .66
   m                                            .13
                                                .10
                                                .27
   yy*                                           49
   i—it

                               Log Likelihood

                                     5 18.879




                                    30
e                          e=q




       E
                           De
                      Li




                                 q
           Figure 1

e                          e=c

                           De =O




                                 q
    Figure 2
