NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REFLECTIONS ON U.S. DISASTER INSURANCE
POLICY FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Howard Kunreuther
Working Paper 12449
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12449
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006

This paper is a revised version of one presented at the Berkeley Symposium on Real Estate, Catastrophic
Risk, and Public Policy on March 23, 2006. I appreciate comments by Dwight Jaffee, the discussant of the
paper, as well as Rob Lieberthal, Erwann Michel Kerjan, Larry Rosenthal and Thomas Russell on an earlier
draft. The paper also reflects a continuing dialog over the past six months with members of the Wharton Risk
Center/Insurance Information Institute/University of Georgia team studying alternative disaster insurance
and mitigation programs: Neil Doherty, Martin Grace, Scott Harrington, Robert Hartwig, Robert Klein, Paul
Kleindorfer, Rob Lieberthal, Erwann Michel-Kerjan, Mark Pauly, Irv Rosenthal, Benjamin Shiller, Gordon
Stewart, James Valverde and Haitao Yin. Interactions with Robert Litan were also very helpful in my
rethinking issues associated with disaster insurance. Support from NSF Grant # CMS-0527598 and the
Wharton Risk Management and Decision Processes Center is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2006 by Howard Kunreuther. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Reflections on U.S. Disaster Insurance Policy for the 21st Century
Howard Kunreuther
NBER Working Paper No. 12449
August 2006
JEL No. F34, F41
ABSTRACT
The devastation caused by hurricanes during the 2004 and 2005 seasons has been
unprecedented and is forcing the insurance industry to reevaluate the role that it can play in dealing
with future natural disasters in the United States. As shown in Table 1 the four hurricanes that hit
Florida in the fall of 2004 -- Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne---and Hurricanes Katrina and Rita
in 2005 comprised half of the top 12 disasters with respect to insured losses between 1970 and 2005.
On a related note, 18 of the 20 most costly disasters occurred between 1990 and 2005 and 10
occurred in the 21st Century. This context is totally different than the scale of economic loss the
country has suffered from natural disasters and other extreme events in the 20th century.
The first section of the paper addresses the first question by outlining two principles on which
a disaster insurance program should be based. Section 3 then focuses on the second question by
analyzing the insurability of a risk and examining the challenges facing the private sector in
providing coverage against natural disasters. Section 4 turns to the third question and delineates the
opportunities and challenges of a comprehensive disaster insurance program. Section 5 poses a set
of open issues that are currently being addressed by a research project on disaster insurance
undertaken by the Wharton Risk Center in conjunction with the Insurance Information Institute and
Georgia State University. The concluding section summarizes the key issues associated with
providing disaster insurance in the 21st century.
Howard Kunreuther
Operations and Information Management
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
and NBER
kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
The devastation caused by hurricanes during the 2004 and 2005 seasons has been
unprecedented and is forcing the insurance industry to reevaluate the role that it can play
in dealing with future natural disasters in the United States. As shown in Table 1 the four
hurricanes that hit Florida in the fall of 2004 -- Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne---and
Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005 comprised half of the top 12 disasters with respect to
insured losses between 1970 and 2005. On a related note, 18 of the 20 most costly
disasters occurred between 1990 and 2005 and 10 occurred in the 21st Century. This
context is totally different than the scale of economic loss the country has suffered from
natural disasters and other extreme events in the 20th century.
INSERT TABLE 1
Hurricane Katrina is the most costly event the insurance industry has ever
experienced with estimated losses likely to be more than double that of Hurricane
Andrew. It is difficult to believe that prior to Hurricane Hugo in 1989 there was not a
single natural disaster in the United States that cost the insurance industry $1 billion.
(Kunreuther and Roth Jr. 1998 Chap. 1)
The cause of these large losses is a product of several different forces. For one
thing, there has been increased development of structures in hazard-prone areas. Data
from the 2000 U.S. Census reveals that 53% of the U.S. population now resides along
one of the oceans or inland coastlines. From 1970 to 2000 the southeastern Atlantic coast
areas had an increase in population density of 66%, far exceeding the national average of
38%. In Florida the population has increased by 535% between 1950 and 2005, up from

2

2.8 million to an estimated 17.8 million in 2005.2 The total value of insured coastal
exposure in the State of Florida was nearly $2 trillion at the end of 2004. Since financial
institutions normally require homeowners to purchase insurance coverage as a condition
for a mortgage, the amount of insurance in force has ballooned, leading to a greater
potential for catastrophic insured losses today than in previous years.
There has also been an increase in hurricane activity in the North Atlantic basin.
During the past ten years the number of hurricanes has increased by more than 60%
relative to the low activity period between 1970-1994 and the number of category 3-5
storms have increased by more than 150% when compared with the previous 25 year
period (Risk Management Solutions 2006). The cause of this increased hurricane
activity has been actively debated by scientists, especially during the past couple of years.
MIT’s Kerry Emanuel, a leader in the field, has concluded that the changing pattern is
partially due to global warming and that future warming may lead to an upward trend in
the destructive potential of future hurricanes (Emanuel 2005).
An appropriately designed disaster insurance program is vital for stemming the
tide of increasing losses from natural disasters while at the same time providing funds to
those suffering losses. This paper addresses the following three questions that are likely
to determine the shape of a disaster insurance program in the United States:
•

What principles should be adhered to in developing a disaster insurance
program?

•

What is the appropriate balance between private and public sector
participation in a disaster insurance program?

2

My thanks to Paul Amos for providing these data from the U.S. Census

3

•

Can an insurance policy that provides coverage against all natural perils be
made attractive to homeowners and insurers as well as policymakers at
the local, state and federal levels?

The next section of the paper addresses the first question by outlining two
principles on which a disaster insurance program should be based. Section 3 then focuses
on the second question by analyzing the insurability of a risk and examining the
challenges facing the private sector in providing coverage against natural disasters.
Section 4 turns to the third question and delineates the opportunities and challenges of a
comprehensive disaster insurance program. Section 5 poses a set of open issues that are
currently being addressed by a research project on disaster insurance undertaken by the
Wharton Risk Center in conjunction with the Insurance Information Institute and Georgia
State University. The concluding section summarizes the key issues associated with
providing disaster insurance in the 21st century.

2. Principles of a Disaster Insurance Program
The principles on which to base a disaster insurance program can be highlighted
by focusing on a hypothetical homeowner residing in a Gulf Coast community subject to
damaging hurricanes:
The Baylors have a 20 year mortgage on a home along the Gulf Coast that is
currently valued at $200,000. The bank that issued the mortgage requires them to
purchase a homeowners’ insurance policy. The best estimate of the annual chance
of a severe hurricane that will cause damage to the Baylors’ house is p =1 in 100.
If the hurricane occurs it will totally destroy the Baylor home so that the loss will
be L=$200,000.

4

Principle 1: Risk-based premiums
Insurance premiums should reflect the underlying risk associated with the events against
which coverage is provided. To illustrate this principle in the context of the Baylors’ home, the
expected loss to their property from hurricanes is estimated to be pL=$2,000. A risk-based
premium would be $2000(1+λ), where λ is a loading factor reflecting the costs to the insurer of
marketing a policy, assessing the risk, settling the claim if any, and making normal profits. If
λ = .5, then a risk-based premium for the Baylors’ home would be $3000.
Risk-based premiums provide a clear signal to individuals and businesses of the dangers
they face when locating in hazard-prone areas and provide economic incentives to invest in costeffective mitigation measures. To highlight these points suppose that a state insurance regulator
restricted rates in hurricane-prone areas so that the maximum premium that an insurer could
charge the Baylors would be $1500. Assume the Baylors knew that the loading factor on an
insurance policy was λ =.5, and that if a hurricane occurred in their area it would destroy their
home. Based on the $1500 premium, the Baylors would then conclude that the chances of such a
disaster occurring would be 1/200 rather than 1/100.3 More generally, highly subsidized
premiums due to rate regulation, without clear communication on the actual risk facing the
homeowner, will encourage development of hazard-prone areas in ways that are costly to both
the individuals who locate there as well as the rest of society who are likely to incur the costs of
bailing out victims following the next disaster.
There is an additional reason why insurance premiums can make individuals aware of the
relative risks associated with locating in different areas. Empirical studies have revealed that
individuals rarely seek out probability estimates in making their decisions, and that low
3

They could rationally conclude that they are getting a “great deal” on their insurance.

5

probabilities are inherently difficult to comprehend. When explicit probabilities are given to
decision makers they often do not use the information. [Magat, Viscusi and Huber (1987) and
Camerer and Kunreuther (1989)]. In one study, researchers found that only 22 percent of
subjects sought out probability information when evaluating several risky managerial decisions.
When another group of respondents was given precise probability information, less than 20
percent mentioned the probability in their verbal protocols. [Huber, Wider and Huber (1997)]. In
other words, people do not deal with uncertainty in ways that would be predicted by normative
models of choice.
People are much more likely to pay attention to dollar expenditures when making
location decisions. If they have comparative data on insurance premiums in different regions and
know that these are risk-based rates, they will be able to determine the relative safety of different
areas. In a controlled experimental study on whether individuals can distinguish between
probabilities or insurance premiums for low probability events, Kunreuther, Novemsky and
Kahneman (2000) found that it was necessary to present comparative information on high and
low risk situations for people to judge how safe an area would be with respect to its risk.
Risk-based rates also encourage investment in risk mitigation measures that are
cost-effective. Suppose that the Baylors could reduce property damage caused by a
hurricane by bracing their roof trusses and installing straps or clips at a cost of $1500. If
the annual probability of a hurricane causing damage to their house is 1/100 and the
reduction in loss due to strengthening the roof in this manner is $50,000, then the
expected annual benefit from roof mitigation to the Baylors is $500 and a risk-based
insurance premium with λ =.5 should be reduced by $750 [i.e. $500(1.5)]. If the
Baylors were offered a 20 year home improvement loan of $1500 at a 10% annual rate of
interest to make their roof more hurricane resistant, their annual loan payment would be
6

$145. The annual savings to the Baylors from investing in this mitigation measure would
thus be $605. The bank will also feel that it is now better protected against a catastrophic
loss to the property and the insurer knows that its potential loss from a major disaster is
reduced. The general public will now be less likely to have large amounts of their tax
dollars going for disaster relief. This represents a win-win-win-win situation for these
concerned stakeholders.
Now suppose that an insurer would only be allowed to charge the Baylors $1500 for an
insurance policy due to state regulations. Then the insurer would have no economic incentive to
provide a premium discount for undertaking a mitigation measure. In fact, no insurer would want
to market coverage to the Baylors or any homeowner in the hurricane-prone area with similar
risks because in the long-run the insurer would lose money on each of these policies. More
specifically, an insurer’s annual expected loss on the Baylors home would be greater than the
$1500 they would be receiving in premiums.4
Principle 2: Affordable Insurance
In developing an insurance program that stands any chance of being implemented it is
necessary to recognize the tension between setting premiums that reflect risk and the financial
ability of residents in hazard-prone areas to buy coverage. This was a major issue in the
development of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in 1968. There was great concern
that if flood insurance rates were risk-based, then many residents in hazard-prone areas would be
charged extremely high premiums for flood coverage and would not want to purchase it. Hence
the program was developed with two layers---a subsidized rate for residents currently residing in
hazard-prone areas and an actuarially based rate for those who built or substantially improved
4

If the insurer were forced to provide coverage to the Baylors at a premium of $1500 then they would want
to offer a premium discount to encourage them to invest in roof mitigation since it would lower their claims
payments following a disaster.

7

their structures after the federal government provided complete risk information in the area
through flood insurance rate maps (Pasterick 1998). The subsidized rate was also designed to
maintain the property values of structures in flood prone areas.5
There are some lessons to be learned from the experience of the NFIP that should guide
the development of a future disaster insurance program. With subsidized rates there are no
economic incentives for residents in hazard-prone areas to invest in mitigation measures because
they will not be given premium discounts. Property owners that have repeatedly suffered damage
from floods have rebuilt their property in the same location and continue to receive subsidized
insurance rates. A recent U.S General Accountability Office (GAO) (2006) study revealed that
structures receiving flood insurance payments of $1000 or more over a 10 year period constitute
less than 1 percent of the properties covered under the NFIP but involve approximately 25-30
percent of all claims under the program. To address this problem the Flood Insurance Reform
Act of 2004 provides states and local communities with an additional $40 million a year for
mitigating severe repetitive loss properties by such means as buyouts, elevation or moving the
house (King 2006).
Based on the experience of the NFIP, one should not provide subsidized premiums to
those currently residing in hazard-prone areas. Rather either the State or Federal government
should offer some type of subsidy or grant that enables low income residents to purchase
insurance at a risk-based premium. Suppose that the Baylors had inherited their home and that
the family’s annual income was $50,000 so that they could not afford to pay $3000 for coverage
against damage from hurricanes. Rather than having state regulators set a maximum premium of
$1,500 for insuring homes like the Baylors, the family could be given an insurance voucher that
5

The distribution of flood insurance business written in 2005 is anticipated to be 26% at subsidized rates
and 74% at risk-based rates. Those being charged a subsidized rate are estimated to pay between 35% and
40% of the risk-based premium. (Hayes and Sabada 2004).

8

must be used to buy homeowners coverage. The program could be similar in spirit to the food
stamp program. The magnitude of the voucher would be based on the income and assets of the
resident. Homeowners could also be provided with subsidies or loans to invest in cost-effective
mitigation measures and in return be charged a lower insurance premium reflecting the reduced
damage to their structure from a future disaster. Property owners purchasing new structures
would pay the risk-based insurance premium no matter what is their income level.

3. Providing Protection by the Private Sector: Insurability Issues
Consider an insurer who would like to provide protection to individuals residing in
hazard-prone areas of the United States. What factors will be important to the insurer in
determining whether to offer coverage and if so, how much should it charge for this protection?
These questions relate to the insurability of a risk. By insurability we mean the ability of the
insurer to offer coverage to individuals at a price that generates sufficient demand for them to
cover the fixed costs of developing and offering the product.
A set of papers from researchers associated with the Wharton Risk Center have examined
the conditions for insurability.6 Cummins (2006) and Litan (2006) have recently examined this
issue in the context of catastrophic risks. The discussion that follows utilizes concepts from these
papers by focusing on a hypothetical insurer, Naturesway, who is deciding whether or not it
wants to provide coverage to protect homeowners like the Baylors against damage to its house
and contents from future hurricanes.

6

See Freeman and Kunreuther (1997) Kunreuther and Roth Chapter 2 (1998) and Wharton Risk Center
(2005)

9

Law of large numbers
Naturesway and other insurers are likely to be concerned about the variability of profits
from the risks they insure. The ideal risk is one where the potential loss from each insured
individual is relatively small and independent of the losses from other policyholders. As the
insurer increases the number of policies (n) it issues in a year, the sample mean becomes close to
the population mean and the expected loss becomes more predictable. In other words, the law of
large numbers implies that for large n it is highly unlikely that the insurer will suffer a loss that
greatly exceeds the premiums collected.
Fire is an example of a risk that satisfies the law of large numbers since losses are
normally independent of one another. To illustrate the application of this law, suppose that an
insurer wants to determine the accuracy of the estimated fire loss for a group of identical homes
valued at $100,000, each of which has a 1/1,000 annual chance of being completely destroyed by
fire. If one assumes that only one fire can occur to any structure during the year, the expected
annual loss for each home would be $100 (i.e. 1/1000 x $100,000). As the number of fire
insurance policies n increases, then the variance of the expected annual loss decreases in
proportion to n. Cummins (2006) considers the case where the insurer is willing to accept a low
probability of insolvency ε arising out of a catastrophic loss when insuring a book of business.
He shows that for risks which are independent and whose losses are characterized by the normal
distribution so that the central limit theorem applies, the equity capital per policy approaches
zero as the number of insured policies becomes very large.
Conditions for Insurability
The law of large numbers is predicated on the ability of Naturesway or other insurers to
estimate the likelihood and consequences of a risk, and to be able to estimate that risk at a
reasonable cost, and for the risks to be independent of each other. The risks associated with
10

large-scale natural disasters are unlikely to satisfy the law of large numbers. The following three
conditions can then determine the degree to which such a risk is insurable:
Condition 1 is the ability to identify and quantify, or estimate, the chances of the event
occurring, and the extent of losses likely to be incurred when providing different levels of
coverage.
Condition 2 is the ability to set premiums for each potential customer or class of
customers. This requires some knowledge of the customer's risk in relation to others in
the population of potential policyholders.
Condition 3 is the generation of sufficient demand and revenue from insuring this risk to
cover the development, marketing and claims costs incurred by the insurer and still yield
the firm a positive expected profit.
I will now examine each condition and raise some questions related to the ability
of private insurers to provide coverage in the 21st century.
Condition 1: Identifying the Risk
To satisfy this condition, estimates must be made of the frequency with which
specific events occur and the magnitude of the loss. The fire risk is relatively easy in this
regard since there are considerable past data available to determine the likelihood of
damage of different magnitudes to different type structures in certain locations (e.g.
distance from a fire hydrant).
Due to the infrequency of natural disasters insurers have turned to scientific
studies by scientists and structural engineers to estimate the frequency of hurricanes,
earthquakes and floods of different magnitudes, as well as the damage that is likely to
occur to different structures from these disasters. New advances in information
technology have led to the development of catastrophe models (CMs) which have proven
11

very useful for quantifying the likelihood of disasters of different magnitudes and the
resulting damage to properties as a function of the type of construction, location and
other variables.
A CM combines scientific risk assessments of the hazard with historical records
to estimate these probabilities and resulting damage. The information can be presented in
the form of expected annual losses and/or through exceedance probability (EP) curves
such as the probability that in a given year Naturesway’s damage claims from hurricanes
will exceed a certain dollar amount. CMs can also be used to calculate estimated insured
losses from specific hypothesized events (e.g. a severe hurricane hitting downtown
Miami and Miami Beach in 2006).
The occurrence of Hurricane Andrew in Florida in 1992 and the
Northridge earthquake in California in 1994 stimulated the insurance industry to
pay more attention to output from these CMs. Today these models are utilized by
individual insurers and reinsurers to determine how much coverage they should
provide, what premiums to charge, and where coverage should be offered and
restricted to increase the firm’s profitability while reducing the probability of
severe financial losses.7
During the first half of 2006 the three leading modeling firms [AIR Worldwide,
EQECAT and Risk Management Solutions (RMS)] reevaluated their hurricane models
based on the losses from the recent hurricanes in Florida and the rest of the Gulf Coast
and new scientific studies. All three firms have revised their near-term models to

7

For a detailed analysis of the use of catastrophe models in the context of natural disasters see Grossi and
Kunreuther (2005).

12

incorporate an increased likelihood of hurricanes in the next five years and hence higher
expected annual losses than they had predicted in 2005.
Condition 2: Setting Premiums for Specific Risks
Once the risk has been identified, Naturesway and other insurers need to
determine what premium it can charge to make a profit while not subjecting itself to an
unacceptably high chance of insolvency or severe loss of surplus due to a catastrophic
loss. There are several factors that determine what premiums insurers would like to
charge if they are unregulated.
Ambiguity of Risk

The greater the ambiguity the probability of a specific loss and the

uncertainty of the claims payments, the higher the premium will be. In a mail survey of
professional actuaries conducted by the Casualty Actuarial Society, 463 respondents
indicated how much they would charge to cover losses against a defective product where
the probabilities of a loss was well specified at p=.001 and where they experienced
considerable uncertainty about the likelihood of a loss. The median premium values were
five times higher for the uncertain risk than for the well-specified probability when the
losses from each insurance policy were independent. This ratio increased to ten times
when the losses were perfectly correlated. (Hogarth and Kunreuther 1989).
In another study a questionnaire was mailed to 190 randomly chosen insurance
companies of different sizes asking underwriters to specify the prices which they would
like to charge to insure a factory against property damage from a severe earthquake, to
insure an underground storage tank and to provide coverage for a neutral situation (i.e. a
risk without any context). Probabilities and losses were varied. The probability of loss
and the size of the claim were either well-specified or there was ambiguity regarding the
likelihood of the loss and/or the claim size. The underwriters wanted to charge
13

considerably more for the same amount of coverage when either the probability was
ambiguous and/or the claim size was uncertain. (Kunreuther et al. 1993).8
Adverse Selection

If the insurer sets a premium based on the average probability of a

loss, using the entire population as a basis for this estimate, those at the highest risk for a
certain hazard will be the most likely to purchase coverage for that hazard. In an extreme
case, the poor risks will be the only purchasers of coverage, and the insurer will lose
money on each policy sold. This situation, referred to as adverse selection, occurs when
the insurer cannot distinguish between the probabilities of a loss for good- and poor-risk
categories, but the insured can. Given the development of catastrophe models and better
scientific data on the nature of the risks facing different parts of the country it is unlikely
that adverse selection present a major problem today for insurers providing coverage
against damage from natural disasters.9
Moral Hazard

Moral hazard refers to an increase in the probability of loss caused

by the behavior of the policyholder. For example, providing insurance protection to an
individual may lead that person to behave more carelessly than before he or she had
coverage. One way to avoid the problem of moral hazard is to introduce deductibles and
coinsurance as part of the insurance contract. A sufficiently large deductible can act as an
incentive for the insureds to continue to behave carefully after purchasing coverage
because they will be forced to cover a significant portion of their loss themselves. With
8

Risk ambiguity does not preclude insurers from issuing an insurance policy even though the premiums
charged will be higher than if the probabilities and outcomes were well-specified. As pointed out by Jaffee
(2006) insurance was provided for telecommunication satellites from their very first launch even though
there was no historical data on the likelihood that the satellite would be destroyed. Froot and Posner
(2002) also indicate that insurance can be provided for catastrophic events even though there is
considerable parameter uncertainty with respect to these risks.
9
The absence of adverse selection has been empirically demonstrated in several other insurance markets. In
these markets the data show that there is no positive correlation between the level of risk and the quantity
of insurance coverage. For a survey of these studies during the past ten years see Henriet and MichelKerjan (2006).

14

coinsurance the insurer and the insured share the loss together. As with a deductible, this
type of risk-sharing arrangement encourages safer behavior because those insured want to
avoid having to pay for some of the losses.10
Even with these clauses in an insurance contract, individuals may still behave
more carelessly with coverage simply because they are protected against a large portion
of the loss. For example, they may decide not to take precautionary measures that they
would have adopted had they been uninsured. The cost of adopting mitigation may now
be viewed by policyholders as too high relative to the expected dollar benefits that they
perceive with respect to this investment.
The other type of moral hazard problem that could exist with respect to natural
hazards is illustrated by a decision to move unwanted furniture to the basement a day or
two in advance of a predicted flood or hurricane to increase the likelihood that they will
be damaged or destroyed than had they remained in their normal spots. Similarly a
homeowner may claim cracks and other damage that existed prior to the earthquake from
the disaster itself (ex post moral hazard). A sufficiently large deductible might prevent
individuals from putting contents in harms way or providing false information about the
cause of damage from a disaster, as well as having cost advantages over other methods
for dealing with build-up such as claims adjustment.
Correlated Risk

Earthquakes, floods, hurricanes and other large-scale natural

disasters produce highly correlated losses since a single event will damaged and
destroyed many homes in the affected area. Insurers who cover the risks from such
disasters may have to pay potentially large claims to policyholders before they are able to

10

For more details on deductibles and coinsurance in relation to moral hazard, see Pauly, 1968.

15

collect sufficient premiums to cover their costs. This timing risk is an important element
associated with highly correlated risks and catastrophic losses. [Litan (2006)].
To illustrate the nature of timing risk consider the decision by Naturesway as to
how much coverage it will want to offer and what premium it will want to charge for
damage to homes in one region of the Gulf Coast from future hurricanes. To keep the
analysis simple assume that all the structures are identical to the Baylor home. Each
home is valued at $200,000 and will be destroyed by a hurricane that has a probability of
1/100 of occurring next year. Suppose Naturesway insured 100 such homes in the area at
a risk-based premium of $3000 [i.e. (1+ λ)pL = 1.5 ($2000)] and the hurricane would
destroy all the homes (i.e. perfect correlation). Then Naturesway would collect $300,000
in premiums each year but would be forced to pay out $20 million in claims should a
damaging hurricane hit the area where the Baylors and others live. Unless Naturesway
had considerable surplus it could become insolvent from this event. Should that be the
case, and depending on which state it operates, part of the claims Naturesway is unable to
pay would be reassessed against all other insurers operating in this state, as we have seen
after the 2004 and 2005 hurricanes when several catastrophe state funds became
technically bankrupt.
More generally, this has been also a critical issue facing countries when they set
up any type of insurance pool for covering losses from catastrophic events such as natural
disasters or terrorism. Several countries have responded by providing the pool with some
type of temporary government backstop to cover losses should the pool not have enough
reserves to pay claims from a major disaster. When this occurs the pool is responsible for
reimbursing the central government after it gets back on its feet again (e.g., Pool Re in
the UK for terrorism insurance).
16

Actuaries and underwriters both utilize heuristics that reflect this concern with
insolvency in determining how much coverage to offer in hazard-prone areas and what
premium to charge. Actuaries at Naturesway will first use their best estimates of the
likelihood of hurricanes of different intensities to determine an expected annual loss to
the property and contents of a particular residence such as the Baylor home. Underwriters
utilize the actuary’s recommended premium as a reference point and then focus first on
the impact of a major disaster on the probability of insolvency or some prespecified loss
of surplus to determine an appropriate premium to charge and the number of policies to
market. (Kunreuther 1989).
Roy (1952) first proposed a safety-first model to characterize this type of firm
behavior. In the context of insurance, such a model explicitly concerns itself with
insolvency when determining the maximum amount of coverage the insurer should offer
and the premiums to charge. Stone (1973) formalized these concepts by suggesting that
an underwriter who wants to determine the conditions for a specific risk to be insurable
will first focus on keeping the probability of insolvency below some threshold level (q*).
Let

A = the insurer’s total assets. The underwriter is considering whether to provide

coverage for a risk at a premium z* for each policy it sells. The likelihood of a loss
occurring is p and the magnitude of the loss is L. Then a safety first model implies that
the underwriter will determine the maximum number of policies m it is willing to sell so
that
m
∑ {Probability [jL > (A+mz*)]}< q*
j=1

17

(1).

where q* is a preassigned probability that reflects the insolvency probability that the
firm is willing to tolerate (i.e. its acceptable risk of insolvency).11
To illustrate the nature of a safety-first model for underwriters, suppose that
Naturesway had a surplus of A= $15 million and wanted to determine how many
policies to write in the hazard-prone area where the Baylors locate. Suppose the risks
were perfectly correlated and there is a probability p=1/100 of a loss of L= $200,000 to
each house that Naturesway insured against damage from hurricanes. If Naturesway
charged a risk-based premium of $3,000 per policy and q* < 1/100, then the underwriter
would not want to write more than 76 policies in order to meet the solvency constraint
given by equation (1).12 Naturesway would only want to maintain its current book of
business of 100 insured homes in the area if it could transfer some of the risk of a
catastrophic loss to others through reinsurance or financial instruments such as
catastrophe bonds.
Rating agencies may also play a role in influencing how many policies an insurer
will want to write on risks with respect to catastrophic losses. A recent report by AM
Best focuses on the importance of the ratio of annual insured catastrophic losses as
percentage of policyholder surplus (PHS). In general, the report notes that the higher the
level of loss relative to surplus, the greater has been the financial damage to the insurance
industry (Williams and King 2006).

11

The use of a safety-first model implies that underwriters are risk averse. Greenwald and Stiglitz (1990)
contend that managers suffer damage to their personal career prospects if their companies become insolvent
and that they cannot diversify their risk as owners of the firm can. By this logic, underwriters would focus
on the insolvency constraint where the owners of the firm would be less likely to do so.
12
Since the risks are perfectly correlated for this example and q* < 1/100, the maximum number of policies
(m*) is determined by finding the largest value of m where mL <A+mz*. If L=$200,000, A= $15 million
and z*= $3,000 then m* =76.

18

The AM Best report points out that insured catastrophic losses of less than 5% of
PHS has been the norm during the 88 of the past 100 years and that the damage to the
industry’s financial stability has been minimal. On the other hand, when insured
catastrophic losses are between 10% and 20% of PHS, as was the case in 1938 with the
Great New England hurricane and in 1992 with Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki, then there
was considerable financial stress placed on the industry.
It is unclear how rating agencies treat the ratio of catastrophic losses/policyholder
surplus for individual firms. In the case of the terrorism risk, insurers are concerned with
maintaining an aggregate exposure to any terrorist attack at no more than 10 percent of its
surplus based on concerns that they might be downgraded by rating agencies if their
exposure/surplus ratio exceeded this percentage (Wharton Risk Center 2005). If one
applies the same criterion to natural disasters, then an insurer would want to limit its
coverage against catastrophic risk by reducing the number of policies that it insures
unless it could lay off a portion of its risk through reinsurance or other risk transfer
instruments. In the above example, if Naturesway had a surplus of $15 million it would
only want to write 7 homeowners policies, each for coverage of $200,000, should the
insurer believe that the losses were perfectly correlated and it wanted to keep its cat risk
potential less than 10% of its surplus (i.e. below $1.5 million).
Condition 3: Sufficient Demand for Coverage
After examining the coverage that Naturesway believes it can offer at risk-based
rates, the company may be convinced that it cannot offer enough policies to cover the
fixed costs associated with developing a program for marketing coverage. One
alternative is to raise premiums to cover some of these costs but this would adversely
affect demand. If there are regulatory restrictions that limit the price insurers can charge
19

for certain types of coverage, then Naturesway may not want to provide protection
against these risks. In addition, if Naturesway’s portfolio leaves them vulnerable to the
possibility of extremely large losses from a given disaster due to adverse selection, moral
hazard, and/or high correlation of risks, then it will want to reduce the number of policies
in force for these hazards.
To illustrate the challenges that insurers face in this regard, suppose Naturesway
is considering marketing a new policy where the fixed costs are D dollars to develop and
administer in addition to the marginal costs associated with marketing a policy and
processing claims that comprise the loading factor λ. The fixed cost D can be spread
across the number of policies that the insurer is able to sell. To the extent that
Naturesway is restricted in selling large numbers of policies because of the impact that a
loss will have on its surplus, a higher premium will have to be charged per policy sold in
order to cover these fixed costs D. However, the higher the premium will lower the
demand for coverage. In other words, high values of D, coupled with a concern with
insolvency, may make a risk uninsurable even if there are no rate regulations. It is thus
not surprising that some insurers are reluctant to offer coverage against risks that have
catastrophic potential, particularly after suffering losses from a major disaster that causes
a large loss of surplus. Any restrictions on the rates that insurers can charge for coverage
will exacerbate the problem.
In fact, recent experience with losses from large-scale disasters suggests
that the insurance industry will turn to the public sector for assistance. Following
Hurricane Andrew, which caused $21.5 billion in insured losses (in 2002 prices)
to property in the southern coast of Florida, some insurers felt that they could not
continue to provide coverage against wind damage in hurricane-prone areas
20

within the State, especially since insurance rate regulation would prevent them
from charging the high rates required to continue writing coverage. This led to
the formation of the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund that reimburses a portion
of insurers’ losses following major hurricanes (Lecomte and Gahagan 1998).
In the case of earthquakes, the Northridge, CA earthquake of January 1994
caused $12.5 billion in private insured losses while stimulating considerable
demand for coverage by residents in earthquake-prone areas of California.
Insurers in the state stopped selling new homeowners policies because they were
required to offer earthquake coverage to those who demanded it and were
concerned with the possibility of suffering large losses from the next severe
earthquake in California. This led to the formation of the California Earthquake
Authority (CEA) in 1996 which limited the losses that insurers can suffer from a
future earthquake (Roth, Jr. 1998).
Given rate and coverage restrictions imposed on them, some insurers
claim that coverage for wind damage from hurricanes and earthquake losses
cannot be profitably marketed today in Florida and California.13 Insurers reached
a similar conclusion a number of years ago with respect to the flood hazard,
which led to the development of the National Flood Insurance Program in 1968.

3. Comprehensive Disaster Insurance---Advantages and Disadvantages14
One way to deal with issues of insurability discussed above is to have insurers provide
coverage against all hazards in a single policy. Current insurance programs for residents in
13

It should be noted that most insurance companies made large profits prior to the early 1990s by
marketing hurricane insurance in Florida and earthquake coverage in California. However, all of these
disappeared, and more, with the occurrence of Hurricane Andrew and the Northridge earthquake.
14
This section is based on Kunreuther (2006) and Kunreuther and Pauly (in press).

21

hazard prone areas are segmented across perils. Standard homeowners and commercial
insurance policies, normally required as a condition for a mortgage, cover damage from fire,
wind, hail, lightning, winter storms and volcanic eruption. Earthquake insurance can be
purchased for an additional premium. As noted in the introduction, flood insurance for residents
and businesses is offered through the National Flood Insurance program, a public-private
partnership created by Congress in 1968.
If one is to develop a comprehensive disaster insurance policy it should adhere to the two
principles of risk-based rates and affordability discussed in Section 2. A comprehensive
insurance policy with risk-based premiums is likely to come closer to meeting the conditions of
insurability discussed in the previous section than the current program. However, it also presents
challenges for small insurers that market policies in only a single state subject to catastrophic
losses from natural disasters. All insurers face the challenge of having to convince a
policyholder living far away from any water that he or she is not being charged a premium to
cover the losses from those at risk from flood damage.
The idea of a comprehensive disaster insurance program where all natural disasters are
covered by a single policy is not a new one. I proposed such a program for the United States
many years ago in one of my first papers on the disaster insurance (Kunreuther 1968). In 1954
Spain formed a public corporation, the Consorcio de Compensation de Seguros (CCS) that today
provides mandatory insurance for so-called “extraordinary risks” that include natural disasters
and political and social events such as terrorism, riots and civil commotion. Such coverage is an
add-on to property insurance policies that are marketed by the private sector. CCS pays claims
only if the loss is not covered by private insurance, if low income families did not buy insurance
and/or the insurance company fails to pay because it becomes insolvent. The government

22

collects the premiums and private insurers market the policies and handle claims settlements
(Freeman and Scott 2005).
In France, a mandatory homeowners policy also covers number of different natural
disasters along with terrorism. The main difference comes at the reinsurance level which is
partially provided by a publicly owned reinsurer, the Caisse Centrale de Reassurance, for flood,
earthquakes, and droughts, and by an insurance pool, Gareat, with unlimited government
guarantee for terrorism. There is no public reinsurance for storms (Michel-Kerjan and de
Marcellis, 2006).
Advantages of Comprehensive Disaster Insurance
Consider an insurer marketing homeowners coverage in different parts of the country.
With risk-based rates it will collect premiums that reflect the earthquake risk in California,
hurricane risk on the Gulf Coast, tornado damage in the Great Plains states and a flood risk in the
Mississippi Valley. Each of these disaster risks is independent of the others. Using the law of
large numbers discussed above, this higher premium base and the diversification of risk across
many hazards reduces the likelihood that such an insurer will suffer a loss that exceeds its
surplus in any given year for a given book of business.
An all-hazards homeowners policy should also be attractive to both insurers and
policyholders in hurricane-prone areas because it avoids the costly process of having an adjuster
determine whether the damage was caused by wind or water. This problem of separating wind
damage from water damage was a particularly challenging one following Hurricane Katrina.
Across large portions of the coast, the only remains of buildings were foundations and steps
where it is difficult to determine the cause of damage. In these cases insurers may decide to pay
the coverage limits rather than incurring litigation costs to determine whether the damage came
from water or wind. For a house still standing, this process is somewhat easier since one knows,
23

for example, that roof destruction is likely to be caused by the wind and water marks in the
living room are signs of flooding (Towers Perrin 2005). 15An all hazards policy would also deal
with the problem that insurers currently face with respect to fire damage caused by earthquakes.
Even if a homeowner has not purchased an earthquake insurance policy it will be able to collect
any damages from an earthquake due to fire. In the case of the 1906 San Francisco earthquake
most of the damage was caused by fire and insurers were on the hook to cover these losses. In
this sense homeowners insurance actually covers a portion of earthquake losses even though this
coverage is excluded from the policy
Another reason for having an insurance policy that covers all hazards is that there will be
no ambiguity by the homeowner as to whether or not he or she has coverage. Many residing in
the Gulf Coast believed they were covered for water damage from hurricanes when purchasing
their homeowners policies. In fact, lawsuits were filed in Mississippi and Louisiana following
Katrina claiming that homeowners policies should provide protection against water damage even
though there are explicit clauses in the contract that excludes these losses (Hood 2005).
The attractiveness of insurance that guarantees that the policyholder will have coverage
against all losses from disasters independent of cause has also been demonstrated experimentally
by Kahneman and Tversky (1979). They showed that 80 percent of their subjects preferred such
coverage to what they termed probabilistic insurance where there was some chance that a loss
was not covered. What matters to an individual is the knowledge that he or she will be covered
if her property is damaged or destroyed, not the cause of the loss. Such a policy has added
benefits to the extent that individuals are unaware that they are not covered against rising water
or earthquake damage in their current homeowners policy.

15

If the insurance company is to set risk based premia, they may still need to unbundle the risk to build an
experience data base, as pointed out to me by Tom Russell.

24

Another advantage of a comprehensive homeowners program is that it may address some
of the issues that currently plague the National Flood Insurance Program. As noted in a recent
GAO report (2006) only half of the properties eligible for flood insurance are covered by it.
Furthermore there were a number of properties suffering water damage from Hurricane Katrina
that were not eligible to purchase flood insurance under the NFIP. Those who did have flood
insurance and suffered large losses from the rising waters were only able to cover a portion of
their losses because the maximum coverage limit for flood insurance under the NFIP is $250,000
on building property and $100,000 on personal property (Hartwig and Wilkinson 2005).
Naturally, an all-hazards insurance policy will be more expensive than the standard
homeowners policy because it is more comprehensive. If premiums are based on risk then
policyholders would only be charged for hazards that they face. Thus a homeowner in the Gulf
Coast would theoretically be covered for earthquake damage but would not be charged anything
for this additional protection if the area in which they reside is not a seismically active area. In
promoting this all-risk coverage one needs to highlight this point to the general public who may
otherwise feel that they are paying for risks that they do not face.
Disadvantages of Comprehensive Disaster Insurance
The major disadvantage of a comprehensive disaster insurance program with risk-based
rates is that it will force state regulators to allow insurers to raise their rates to raise their rates to
cover the potential damage in hazard-prone areas. For example, in Florida insurance rates along
the coast subject to hurricanes are currently well below the actuarially fair premium.(Grace,
Klein and Kleindorfer 2004). If insurance commissioners allow companies to charge a rate that
reflects the risk many individuals will be forced to pay premiums that are considerably higher
than what they are currently charged. Many are likely to complain that this is highly unfair and
unanticipated.
25

A large increase in premium will be viewed by homeowners as unjustified and there will
be significant resistance to paying for this coverage. For high income residents who have second
homes on the coast there is an economic rationale for them to pay the cost of their insurance. A
step in this direction was recently discussed by the Florida legislature indicating that homes
valued at over $2 million would have to be turned down by three surplus lines carriers (whose
rates are not regulated) before they could turn to the state fund for coverage. For lower income
residents there needs to be an insurance subsidy from the state or federal government (as
discussed in Section 2) so that these homeowners can afford to purchase coverage.
Many insurers are likely to resist a comprehensive disaster insurance program because
they may fear the possibility of even larger losses than they have suffered to date and because
their current efforts may not be geared towards underwriting and marketing all perils policies.
Some note that if both wind and water damage were to be included in a homeowners policies the
losses from Hurricane Katrina to private insurers would be considerably higher. In order for
insurers to feel comfortable with such a program they would have to be able to protect
themselves against catastrophic losses either through private risk transfer instruments (e.g.
reinsurance, catastrophe bonds), State funds or federal reinsurance.
There will also be special needs facing small companies operating in a single state who
have smaller surplus than larger firms and are limited in their ability to diversify their risk. These
insurers may find that the variance in their losses increases by incorporating the flood and
earthquake risks as part of a homeowners policy. For example, a Louisiana insurance company
providing protection against hurricane damage might find the variance in losses to be higher than
it is today if both wind and water damage were covered under a homeowners policy. For these
companies to compete with larger firms they would have to be able to protect themselves against
catastrophic losses through either private or public-based risk transfer instruments that would not
26

price them out of the market. Remark: Dwight has a recent paper on single line insurers which
may be relevant to this issue.
These smaller firms need to be differentiated from single-state subsidiaries established by
some national insurer groups to help the parent company maintain or establish a high financial
rating. The parent company has the option to disown itself from this single state subsidiary
should it suffer a catastrophic loss (Grace, Klein and Liu 2006). There needs to be some
protection given to the policyholders in this case should the single-state subsidiary declare itself
to be insolvent.
Insurers who market a comprehensive disaster insurance policy face an additional
challenge in trying to convince homeowners that they are only paying for risks that they actually
face. One way for them to do this is to itemize the cost of different types of coverage on the
policy itself in much the way current homeowners or automobile insurance breaks up the cost for
different types of protection. If the Baylor family knew that it would be paying $3,000 for wind
coverage, $1500 for water coverage, $500 for fire coverage and $0 for earthquake coverage, it
would not complain about covering damage from seismic risk facing California homeowners.
Such an itemized list of coverage would also highlight the magnitude of risks that the Baylors
faced by living in their home, another role that insurance can play----a signal as to how
hazardous a particular place is likely to be. Whether or not this information will convince
consumers that it is worth purchasing all-perils coverage is an open question. If the price is very
high individuals will resist purchasing a policy voluntarily even if they know it is based on risk.

4. Open Issues for Future Research
There are a number of issues that need to be examined in order to determine whether a
comprehensive disaster insurance program has a chance of being implemented, whether an
27

alternative disaster insurance program is more appropriate or whether one should maintain the
status quo. A program of research is now being undertaken by the Wharton Risk Management
and Decision Processes Center in conjunction with the Insurance Information Institute and
Georgia State University that will be exploring these issues.
Mandatory vs. Voluntary Insurance
Should all property owners be required by the federal or state government to have
insurance coverage against natural disasters? Today, banks normally require homeowners and/or
commercial insurance as a condition for a mortgage. There will be some individuals who either
own their house outright or are not required by their bank to purchase insurance. One of the
open questions where we need better data are the number of uninsured homes in hazard prone
areas and the income distribution of those individuals who reside in them. If there are a
significant number of uninsured individuals, many of whom are in the middle and low income
brackets, the federal government is likely to provide financial 16assistance following the next
large-scale disaster. If the disaster occurs at a critical time in the political process it is almost
certainty that liberal relief will be forthcoming. One only has to look back at earlier disasters,
such as the Alaskan earthquake of March 1964 and Tropical Storm Agnes of June 1972 that
occurred during a Presidential election year, to remind oneself of the type of aid the Federal
government is capable of giving. In both disasters there were low interest loans and forgiveness
grants that actually resulted in individuals being financial better off after the disaster than before
the event. Moss (2002) documents the nature of government assistance for both natural disasters
and other risks.
If the prevailing view is that those residing in hazard-prone areas should be responsible
for covering their own losses then a mandatory insurance program would be appropriate. Many
16

For more details on the disaster assistance program following these two disasters see Kunreuther (1973).

28

states require automobile insurance as a condition for driving Disaster insurance could be treated
in a similar fashion by including the premium as part of a person’s property tax assessment. To
the extent that individuals misperceive the amount of assistance they will receive following a
disaster, requiring insurance may be viewed by them as a blessing should these individuals suffer
losses from a disaster. Following Hurricane Katrina uninsured victims complained about not
receiving more disaster assistance. They may not have known that under the Stafford Act, the
maximum amount of assistance to any individual or household for repairing damaged property is
$25,000 (FEMA 2006). Although the Small Business Administration (SBA) offers loans of up to
$200,000 for repairs to damaged primary residences, low income residents may not eligible for
them because of their inability to repay the loan.
Tax Write-offs for Uninsured Losses
One factor that needs to be considered when examining whether or not to make insurance
mandatory are the income tax provisions with respect to uninsured losses. At the federal level
homeowners who have losses from a disaster that exceed 10% of their income can deduct this
loss when filing their taxes.17 Homeowners in a high tax bracket who are not required to
purchase insurance because they don’t have a mortgage may determine that it makes economic
sense to be uninsured and use the tax write-off provision to cover a significant portion of their
losses following a major disaster (Kaplow 1992). Some states may also have similar provisions
in their tax codes which would provide additional savings to these uninsured victims by reduced
state income tax payments.

17

More details on write-off provisions on federal income tax can be found at
http://www.irs.gov/taxtopics/tc515.html

29

Mitigating Losses from Natural Disasters
To reduce losses from future disasters property owners need to protect themselves by
investing in cost-effective mitigation measures. The importance of well-enforced building codes
coupled with appropriate land use regulations cannot be overemphasized in this regard. These
measures are likely to be controversial since they limit economic development and growth in
hazard-prone areas and thus reduce the tax base for the State, and may increase housing costs.18
The construction and real estate sectors have traditionally opposed measures that increase the
price of a structure so that one needs to provide appropriate economic incentives for undertaking
these measures. Long-term loans tied to a mortgage for mitigating a structure coupled with
reduced insurance premiums are one way to make these measures financially attractive. The
example provided in Section 2 where the Baylors were far better off financially by investing in
roof shutters illustrates this point.
Providing Affordable Coverage
One of the principles guiding any disaster insurance program is that insurance premiums
reflect the risk. State insurance departments need to give insurers freedom to charge these rates
subject to solvency regulations that prevent undercapitalized insurers from charging unduly low
premiums with the intent of declaring bankruptcy should a catastrophic disaster occur. A key
challenge facing the states and federal government would be how to provide affordable coverage
and deal with the political fallout that will undoubtedly occur when insurance rates are increased
from their current levels. This is a major political problem and needs to be discussed openly with
the concerned stakeholders. When presenting this issue one needs to highlight the importance of
risk-based rates for encouraging property owners to invest in cost-effective mitigation measures

18

See Listokin and Hattis ( 2005) for more detail on the impact that building codes have had on housing
costs.

30

and the savings that will emerge from a reduced disaster assistance program following a
catastrophic event.
Protecting Insurers against Catastrophic Losses
One of the reasons that some insurers are now withdrawing coverage from areas that are
subject to large-scale losses is because they are concerned with the impact that a disaster will
have on their surplus should it occur in the next few years. As shown with the illustrative
example of the Naturesway insurance company, the premiums that an insurer collects in any
given year on its homeowners policy will only pay a fraction of the claims should a large number
of their insured properties suffer severe damage from a disaster.
An important issue that needs to be examined carefully is whether the private sector has
the ability to provide sufficient coverage against catastrophic losses or whether one needs to rely
on some type of public sector involvement at the State and/or federal level for financial
protection should a large-scale hurricane or earthquake occur. There have been a number of
recent papers that have addressed this issue in the context of natural disasters that suggest a
variety of different ways to address the problem.19 There is general agreement that one should
do everything one can to rely on the private sector to provide insurance protection but that there
may be capacity limitations which require public sector involvement.
In order to address this issue one needs to have a clearer understanding of the availability
of risk transfer mechanisms, such as reinsurance and catastrophe bonds, and their costs to
insurers relative to public sector options such as state catastrophe funds and federal reinsurance.
Given the need for short-term funds to help replenish surplus following a disaster there may be a
role that federal loans can play as noted by Jaffee and Russell (2006) or some type of

19

See Cummins (2006), Grace, Klein and Liu (2006), Harrington (2006), Jaffee and Russell (2006), and
Kunreuther (2006).

31

reinsurance contracts auctioned by the federal government as proposed by Lewis and Murdock
(1997). The federal government does have an easier time raising money in times of disaster than
does the private sector and has a comparative advantage in this sense. On the other hand, the
private insurance industry has had long-term experience in marketing coverage and paying
claims needs to be taken into account when evaluating alternative disaster insurance programs.

5. Summary and Conclusions
This paper proposes that we examine the feasibility of including earthquake and water
damage as part of a global homeowners policy for dealing with the catastrophic risk problem
from natural disasters. By undertaking such an analysis one is forced to address the question as
to who should pay for disasters and how can we encourage individuals to undertake protective
measures in advance of the event.
Two key principles underlying any disaster insurance program is that the rates reflect the
risk and that coverage is affordable. For lower income individuals it will be impossible to satisfy
the first principle without some type of subsidy from the public sector. There are also a set of
questions as to whether the private sector has the ability to cover losses from catastrophic
disasters on their own or will need some type of public sector involvement.
There are a set of related issues that have to be considered when developing any type of
disaster insurance program. These include the ability to assess the risk and the uncertainty of the
models, the appropriate role of regulation, balancing the concerns of the different stakeholders
concerned with this issue and the types of subsidies and back-up provision that can be offered by
the public sector. Finally we need a clear understanding of the political and social landscape as
well as how choices are actually made so as to develop a disaster insurance program as part of a
hazard management strategy that achieve its desired impacts. The challenges in this regard are
32

quite different today than they were in the 20th century because of the magnitude of losses from
these disasters in the past few years.

33

The 20 Most Costly Catastrophe Insurance Losses, 1970-2005
(18 of them occurred between 1990 and 2005; 10 of them occurred in the last 5 years)
U.S.$ Billion
(indexed to 2004)

Event

Victims
(Dead and missing)

Year

Country

1

40-55

Hurricane Katrina

1,281*

2005

USA

2

32.4

9/11 Attacks

3,025

2001

USA

3

21.50

Hurricane Andrew

43

1992

USA, Bahamas

4

17.80

Northridge Quake

61

1994

USA

5

11.00

Hurricane Ivan

124

2004

USA, Caribbean et al

6

8.00

Hurricane Charley

24

2004

USA, Caribbean et all

7

7.80

Typhoon Mireille

51

1991

Japan

8

6.7

Winterstorm Daria

95

1990

France, UK et al

9

6.6

Winterstorm Lothar

110

1999

France, Switzerland et al

10

6.4

Hurricane Hugo

71

1989

Puerto Rico, USA et al

11

4-7*

Hurricane Rita

119

2005

USA

12

5.0

Hurricane Frances

38

2004

USA, Bahamas

13

5.0

Seaquake, Tsunami

280,000

2004

Indonesia, Thailand et al

14

5.0

Storms and floods

22

1987

France, UK et al

15

4.6

Winterstorm Vivian

64

1990

Western/Central Europe

16

4.6

Typhoon Bart

26

1999

Japan

17

4.1

Hurricane Georges

600

1998

USA, Caribbean

18

4.0

Hurricane Jeanne

3,034

2004

USA, Caribbean et al

19

3.6

Typhon Songda

45

2004

Japan, South Korea

20

3.4

Tropical Storm Alison

41

2001

USA

Rank

Sources: Wharton Risk Center with data from Swiss Re, Insurance Information Institute and press releases (*estimations)

34

4

REFERENCES
Camerer, Colin and Kunreuther, Howard (1989). Decision Processes for Low Probability
Events: Policy Implications. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 8: 565-592.
Cummins, David (2006) “Should the Government Provide Insurance for Catastrophe?”
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 88: 337-79.
Emanuel, Kerry (2005) “Increasing destructiveness of tropical cyclones over the past
30 years” Nature 436:686-88.
Froot, Kenneth and Posner, Steven (2002) “ The Pricing of Event Risks with Parameter
Uncertainty Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Theory 27:153-65.
Freeman, Paul and Kunreuther, Howard (1997) Managing Environmental Risk through
Insurance. AEI Press (softback), Kluwer Academic Publishers (hardback).
Freeman, Paul and Scott, Kathryn (2005) “Comparative Analysis of Large Scale
Catastrophe Compensation Schemes’ in Catastrophic Risks and Insurance Paris:
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) July.
Grace, Martin F.,. Klein, Robert and Kleindorfer, Paul (2004). "Homeowners Insurance
with Bundled Catastrophe Coverage", Journal of Risk and Insurance, Vol. 7:3
September.
Grace, Martin, Klein, Robert and Liu, Zhiyong (2006) “Mother Nature on the
Rampage: Implications for Insurance Markets” Paper presented at the NBER Insurance
Workshop Cambridge, MA February 2006.
Greenwald, Bruce and Stiglitz, Joseph (1990) “Asymmetric Information and the New
Theory of the Firm; Financial Constraints and Risk Behavior,” American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings 80:160-65.
Grossi, Patricia and Howard Kunreuther (2005), Catastrophe Modeling: A New
Approach to Managing Risk. New York: Springer.
Harrington, Scott (2006) “Rethinking Disaster Policy After Hurricane Katrina” This
Volume
Hartwig, Robert and Claire Wilkinson, (2005), Public/Private Mechanisms Handling
Catastrophic Risk in the United States, Insurance Information Institute, New York, N.Y.
October.
Hayes, Thomas and Sabada, Shama (2004) National Flood Insurance Program: Actuarial
Rate Review Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) November 30.

35

Henriet, Dominique and Michel-Kerjan, Erwann (2006) “Optimal Risk-Sharing under
Dual Asymmetry of Information and Market Power: A Unifying Approach”, Wharton
Risk Center Working Paper, June.
Hogarth, Robin and Kunreuther, Howard (1989) “Risk, Ambiguity and Insurance”
Journal of Risk andUncertainty 2:5-35.
Hood, Jim (2005) “A Policy of Deceit” New York Times November 19 p. A27.
Huber, O., Wider, R. and Huber, O. (1997) “Active Information Search and Complete
Information Presentation in Naturalistic Risky Decision Tasks” Acta Psychologica 95:1529.
Jaffee, Dwight (2006) “Commentary on J. David Cummins paper , “Should the
Government Provide Insurance for Catastrophe?” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Review 88 pp. 381-386
Jaffee, Dwight and Russell, Thomas (2006) “Should Governments Provide Catastrophe
Insurance?” Economists’ Voice pp. 1-8 April.
Kahneman, Daniel and Tversky, Amos (1979), “Prospect theory: An analysis of decision
under risk.” Econometrica 47(2):263-291.
Kaplow, Louis. (1992) "Income Tax Deductions for Losses as Insurance," American
Economic Review 82: 1013-17
King, Rawle (2006) “Hurricanes and Disaster Risk Financing Through Insurance: Challenges
and Policy Options” Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service January 27.
Kunreuther (1968) “The Case for Comprehensive Disaster Insurance” Journal of Law
and Economics April.
Kunreuther, Howard. (1973). Recovery from Natural Disasters: Insurance or Federal
Aid?. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.
Kunreuther, Howard (1989) “The Role of Actuaries and Underwriters in Insuring
Ambiguous Risks” Risk Analysis, 9:319-28.
Kunreuther, Howard Hogarth, Robin, Meszaros, Jacqueline (1993), "Insurer Ambiguity
and Market Failure," Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 7: 71-87.
Kunreuther, Howard and Richard Roth, Sr. (1998), Paying the Price: The Status and Role
of Insurance Against Natural Disasters in the United States, Washington, D.C: Joseph
Henry Press.
Kunreuther, Howard, Novemsky, Nathan, and Kahneman, Daniel (2001). “Making Low
Probabilities Useful”, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 23:2, pp. 103-120.
36

Kunreuther, Howard (2006), “Comprehensive Disaster Insurance: Has its Time Come?”
in Risk and Disaster: Lessons from Hurricane Katrina. University of Pennsylvania Press,
Philadelphia, PA.
Kunreuther, Howard and Mark Pauly (in press) "Rules rather than Discretion: Lessons
from Hurricane Katrina Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
Lecomte, Eugene and Karen Gahagan, (1998), “Hurricane Insurance Protection in
Florida” in Howard Kunreuther and Richard Roth, Sr., eds., Paying the Price: The Status
and Role of Insurance Against Natural Disasters in the United States, Washington, D.C.:
Joseph Henry Press: 97-124.
Lewis, Christopher and Kevin C. Murdock (1996) “The Role of Government Contracts
in Discretionary Reinsurance Markets for Natural Disasters” , Journal of Risk and
Insurance 63: 567-597.
Listokin, D., D. B. Hattis, and B. T. Inc, (2005) “Building Codes and Housing” ,
Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research 8: 21-67.
Litan, Robert (2006). “Sharing and Reducing the Financial Risks of Future “MegaCatastrophes”, Issues in Economic Policy No.4, Brookings Institute Washington, DC
March.
Magat, Wes. Viscusi, W. Kip and Huber, Joel (1987). “Risk-dollar Tradeoffs, Risk
Perceptions, and Consumer Behavior,” In W. Viscusi & W. Magat (eds.), Learning about
Risk (p. 83-97). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
Michel-Kerjan, Erwann and Nathalie de Marcellis (2006) “Public-Private Programs for
Covering against Extreme Events: The Impact of Information Distribution on RiskSharing” Asia-Pacific Journal of Risk and Insurance, 1: 21-49.
Moss, David (2002) When All Else Fails: Government as the Ultimate Risk Manager
Cambridge: Harvard.
Pasterick, Edward T. (1998), “The National Flood Insurance Program.” in Howard
Kunreuther and Richard J. Roth, Sr. (eds.), Paying the Price: The Status and Role of
Insurance Against Natural Disasters in the United States. Washington, DC: Joseph
Henry Press.
Pauly, Mark (1968), ‘The economics of moral hazard: Comment’. American Economic
Review 58, 531–536.
Risk Management Solutions (2006) U.S. and Caribbean Hurricane Activity Rates
March.

37

Roth, Richard Jr. (1998) “Earthquake Insurance in the United States” in Howard
Kunreuther and Richard J. Roth, Sr. (eds.), Paying the Price: The Status and Role of
Insurance Against Natural Disasters in the United States. Washington, DC: Joseph
Henry Press.
Roy, A.D. (1952). Safety-first and the holding of assets. Econometrica 20:431—449.
Stone, James (1973). A theory of capacity and the insurance of catastrophe risks: Part I
and Part II. Journal of Risk and Insurance 40:231-243 (Part I) and 40:339-355 (Part II).
Towers Perrin (2005) “Hurricane Katrina: Analysis of the Impact on the Insurance
Industry.” Available online at
http://www.towersperrin.com/tillinghast/publications/reports/Hurricane_Katrina/katrina.p
df
U.S. Government Accountability Office (2006) Federal Emergency Management
Agency: Challenges Facing the National Flood Insurance Program Washington, DC:
GAO-06-174T
Wharton Risk Center (2005), TRIA and Beyond: Terrorism Risk Financing in the U.S.
Philadelphia, Pa: Wharton Risk Management and Decision Processes Center
Williams, John and King, Carole Ann (2006) “2006 Annual Hurricane Study: Shake, Rattle and
Roar” Oldwick, NJ; A.M Best Company, Inc. June.

38

