                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY: TRACING THE FLOW OF BASIC
                  RESEARCH THROUGH MANUFACTURING AND TRADE

                                             James D. Adams
                                           J. Roger Clemmons

                                          Working Paper 12459
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12459


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation has generously supported this research. We thank Nancy Bayers and
Henry Small of the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) for assistance with the ISI data that we use in
this paper. We thank Scott Stern and participants at seminars at the National Bureau of Economic Research
and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute for comments and suggestions that have improved this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2006 by James D. Adams and J. Roger Clemmons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Science and Industry: Tracing the Flow of Basic Research Through Manufacturing and Trade
James D. Adams and J. Roger Clemmons
NBER Working Paper No. 12459
August 2006
JEL No. D2, O3

                                            ABSTRACT


        This paper describes flows of basic research through the U.S. economy and explores their
implications for scientific output at the industry and field level. The time period is the late 20th
century. This paper differs from others in its use of measures of science rather than technology.
Together its results provide a more complete picture of the structure of basic research flows than was
previously available.
        Basic research flows are high within petrochemicals and drugs and within a second cluster
composed of software and communications. Flows of chemistry, physics, and engineering are
common throughout industry; biology and medicine are almost confined to petrochemicals and
drugs, and computer science is nearly as limited to software and communications. In general, basic
research flows are more concentrated within scientific fields than within industries.
        The paper also compares effects of different types of basic research on scientific output. The
main finding is that the academic spillover effect significantly exceeds that of industrial spillovers
or industry basic research. Finally, within field effects exceed between field effects, while the
within- and between industry effects are equal. Therefore, scientific fields limit basic research flows
more than industries.


James D. Adams
Department of Economics
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
3406 Russel Sage Laboratory
Troy, NY 12180-3590
and NBER
adamsj@rpi.edu

J. Roger Clemmons
Institute for Child Health Policy
College of Medicine
PO Box 100147
Gainesville, FL 32610-0147
jrc@ichp.ufl.edu
    1. Introductory Remarks

    Using a new body of evidence, this paper describes flows of basic research through the U.S.

economy and explores their implications for scientific output in industries and fields. Besides

the description of basic research flows, the analysis specifies the role of industry and field

barriers in limiting R&D spillovers to industries and fields. To undertake the study we use data

on scientific papers written in firms and universities as well as citations made and received by

the papers. This article differs from others in its examination of flows of scientific knowledge,

rather than flows of applied technology.

    Findings are as follows. Basic research flows are most intense in a cluster of petrochemicals

and drugs and in a second cluster composed of software and communications. Flows of

chemistry, physics, and engineering are general throughout industry; biology and medicine are

almost confined to drugs and petrochemicals, and computer science is nearly as limited to

software and communications. In general, basic research flows are more concentrated within

fields than within industries.

    In addition we assess comparative effects of different basic research flows, primarily R&D

spillovers, on output of scientific papers in an industry and field. The measure of effect is the

elasticity of scientific papers with respect to basic research flows. We find that the academic

spillover elasticity exceeds the industrial spillover elasticity and the elasticity of the industry

R&D stock. For academic and industrial spillovers we find that the within field elasticity

exceeds the between field elasticity. Finally, the within and between industry elasticities for the

industrial spillover are roughly equal. These findings form the basis for our claim that field is

more a barrier to knowledge flows than industry is.
    Both descriptively and in terms of the explanation of scientific output, we find that aggregate

R&D spillovers are a more comprehensive measure of knowledge flows than citation rates. This

is because spillovers capture frequency of citation events as well as size of the cited R&D stock.

All this is despite much recent emphasis on citation rates as a measure of knowledge flows.

    The prior literature mostly consists of studies of flows of applied research among industries

and technologies. Terleckyj (1974) and Griliches (1979) emphasize the importance of

interindustry flows for productivity growth. Using data on patents and R&D performed in lines

of business owned by large U.S. firms in 1974, Scherer (1982a) computes a matrix of

interindustry technology flows. Using this he reassigns firms’ patents from industries where

R&D is performed to industries of use, in order to calculate flows of R&D dollars between

industries. The results indicate that most R&D is used outside the industry. Scherer (1982b)

shows that R&D “used” has a significant effect on labor productivity while R&D “performed”

does not. Using a different sample and method Griliches and Lichtenberg (1984) find similar

results, though with a larger role for R&D performed. Mueller and Culbertson (1986) find

something similar, that extra-industry innovations drive productivity gains in food processing.

    Interindustry flows of technology play a significant role in industrial organization, economic

history, urban economics, and management. General Purpose Technologies or GPTs (Bresnahan

and Trajtenberg, 1995) are a dramatic case of interindustry technology flows. GPTs are defined

as having wide applicability to downstream sectors and as increasing the returns to both earlier

and subsequent technologies. Rosenberg (1963) offers an example of an early GPT, the machine

tools industry in the 19th century U.S. economy. In a related study Rosenberg (1979) confirms

the broad role of capital goods and materials suppliers as sources of technology flows to user

industries in the past.




                                                 2
    Jacobs (1969) emphasizes the flow of ideas across industries within cities, as well as the

guiding role of industry diversity in urban prosperity. Glaeser et al. (1992) and Henderson et al.

(1995) find empirical support for this view, in that initially diversified cities exhibit faster growth

of employment and wages. In management studies, Klevorick et al. (1995) find that half the

industries in the Yale Survey on Industrial Research and Development report sizable in-flows of

technology from other industries. Likewise Von Hippel (1988) finds that innovation often

begins with customers and suppliers located in different industries from the manufacturer.

    Other research explores limits to knowledge flows thrown up by industries, technologies, and

sciences. Differences in scientific employment bound R&D spillovers between industries in

Adams (1990). Even within firms technology groups are barriers to idea flows in Adams and

Jaffe (1996) and Adams (1999). Patent classes limit rates of patent citation in Jaffe and

Trajtenberg (1999), and science fields limit rates of science citation in Adams, Clemmons, and

Stephan (2004 and forthcoming). Industry and field barriers to knowledge flows also arise in

this paper’s study of basic research flows through the U.S. economy1.

    The rest of the paper consists of four sections. Section 2 discusses measurement of mean

citation rates to basic research and aggregate spillovers of basic research. In comparing the two

statistics it argues for the spillover as the more comprehensive measure of the influence of ideas.

Next the section discusses data that we have collected to measure citation rates and spillovers.

The section concludes with descriptive tables that characterize and compare academic and

industrial science. Section 3 presents graphs and descriptive tables of the citation rates and

spillovers. The discussion considers flows of basic research to firms that derive from


1
  Geographic restrictions on idea flows lie beyond the limits of this paper. Keller (2002) reviews the literature of
international R&D spillovers and analyzes intra- and inter-industry aspects of the spillovers. Peri (2005) studies
resistance to patent citation imposed by region, country, language, and distance. Adams (2002) discusses and
provides estimates of localization of knowledge spillovers within countries.


                                                           3
universities and from other firms. The section concludes with Herfindahl indexes of

concentration of the spillovers. The explanation of scientific output at the industry and field

levels is the topic of Section 4. Output is expressed as a function of industry research, academic

spillovers, and industrial spillovers. Regression analysis is then undertaken using a panel of

industries, science fields, and years. The equations estimate elasticities of scientific output with

respect to industry research as well as the R&D spillovers. A final table tests for equality of the

elasticities. Section 5 concludes.

   2. Citation Rates and R&D Spillovers
       2.1. Concepts
       The analysis relies on papers and citations made by industrial researchers in firms and on

R&D stocks of cited firms and universities. Since we are interested in industry and field effects

we assign citing papers to the primary industry of the employer. This is the industry of largest

sales in Compustat, our source for industrial R&D. We assign cited papers to the primary

industry of employers when a firm is cited and to the academic sector if a university is cited.

Papers are assigned to the scientific field of the journal where they appear. Since citations link

citing and cited papers together, they are able to measure influence only among active

researchers.

       In this paper we report two citation-based statistics. First, we report mean citation rates

averaged by industry, field, and year. In the underlying data individual citation rates are

numbers of citations made by papers in a specific citing firm, field, and year, to papers in

specific cited firms or universities, fields, and years, divided by the number of papers in the cited

group. The mean citation rate is the simple average of the individual rates by industry, field, and

year. By analogy with search theory, the mean rate is the average propensity to draw on




                                                  4
knowledge stocks of cited institutions. As we have seen, citations require sufficient human

capital and emphasis on science in firms for publication to occur. Besides this, scientifically

driven citations assume sufficient relevance of cited research to make it worthwhile to learn

about the research of others.

       However, as a spillover measure, citation rates have several shortcomings. While they

capture the propensity to cite, this is contingent on citations having occurred. Also, the citation

rate fails to capture frequency so the same mean rate can apply once, twice, or a thousand times.

And finally, the citation rate does not consider the scale of the cited knowledge stock.

       The aggregate R&D spillover gets around many of these shortcomings. This is the sum

of citation rates by citing industry, field and year multiplied by stocks of R&D in the cited group.

Zero citation rates diminish the spillover and are implicitly taken into account through the

frequency of citation events. The product of the citation rates times the cited R&D stocks

incorporates size of the cited knowledge stock. In this way the aggregate R&D spillover answers

several objections to the mean citation rate.

       As a proxy for underlying knowledge, R&D stocks have some advantages. For a start,

they provide an historical record of research. This activity goes beyond patents or papers, since

learning from past research effort could be important whether it is published or not. And besides

R&D stocks capture size of effort in anticipation of future impact and are likely to be correlated

with that impact. R&D gets around nominal shifts in the patent-R&D ratio, a problem that

afflicts citation stocks. The ratio could decline due to a shift towards more important inventions.

If so R&D would remain profitable despite the fall in the patent-R&D ratio (Lanjouw and

Schankerman, 2004). Also, in science the basic research stock is a forecast by granting agencies

of future impact of the research. While these arguments in favor of R&D stocks are not perfect,




                                                 5
they help to explain why R&D might perform better in this role than patent counts (Scherer,

1982a). We turn now to definitions of the citation rate and the aggregate R&D spillover.

         The individual citation rates in this paper are defined by citing and cited institutions,

fields, and years. Citing institutions are firms; cited institutions are firms or universities. Notice

that classification into industries is immediate from the primary industries of firms.

         The raw citation rate is c klf g y g f d yd / n lf d yd . Superscript k stands for the citing firm while l

stands for the cited university or firm. Subscripts f g and y g indicate citing field and year; f d

and y d indicate cited field and year. The numerator c klf g y g f d yd counts citations made by

firm k papers in citing field and year f g and y g to university or firm l papers in cited field and

year f d and y d . This is divided by n lf d yd , the total number of papers in firm or university l in f d

and y d that could in principle be cited.

         The mean citation rate U is defined over sets of citing and cited institutions, fields, and

years:



(1)               U
                        >¦ ¦k    fg   ¦ ¦¦ ¦
                                       yg       l    fd    yd
                                                                (c klf g y g f d y d / nlf d y d )   @   .
                                                     N


The term N is the number of raw citation rates. Examples of the set of institutions are firms in

the same industry and firms not in the same industry. Examples of the set of fields are fields that

are the same and fields that are not the same, and so on. Equation (1) is the average propensity

to cite, given the definitions of citing and citing institutions, fields, and years.

         The aggregate R&D spillover from universities to firms is the sum,

(2)               SA     ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦¦ ¦
                            k    fg    yg   l       fd    yd
                                                               (c klf g yg f d yd / n lf d yd )R lf d , yd 1


                                                                   6
This is the sum of individual citation rates times academic R&D stocks R lf d , y d 1 in cited

university l and field f d lagged one year yd  1 . The definition is again flexible; it covers

observations where firms in a specific industry and field cite universities in a specific field, and

so forth.

        The source for university R&D is the CASPAR database (National Science Foundation,

various years). We use CASPAR to construct individual R&D stocks by university, field, and

year. In turn we use the stocks and citation rates to construct R&D spillovers from universities

to specific firms and fields. The university data have two advantages over Compustat, our

source for firm R&D. University R&D is available by field over a dependably long period of

time. Second, and consistent with our interest in basic knowledge flows university research

concerns science rather than general R&D.

        Compustat records total R&D expense by a firm. It makes no distinction between basic

research and applied research and development; and within basic research it makes no distinction

among sciences. To obtain a rough estimate of the aggregate R&D spillover from industry under

these constraints, we make two adjustments. Since we lack R&D by cited field we use the

citation rate from a citing firm and field to a cited firm averaged over cited fields. In addition we

multiply the total stock of R&D in the cited firm by the ratio of basic research expenditure to

total R&D in its primary industry, since our interest is in basic research. The basic-total research

ratio is about 0.05 in the industries that we study. The aggregate R&D spillover from firms is

therefore:

(3)             SI    ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦¦
                         k   fg   yg   l   yd
                                                (c kly g y d / n lyd )b j R lyd 1




                                                          7
The bar placed over the citation rate indicates the average over cited fields. Besides this b j is the

basic research ratio in the primary industry j of the cited firm, and R yl d 1 is the total R&D stock

of the cited firm. For example, suppose that engineering papers in firm X, located in

communications services, cite papers of firm Y, located in software and business services.

Then c XY
       f g y g yd
                  / nYyd is the average citation rate by engineering papers in X to papers in Y averaged


across cited fields, R Yj,1 is the lagged stock of R&D in Y, and b j is the ratio of basic research to

total R&D in software and business services. Equation (3) represents our best measure of the

spillover from other firms, though the fact that we cannot individually measure basic research in

cited fields inevitably introduces errors in the spillover.

         Finally, the lagged basic research stock R K , y d 1 of industry K is

(4)               R K , y d 1   ¦   lK
                                           b K R lK , yd 1

We use (4) to represent basic research that is privately available to firms in an industry.

      2.2. Data Sources
      The data consist of 230 thousand papers written in the top 200 U.S. R&D firms in 1998 as

ranked by their R&D, and 2.43 million papers of the top 110 U.S. universities. The papers were

published during 1981-1999. The top 200 firms make about one million citations to papers of

top 110 universities as well as 600 thousand citations to papers of top 200 firms, including

themselves. We remove self citations from a firm to itself from the data.

       The source for the papers and citations data is ISI, the Institute for Scientific Information, in

Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Papers appear in more than 7,000 journals. Each journal is

assigned to one science field. The main alternative to this method is to assign papers according

to authors’ departmental affiliations. But this strategy fails because information on authors’


                                                              8
departments is incomplete2.         The database is described in Adams, Black, Clemmons, and

Stephan (2005) and in Adams, Clemmons, and Stephan (2004, and forthcoming).

    For the university R&D stocks in the academic R&D spillover (see (2)) we use research

expenditures by university, field, and year from the CASPAR database (National Science

Foundation, various years). We express expenditures in millions of dollars, deflate using the

implicit GDP deflator (1992=1.0), and accumulate the research stocks over the previous eight

years using a depreciation rate of 0.15. For the firm R&D stocks in the industrial R&D spillover

(see (3)) we use total R&D expense in Compustat (McGraw-Hill, various years). We express

R&D expense in millions of 1992 dollars and calculate an R&D stock over the previous eight

years using a depreciation rate of 15 percent. We employ published data on the ratio of basic to

total research by industry from 1985-1999 from National Science Foundation (Research and

Development in Industry, various years) and multiply this times firms’ R&D stocks in each

industry to calculate an indicator of the firm’s stock of basic research as this enters the spillover

(3). The industry stock of basic research (4) is this indicator summed over firms in the same

industry.

    To undertake the regression analysis of Section 4 we extract a three-dimensional panel from

the data. The panel consists of 11 industry groups, up to six main sciences, and up to 12 years

ranging from 1988-1999. The industry groups, which include the top 200 R&D firms according

to their primary industry in Compustat, are as follows: petrochemicals (petroleum refining,

chemicals excluding drugs and biotechnology, rubber, and plastics); drugs and biotechnology;

metals (primary and fabricated); machinery (except computers); computers; electrical equipment;


2
 To explore this alternative we assigned all papers of Harvard University to one of the science fields in our data
using address information. About a third of the papers could not be assigned; this caused us to abandon the address
assignment method.


                                                         9
instruments; communications services; software and business services; miscellaneous

(agriculture, food & tobacco, furniture, paper, miscellaneous manufacturing, and retail and

wholesale trade). Clearly the industry groups extend well beyond manufacturing.

   We have seen that the firm’s primary industry is its industry of largest sales. It is not the

firm’s only industry, since large corporations usually span multiple industries. In work using

plants owned by chemical firms in the Longitudinal Establishment Database of the U.S. Bureau

of the Census, it has been shown that the plants cut across a large number of industries (Adams

and Jaffe, 1996; Adams, 1999). Since this is the norm rather than the exception for large firms,

the fact that companies exceed the bounds of a single industry may explain why industry is a

weak barrier to basic research flows in the empirical work below.

   Sciences included in the panel are biology, chemistry, computer science, engineering,

medicine, and physics. These six fields account for nearly all papers in industry. The time

period is 1988-1999. Starting the panel in 1988 allows for a build-up of R&D spillovers and

R&D stocks as described in equations (1)-(4). The regression panel includes the dependent

variable—numbers of scientific papers written in an industry, field, and year; and independent

variables consisting of industry, field, and year fixed effects, the university and industry

spillovers, and industry R&D stock.

    Table I reports the distribution of industrial papers by field and compares this with the

distribution of academic papers. Distributions for the 11 industry groups form the rows;

distributions for the entire industrial and academic sectors appear as the bottom two rows.

Columns report total papers in an industry and sector and percentages of the papers in the six

science fields. For the top three sciences in an industry we highlight the data and issue ranks in

parentheses. Drugs and biotechnology publishes the most scientific papers, but petrochemicals,


                                                 10
electrical equipment, transportation equipment, telecommunications services, and software and

business services also publish in large amounts. Science publication is notably scarce in metals,

machinery, and in miscellaneous agriculture and manufacturing.

         Within drugs and biotechnology, biology, medicine, and chemistry rank first, second, and

third. But this ranking is not representative of industry. Among industries biology is a top three

field only in drugs and biotechnology, and petrochemicals. Medicine is in the top three only in

drugs and biotechnology and instruments. In contrast engineering ranks in the top three in every

industry except drugs and biotechnology with physics and chemistry nearly as prevalent. This

shows up in the second to last row, which reports the science distribution for all industries.

Engineering and physics tie for first; biology ranks third; and chemistry ranks fourth. The

academic distribution differs considerably from this: biology and medicine account for 68

percent of papers. This simply reflects differences in the comparative shares of the scientific

workforce in the two sectors. Engineers, physicists, and chemists dominate industrial papers

while life scientists dominate academic papers. However, this difference is surely an

understatement, because many industrial researchers, and especially engineers, do not publish or

cite3.

         Industry and field could both restrict basic research flows. To this end, Table II examines

differences in citation rates and R&D spillovers within and between fields and industries.

Within field, between field, and total dimensions are reported in columns. Rows contain citation

statistics arranged by industry. Across columns, citation rates are higher within fields than

between them. In addition 72 percent of the academic spillover and 60 percent of the industrial


3
  See Stephan, Sumell, Black, and Adams (2004), Table 2 for a description of the placement of PhD students to
firms during the years 1997-1999. Forty-nine percent were in engineering, 11 percent were in chemistry, seven
percent were in computer science, and six percent were in physics: thus 73 percent overall were in natural science.
Only 10 percent were in biology and medicine.


                                                         11
spillover occur within fields. Citation rates to other firms are higher than to universities,

possibly because industrial papers are more similar and more relevant than academic papers.

Citation occurs at almost the same rate between industries than within them, but R&D spillovers

between industries account for 64 percent of the total. These differences in sources of spillovers

suggest that field may obstruct flows of basic research to a larger extent than industry. It is

noteworthy as well, that academic spillovers are twice as large as industrial spillovers. This gap

would be even larger if the citation rate to industrial science were not the higher of the two.

   3. Descriptive Findings
       3.1. Interactions with Universities
       This section describes the industry and field structure of the citation statistics. To

visualize this structure we rely on three-dimensional column graphs. In graphs of this kind,

discontinuous dimensions (industry and field) map into a continuous variable (citation statistics).

For convenience we abridge the 11 industries in Table I to six. We do so by forming three

aggregates: metals, machinery, and miscellaneous agriculture and manufacturing; computers,

communications, and software; and electrical equipment and instruments. The results for firm-

university interactions are shown in Figures I and II.

       Figure I shows high rates of citation to computer science, intermediate rates to chemistry,

engineering, and physics; and low citation rates to biology and medicine. But as we have seen,

citation rates do not capture frequency or the size of cited R&D. Figure II, which we rotate

slightly in a clockwise direction, shows how important this distinction is. It shows that the

structure of academic spillovers is completely different from the structure of citation rates in

Figure I. The citation rate to computer science is high, but its spillover is low because of a low

frequency of citation rate events and a small R&D stock. Figure II shows that R&D spillovers of




                                                 12
biology and medicine are huge in drugs and biotechnology despite the fact that citation rates to

biology and medicine are low. There is thus only a weak correlation between citation rates and

spillovers. Finally note the cluster of secondary peaks of academic spillovers from computer

science, engineering, and physics, to computers, etc. and electrical equipment, etc.

       Table III takes a close look at the university-industry spillover structure. It shows the top

four academic spillovers by industry and by citing and cited field. Besides the spike of

biological and medical spillovers as well as their near-confinement to drugs, etc., the table

uncovers spikes in petrochemicals, electrical equipment, transportation equipment,

communications services, and software and business services. Table III indicates that 39 of the

44 top spillovers occur in the same field, showing in a different way the importance of field as a

limiting factor in basic research flows.

       3.2. Interactions with Other Firms
       We undertook a similar exercise for citation rates and spillovers from other firms. Figure

III, which is again rotated slightly, shows citation rates by citing industry and cited industrial

field. Compared with Figure I overall rates are higher and more nearly equal across fields and

industries. Figure IV presents aggregate R&D spillovers from other firms. Not surprisingly,

compared to Figure II, industrial spillovers are less dominated by biology and medicine.

Another aspect of Figure IV is the significant cluster of industrial spillovers in computers, etc.

and in electrical equipment, etc.

       Figures V and VI study interactions among industries. Figure V presents interindustry

citation rates. Citation rates to science-intensive industries—petrochemicals, drugs, etc.,

computers, etc., and electrical equipment, etc.—are low compared with citation rates to metals,




                                                  13
machinery, and miscellaneous, a group that does little in the way science4. But Figure VI shows

that spillovers from metals, etc. are quite small compared with other industries. This again

reflects on the deficiencies of the citation rate as a spillover indicator. In Figure VI spillovers

from drugs, etc., show up almost entirely in petrochemicals and drugs. In contrast spillovers

from petrochemicals are flat but widely dispersed. This is also true of spillovers from computers

etc.

          Like Table III, Table IV shows the top six industrial R&D spillovers by citing and cited

industry and field. As one would expect this list is dominated by chemistry, physics, and

engineering, with biology and medicine present mostly in petrochemicals and drugs. Within-

field spillovers account for 54 of the top 72 spillovers. This is a smaller proportion than in Table

III and suggests that industrial science is more applied, eclectic, and interdisciplinary than

academic science.

       3.3. Concentration of R&D Spillovers
       While the figures and tables are helpful in visualizing particular spikes and clusters in

aggregate R&D spillovers it would helpful to quantify concentration of R&D spillovers to

industries. To this end we calculate Herfindahl indexes of concentration based on shares of

R&D spillovers to each industry. To begin with, we compute a field cited index for recipient

industry K :

(5)                H KF   ¦   f FdK
                                       s 2fK ,




4
 Smaller bodies of knowledge could readily exhibit higher citation rates. To see why assume that citations to
different sciences yield a marginal benefit that diminishes at a similar rate with respect to search over articles and
assume that the constant marginal cost of making a citation is similar across sciences. Given these assumptions the
equilibrium citation rate to smaller literatures will be higher than to larger ones. Of course, if the marginal cost is
higher for more technical papers then it would follow that small but highly technical literatures would exhibit lower
citation rates.


                                                          14
We calculate (5) for both academic and industrial spillovers. Here FdK stands for the set of fields

that K cites and s fK is the share of field f in spillovers to K . Since there are six fields the lower

bound on (5) occurs when all shares equal 1/6|0.17. Squaring and summing the shares, (5) also

equals 0.17.

      In the case of industrial spillovers we define an industries cited index for citing industry K :

(6)               H KI   ¦   jI dK
                                      s 2jK

Here I dK is the set of industries that K cites; s iK is the share of industry i in spillovers to K . The

lower bound occurs when all shares equal 1/11|0.09. Squaring and summing the shares, (6) also

equals 0.09.

      Table V displays the results. Rows indicate citing industry; columns indicate the Herfindahl

indexes. The first two columns use the field-cited index H KF as defined in (5). Drugs, etc. and

machinery, etc. are the two most concentrated industries. In drugs most spillovers derive from

biology and medicine. In machinery most spillovers derive from chemistry and physics. The

third column reports the Herfindahl index H KI (6) of spillovers among cited industries. The two

most concentrated industries are drugs, etc., and communications services. Firms in these

industries receive most of their spillovers from the same or a nearby industry. This is partly

because of their fields of specialization: biology and medicine are concentrated in drugs and

petrochemicals, and computer science, engineering, and physics are concentrated in

communications services and electrical equipment.

4. Explaining Scientific Output in Industries and Fields
      Section 3 has described citation statistics and it has mapped points of origin and destination

of basic research flows within the U.S. economy. The rest of the empirical work tries to explain



                                                   15
the output of scientific papers using the stock of basic research in an industry, academic and

industrial spillovers, and fixed effects. We estimate the following knowledge production

function, expressed in logarithms:

                 ln( papersijt ) D 0  D tc Dt  D Ic D I  D cD F  E R ln( Rit )  E A ln(S A,ijt ) 
(7)
                     E ZA [ Z A u ln(S A,ijt )]  E I ln(S I ,ijt )  E ZI [ Z I u ln(S I ,ijt )]  u ijt

Terms entering (7) are

                 papers ijt —number of scientific papers (or citation-weighted papers) written in

                 industry i and field j at time t

                 Dt , DI , DF —vectors of year, industry, and field fixed effects

                 Ri ,t 1 —stock of basic research in industry i at time t  1

                  S Aijt , S Iijt —spillovers of basic research from academia and industry (plus 0.001)

                 to industry i and field j at time t

                 Z A —dummy indicator equal to 1 when S Aijt >0 and 0 otherwise

                 Z I —dummy indicator equal to 1 when S Iijt >0 and 0 otherwise

                 u ijt —normally distributed error term

Since we fit the logarithm of papers on the logarithms of the R&D indicators, the E coefficients

are elasticities. Also, we add 0.001 to each spillover in order to take logarithms when it is zero.

For this reason we introduce interaction terms involving Z A and Z I times the logarithms of the

spillovers. As we shall see the interaction terms handle cases where the spillover is zero.

      We estimate (7) on the panel data set discussed in Section 2. This is arranged according to

industry, field, and year to address the industry and field relationships of interest. After missing

values are excluded the data include 747 observations. We vary (7) by dropping fixed effects, by



                                                              16
dropping interaction terms, by varying the sample, and by switching between papers and

citation-weighted papers. Table VI contains basic specifications. Throughout, the regressions

report robust standard errors5. Notice as well that we tag key variables with their E coefficients

for tests of equality restrictions among coefficients later on.

       Equations VI.1 to VI.3 omit fixed effects. VI.1 fits a simple regression of the logarithm of

scientific papers on the logarithm of the industry’s basic research stock. This elasticity is

positive and highly significant. VI.2 adds logarithms of the academic and industrial research

spillovers to VI.1. This increases R2 from 0.35 to 0.87 but causes a sharp drop in the elasticity of

industry basic research. The industry stock is however, a crude proxy for past basic research,

and this may result in a downward bias when spillovers are included. The spillover elasticities

are positive and highly significant; the academic spillover has more than three times the effect of

the industrial spillover. To capture zero spillovers VI.3 adds the zero interaction terms that we

have discussed. As expected, coefficients of the interaction terms are negative and roughly

cancel the main spillover coefficients. Or to see this in a different light, the spillover has no

effect when it is zero, since in that event both the main and interaction terms differ from zero.

       VI.4 and VI.5 add fixed effects to VI.2 and VI.3, and these are now within group regressions.

The R&D coefficients remain significant and do not change systematically. The elasticity of

industry basic research increases, but the industrial spillover elasticity decreases.

       The rest of the table consists of variations on VI.5. VI.6 drops drugs, etc. The reason is this.

The figures and descriptive tables show that spillovers in drugs and biotechnology exceed other

spillovers, so this industry could have an undue influence on the results. But in fact the



                                                                  ~            1       N                         1
5
    The heteroskedasticity-robust variance-covariance matrix is V       X cX        ¦   i 1
                                                                                              uˆ i2 xic xi X cX        . The
                                                      1
expectation of this matrix reduces to V    V 2 X cX        under the hypothesis of homoskedasticity.


                                                             17
exclusion has little effect and the elasticities stay about the same. VI.7 drops metals, machinery,

and miscellaneous from the sample. Since these three industries produce little science, they are

also outliers. Apart from a slight decline in the industry basic research elasticity and a rise in the

elasticity of academic spillovers, the results stay about the same. In VI.8 and VI.9 the dependent

variable consists of citation-weighted papers. Since these are five-year “forward” citations in an

industry and field, the data are missing in 1996-1999 and this causes a large drop in sample size.

Equation VI.8 repeats VI.3 using citation-weighted papers, omitting fixed effects. R&D

elasticities are higher in VI.8, suggesting that the effect of R&D is partly to produce higher

impact research. Equation VI.9 repeats VI.5 including fixed effects. The elasticity of the

industry research stock turns negative: evidently its effect cannot be identified separately from

industry, field, and year. The spillover elasticities remain positive and significant.

   Table VII introduces decompositions of the academic and industrial spillovers. We begin

with a few preliminaries. Since the table separates spillovers into within and between

components, we introduce zero interaction terms for each one. As before elasticities of the

interaction terms are negative and cancel main spillover elasticities. Thus spillover components

have no effect when they are equal to zero. Also, the different spillover decompositions have

little effect on the elasticity of industry research, which stays around 0.20. Notice that we tag

key variables with corresponding J coefficients for later tests of equality restrictions. All the

equations use VI.5 as the baseline specification.

   Henceforth we focus on the R&D spillovers. VII.1 decomposes these into within and

between field components. Not surprisingly main elasticities are positive, interaction elasticities

are negative, and both are usually significant. The within field component consists of spillovers

where citing and cited fields are the same. The between field component consists of spillovers




                                                  18
where citing and cited fields differ. If within field research is more relevant, its elasticity would

be the larger of the two. This is what VII.1 finds: the within field academic elasticity is 0.38,

about twice the between field elasticity (0.18). The within field industrial elasticity is 0.15 and is

about 40 percent larger than the between field elasticity (0.11).

    In VII.2 we maintain the within- and between- field distinction for academic spillovers, but

we separate the industrial spillover into within- and between- industry components. As before,

the within industry component consists of spillovers where citing and cited industries are the

same and the between industry component consists of spillovers where this is not true. If basic

research within the same industry is more relevant, then the within elasticity should exceed the

between elasticity. However, VII.2 rejects this hypothesis. It finds that the between industry

elasticity is 0.15, larger than the within elasticity (0.12).

    VII.3 considers a four component breakdown of the industrial spillover. In this equation we

consider both within- and between- field and industry dimensions. Making due allowance for

collinearity, VII.3 tells a similar story to VII.1 and VII.2. The within field, within industry

elasticity is 0.10 and the within field, between industry elasticity is 0.09. The two are almost the

same, suggesting that industry has little effect on flows of basic research. The between field,

within industry elasticity is 0.01 and the between field, between industry elasticity is 0.09, on

average falling short of the within field estimates. VII.3 confirms the importance of the within

field component as an impediment to the impact of basic research on scientific output, and it

denies any corresponding role for industry.

    Table VIII tests for equality of the elasticities of the R&D indicators in selected regressions

from Tables VI and VII. Using regressions VI.3 and VI.5 the table tests for equality of the

elasticities of the industry basic research stock and the two spillovers. Where E R is the elasticity




                                                   19
of the industry basic research stock and E A is the elasticity of the academic basic research

spillover, Test 1 decisively rejects the hypothesis of equality, finding that the academic elasticity

is significantly larger than that of industry basic research. Likewise Test 2 checks for and

rejects, equality of E A and E I . Therefore, the academic spillover elasticity significantly exceeds

the industry elasticity.

    Tests 3 to 11 apply to Table VII. Test 3 tests for and rejects equality of the elasticities of the

academic, within and between field spillovers in regressions VII.1-VII.3. Test 4 tests for and

rejects equality of the within field, academic and industrial spillover elasticities. Test 5 accepts

equality of the between field, academic and industrial spillover elasticities. Therefore, the

academic spillover elasticity is significantly greater than the industrial spillover within fields, but

not between fields. This strongly suggests that the stronger influence of universities occurs

within fields, and equally strongly it reflects the more eclectic nature of industry research.

Consistent with this hypothesis, test 6 accepts equality of within and between field industrial

spillover elasticities. Test 7 applies to VII.2 and accepts equality of within and between industry

elasticities of the industrial spillover. This confirms, more formally, that spillovers from the same

industry do not differ in their effect from spillovers outside the industry. Remaining tests apply

to VII.3. Test 8 rejects equality of the within and between field, within industry elasticities,

implying that the within field elasticity is larger. Test 9 accepts equality of elasticities within

and between fields and between industries. Tests 10 and 11 accept equality of the elasticities

within and between industries.




                                                  20
      The tests yield five statements about the effect of basic research flows on the production of

industrial science. Following (7), recall that the effects are elasticities6. The five statements are:

(1), the academic spillover has a larger effect than either industry basic research or the industrial

spillover; (2), within fields, the academic spillover effect exceeds the industrial spillover effect;

(3), within fields, effects tend to be larger than between fields, so that field is a resistance factor

in the production function for science; (4), within industries, effects are the same as between

industries, so that industry is not a resistance factor; and (5), the within field effect of the

industrial spillover occurs within the industry.

      Besides (7) we carried out nonlinear least squares (NLLS) regressions in the style of

Griliches (1986), which allows for arithmetic comparisons of an extra million dollars of different

spillover components rather than one percent changes as in (7). We illustrate this approach by

reporting estimates of a knowledge production function that, like VII.1, includes within and

between field effects:

                  ln( papers ijt ) 0.155 * ln( R ijt )  0.549 * ln[(S A,WF ,ijt  0.001) 
                                   (0.024)                 (0.043)
                                   0.626 * S A, BF ,ijt ]  0.542 * Z A * ln( S A,ijt  0.001) 
                                   (0.189)                (0.076)
(8)                                0.246 * ln[(S I ,WF ,ijt  0.001)  0.720 * S I , BF ,ijt ] 
                                   (0.032)                            (0.266)
                                    0.265 * Z A * ln( S A,ijt  0.001)
                                   (0.034)
                  N    747, R 2     0.992, Root MSE            0.394

The equation includes fixed effects for year, industry, and field. Its nonlinearity is clear from the

coefficients for the between field components of the spillovers, which lie inside the logarithms.

The coefficients are less than 1.0. This difference is marginally significant for academic
6
 Since the elasticities are percentage changes per one percent change in each right-hand side variable, we are using
one percent changes in these comparisons.


                                                          21
spillovers. The estimates suggest that an extra million dollars of between-field academic and

industrial spillovers is 60-70 percent of their within-field counterparts.

5. Concluding Discussion
   This paper provides new evidence on the transmission of basic research through the U.S.

economy. As indicators of basic research flows this paper distinguishes strongly between

citation rates and aggregate R&D spillovers. Though the citation rate gets at the propensity to

draw from a particular body of knowledge, it does so contingent on the existence of citation.

Furthermore, it takes no account of the frequency of citation events, nor does it consider the size

of cited knowledge stocks. To illustrate, the citation rate to academic computer science is

exceptionally high. But the frequency of citation events to computer science is low, as is its

R&D stock. This principle becomes clear from repeated study of the descriptive figures and

tables. Besides this, the descriptive materials indicate points of origin and destination for the

academic and industrial spillovers.

   Likewise we investigate the role of industry basic research and R&D spillovers in the

production of scientific knowledge as evidenced by papers. While it is not easy at all times to

disentangle the industry stock from fixed effects, in general we find that the industry stock as

well the academic and industrial spillover contribute to scientific output. Of the three R&D

inputs academic spillovers have the largest effect, measured by the elasticity of papers with

respect to the input. However, there is reason to think that errors in the industry basic research

stock lead to downward biases in its effect.

   Besides the study of total spillovers we decompose the spillovers into within and between

field components for academic and industrial spillovers, and into within and between industry

components for industrial spillovers. In brief, we find that within field effects on scientific




                                                 22
output exceed between field effects, but that within and between industry effects are statistically

indistinguishable. Thus field seems to be a barrier to flows of basic research in a way that

industry is not.

    Throughout this paper has relied on scientific papers and citations to these papers to gauge

science’s influence in industry. This is a reasonable strategy for assessing the influence of

science on research output, which is the use to which we put it in this paper. But the broader

question perhaps is that of the role of flows of human capital as well as scientific research in the

productivity of final goods and services. That question must await the development of

comprehensive data on stocks and flows of scientists and engineers and their human capital

attributes.




                                                 23
                                          References

Adams, James D., “Fundamental Stocks of Knowledge and Productivity Growth,” Journal of

       Political Economy 98 (August 1990): 673-702.

______________, “The Structure of Firm R&D, the Factor Intensity of Production, and Skill

       Bias,” Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (August 1999): 499-510.

______________, “Comparative Localization of Academic and Industrial Spillovers,” Journal

       of Economic Geography 2 (July 2002): 253-278.

______________, and Adam B. Jaffe, “Bounding the Effects of R&D: An Investigation Using

       Matched Establishment-Firm Data,” RAND Journal of Economics 27 (Winter 1996):

       700-721.

______________, Grant Black, J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan, “Scientific Teams

       and Institutional Collaborations: Evidence from U.S. Universities, 1981-1999,” Research

       Policy 34 (April 2005): 259-285.

______________, J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan, “Standing on Academic Shoulders:

       Measuring Scientific Influence in Universities,” Cambridge, Massachusetts: NBER

       Working Paper No. 10875, October 2004, Forthcoming in Les Annales d’Economie et

       de Statistique.

Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Manuel Trajtenberg, “General Purpose Technologies: ‘Engines of

       Growth?’,” Journal of Econometrics 65 (1995): 83-108.

Glaeser, Edward L., Hedi D. Kallal, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer, “Growth in

       Cities,” Journal of Political Economy 100 (December 1992): 1126-1151.

Griliches, Zvi, “Issues in Addressing the Contribution of R&D to Productivity Growth,” Bell



                                              24
       Journal of Economics 10 (Spring 1979): 92-116.

___________, “Productivity, R&D, and Basic Research at the Firm Level in the 1970s,”

       American Economic Review 76 (March 1986): 141-154.

___________, and Frank Lichtenberg, “Interindustry Technology Flows and Productivity

       Growth: A Reexamination,” Review of Economics and Statistics 66 (May 1984): 324-

       329.

Henderson, Vernon, Ari Kuncoro, and Matt Turner, “Industrial Development in Cities,” Journal

       of Political Economy 103 (October 1995): 1067-1090.

Jacobs, Jane, The Economy of Cities, New York: Vintage Books, 1969.

Jaffe, Adam B., and Manuel Trajtenberg, “International Knowledge Flows: Evidence from

       Patent Citations,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 8 (1999): 105-136.

Keller, Wolfgang, “Trade and the Transmission of Technology,” Journal of Economic Growth

       7 (March 2002): 5-24.

Klevorick, Alvin K., Richard C. Levin, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter, “On the

       Sources and Significance of Interindustry Differences in Technological Opportunities,”

       Research Policy 24 (1995): 185-205.

Lanjouw, Jean O., and Mark Schankerman, “Patent Quality and Research Productivity:

       Measuring Innovation with Multiple Indicators,” The Economic Journal 114 (April

       2004): 441-465.

Mueller, Willard F., and John D. Culbertson, “Inter-industry Technology Flows in the U.S.

       Food-Processing Industries,” Managerial and Decision Economics 7 (September 1986):

       163-168.

National Science Foundation, CASPAR Database, Arlington, Virginia: www.nsf.gov/statistics




                                              25
_______________________, Research and Development in Industry, Arlington, Virginia:

       various years.

Peri, Giovanni, “Determinants of Knowledge Flows and Their Effect on Innovation,” Review of

       Economics and Statistics 87 (May 2005): 308-322.

Rosenberg, Nathan, “Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry, 1840-1910,” Journal

       of Economic History 23 (December 1963): 414-443; reprinted as Chapter 1 of

       Perspectives on Technology, New York, Cambridge University Press, 1976.

________________, “Technological Interdependence in the American Economy,” Technology

       and Culture 21 (January 1979): 25-50; also Chapter 2 of Inside the Black Box:

       Technology and Economics, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1982.

Scherer, F. Michael, “Interindustry Technology Flows in the United States,” Research Policy 11

       (August 1982a): 227-245.

_______________, “Interindustry Technology Flows and Productivity Growth,” Review of

       Economics and Statistics 64 (November 1982b): 627-634.

Stephan, Paula E., Albert J. Sumell, Grant C. Black, and James D. Adams, “Doctoral Education

       and Economic Development: The Flow of New PhDs to Industry,” Economic

       Development Quarterly 18 (May 2004): 151-167.

Standard and Poor’s Compustat, New York: McGraw-Hill, various years.

Terleckyj, Nestor E., “Effects of R&D on the Productivity of Industries,” (1974) Washington,

       DC: National Planning Association.

Von Hippel, Eric, The Sources of Innovation, New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.




                                              26
                              Figure I--Mean Citation Rates by Citing Industry Group
                                       And Cited Field of Academic Science




                                 0.1

                                0.08
                  Cite Rate



                                 0.06

                                  0.04                                                                                   Biol.
                                                                                                                         Chem.
                                   0.02
                                                                                                                         Comp. Sci.
                                        0                                                   Ph
                                                                                                 y                       Eng.
                                                                                          Me s.
                                                                                             d
                                                                       .




                                                                                              i .
                                                                      m




                                                                                       En                                Medi.
                                                                                         g.
                                              M & B he

                                                                    .
                                                                 ch




                                                                                    Co
                                                      ftw c.
                                                                 c
                                                               te




                                                                                      mp
                                                              ro



                                                             is




                                                                                                                         Phys.
                                                           re
                                                            io




                                                                                 Ch      .S
                               om eta rug et



                                                          M




Citing Industry                                                                             ci.
                                                          a




                                                                                   em
                                                         P



                                                        &




                                                       r.




                                                                             Bio      .
                                                     st
                                          m h.,
                                                     s



                                                  So




                                                                                l.
                                                  In


                                                   .
                                      om ac




                                                ip
                                                &
                                                &




                                              qu
                                              D




                                                                                              Cited Field
                                             p.
                                             .,



                                        .E
                                         ls,




                                           i
                                       qu

                                      sp
                                     .E

                                    an
                                    ,C
                                    M



                                   ec

                                 Tr
                                 p.

                                El
                              C




                  Figure II--Academic R&D Spillover by Citing Industry Group
                              And Cited Academic Field of Science




                                                                                                        100000

                                                                                                        80000

                                                                                                      60000
                                                                                                                 Spill




                                                                                                                         Biol.
                                                                                                   40000
                                                                                                                         Chem.
                                                                                                   20000                 Comp. Sci.
                                                                                                                         Eng.
                                   m.                                                             0
                              c he ch.                                                                                   Medi.
                           tro      te                                                              P
                                            c.                                                M hys.
Citing Industry        Pe Bio Mis                                                                ed                      Phys.
                              &        &          re                                      E
                        ug
                           s        .,      t wa                                      Co ng.
                                                                                                   i.
                      r          ch       of           tr.
                     D
                           ,  Ma , & S             Ins                            Ch    m
                                                                                         p.
                      ta
                         ls       m.           . &         ip.                      em      Sc
                   Me Com                quip          E qu                Bi
                                                                              ol.     .       i.
                                       .E            .
                      p.,                         sp
                    m            Elec        ran
                                           T                                                      Cited Field
                  Co




                                                                            27
                                  Figure III--Mean Citation Rates by Citing Industry Group
                                             And Cited Field of Industrial Science




                                                                                                          0.035
                                                                                                         0.03
                                                                                                        0.025




                                                                                                                  Cite Rate
                                                                                                       0.02                   Biol.
                                                                                                       0.015
                                                                                                      0.01                    Chem.
                                                                                                     0.005                    Comp. Sci.
                                               .                                                     0
                                            m                                                                                 Eng.
                                       c he h.                                                   Ph
                                                                                                      ys
                                                 c
                                   t ro       te       c.                                  M            .                     Medi.
Citing Industry                  Pe Bio Mis re                                          En     edi
                                                                                                   .
                                    s & ., &                                              g.
                                                        wa                           Co                                       Phys.
                                rug ach Soft                   st
                                                                 r.               Ch mp.
                              D M                &          In                      em    Sc
                                  s,                                   .
                                al
                                             .,          .&         ip     Bi         .      i.
                              et        m
                                          m
                                                    u ip
                                                               E  qu          ol.
                             M         o           q
                                  ,C              E         p.
                                p.          e c.          ns                                        Cited Field
                              m          El            ra
                                                     T
                            Co




                               Figure IV--Industrial R&D Spillover by Citing Industry Group
                                           And Cited Industrial Field of Science




                              30000
                              25000
                               20000
                    Spill




                                15000
                                                                                                                              Biol.
                                10000
                                                                                                                              Chem.
                                   5000
                                                                                                                              Comp. Sci.
                                          0                                                Phy
                                                                                        Me s.                                 Eng.
                                                                                      Eng di.
                                         m , an otec .
                                                                 em




  Citing Industry                                                                                                             Medi.
                                                                h.




                                                                                         .
                                  , C Ma s & och




                                                                                   Co
                                                     ftw c.




                                                                                     mp
                                                 So Mis

                                                             e
                                                             tr




                                                                                Ch      .S                                    Phys.
                                                          ar
                             om tals Dru Pe

                                                           i




                                                                                           ci.
                                                         B




                                                                                   em
                                                        d



                                                      tr.




                                                                             Bio     .
                                                    s




                                                                                l.
                                                 In
                                                 g




                                                  .
                                                 .




                                               ip
                                              h



                                            .&
                                             &




                                           qu
                                             c
                                          .,

                                         ip

                                        .E
                                      qu
                                     om
                                       ,




                                     sp
                                    ,E

                                   an
                                  ec
                                   e




                                Tr
                                M

                               p.




                                                                                                 Cited Field
                               El
                            C




                                                                           28
                                      Figure V--Mean Citation Rates by Citing And Cited Industry Group




                                0.1

                               0.08
                 Cite Rate




                                0.06
                                                                                                                        Petrochem.
                                 0.04
                                                                                                                        Drugs & Biotech.
                                  0.02
                                                                                                                        Metals, Mach., and Misc.
                                       0                                                    Tra
                                                                                                 nsp                    Comp., Comm., & Softw are
                                                                                        El e        .E
                                                                 .




                                                                                     Co c. Eq
                                                               em




Citing Industry                                                                                        qu
                                                                                                          ip.           Elec. Equip. & Instr.
                                                              h.
                                                            ch




                                                                                        mp        u
                                                                                           ., C ip. &
                                                            c

                                                           c.




                                                                                  Me
                                                        t ro

                                                         te

                                                        is




                                                                                                                        Transp. Equip.
                                                        o




                                                                                    tal         om      Ins
                                                    Pe




                                                     M

                                                     re
                                                     Bi




                                                                              Dr       s,          m.        t
                                                                                                     , & r.
                                                   a
                                                   d




                                                                                          Ma
                                                 &




                                                                                 ug
                                               ftw
                                                 n




                                                r.




                                                                                             ch
                                              ,a
                                             gs




                                                                                   s&
                                             st




                                                                                                          S
                                            So




                                                                          Pe                    .,a         o
                                           ru

                                           h.




                                           In




                                                                            t ro       Bio         nd        ftw
                                           .
                                        ac
                                        D




                                        ip
                                        &




                                                                                                                are
                                        &




                                                                                ch        tec          Mi
                                    qu
                                    M

                                     .,


                                      .




                                                                                  em          h.
                                   ip




                                                                                                          sc.
                                  m




                                .E
                                  ,




                                qu




                                                                                     .
                               om
                       om tals




                              sp
                             .E
                            ,C
                             e




                           an
                           M




                           ec
                         p.




                         Tr
                        El




                                                                                                   Cited Industry
                      C




                                Figure VI--Industrial R&D Spillovers by Citing and Cited Industry Group




                        45000
                        40000
                         35000
                         30000
                         25000
         Spill




                          20000                                                                                         Petrochem.
                          15000
                                                                                                                        Drugs & Biotech.
                          10000
                            5000                                                                                        Metals, Mach., & Misc.
                               0                                                             Tra
                                                                                         El e nsp.                      Comp., Comm., & Softw are
 Citing Industry                                                                     Co c. E            Eq
                                                                      .
                                                                   em




                                                                                        mp         q       uip          Elec. Equip. & Instr.
                                                                    .




                                                                                            ., C uip.          .
                                                                 ch




                                                                                  Me
                                          ls, gs & roch




                                                      ftw c.




                                                                                    tal
                                                                e




                                                                                                 o        &I            Transp. Equip.
                                                              is
                                                              ot




                                                                                       s,          mm
                                                              e




                                                                              Dr                            n
                                                             t



                                                           M




                                                                                                       ., & str.
                                                          Pe




                                                           ar
                                                           Bi




                                                                                 ug       Ma
                                                         &




                                                                                   s&         ch
                                                       tr.




                                                                          Pe                      ., &      So
                                                     .,




                                                     s
                                                  So




                                                                            t ro       B
                                      om ach




                                                                                        iot                    ftw
                                                  In




                                                                                                       Mi
                                                   .
                                                 u




                                                                                ch
                                                ip




                                                                                           ec                     are
                                              ,&




                                                                                                          sc.
                                              .&
                                               Dr




                                                                                  em
                                               M




                                             qu




                                                                                               h.
                                           ip
                                             .




                                                                                     .
                                           m




                                         .E
                                        qu
                                       ta




                                     sp
                                    .E
                             Co Me
                                   ,C




                                   an
                                  ec

                                Tr
                                p.

                               El
                               m




                                                                                          Cited Industry




                                                                                       29
                                             Table I
                           Distribution of Industrial Scientific Papers

                                                             Percentage Distribution by Field




                                                                               Engineering
                           Number of




                                                 Chemistry



                                                                    Computer




                                                                                             Medicine
                                       Biology




                                                                    Science




                                                                                                        Physics
 Industry or Sector
                           Papers



Petrochemicals           30,679         18.7%     36.2%              0.2%       26.9%            7.2%   10.7%
                                          (3)       (1)                           (2)
Drugs & Biotech.         64,014         49.7%     17.0%              0.0%        0.9%         32.0%       0.3%
                                          (1)       (3)                                         (2)
Metals                    2,688          9.4%     20.9%              0.7%       42.7%          5.1%     21.2%
                                                    (3)                           (1)                     (2)
Machinery, Except         1,658           6.8%     5.1%              2.1%       61.6%            1.5%   22.9%
 Computers                                 (3)                                    (1)                     (2)
Computers                 9,210           2.8%    15.3%              13.6%      26.5%            1.3%   40.5%
                                                    (3)                           (2)                     (1)
Electrical Equipment     22,896           2.1%     8.2%              9.1%       50.3%            2.4%   27.9%
                                                                      (3)         (1)                     (2)
Transportation           21,120           5.5%    12.5%              3.9%       49.3%            1.6%   27.3%
  Equipment                                         (3)                           (1)                     (2)
Instruments              10,719         12.0%     18.6%              2.6%       24.1%         15.7%     27.0%
                                                                                  (2)           (3)       (1)
Miscellaneous Agric.      3,074         19.2%     32.4%              0.8%       19.8%         13.9%     13.9%
& Manuf.                                  (2)       (1)                           (3)
Communications           26,292          3.2%     12.1%              10.8%      22.2%            0.3%   51.4%
 Services                                           (3)                           (2)                     (1)
Software & Business      25,272           3.0%    15.1%              17.7%      17.1%            0.8%   46.3%
 Services                                                              (2)        (3)                     (1)

Industrial Sector       217,623         19.9%      17.7%             5.5%       22.4%          12.1%    22.4%
                                          (3)                                    (1.5)                   (1.5)
Academic Sector        1,909,411        33.5%      10.2%             1.5%        8.9%         34.5%     11.4%
                                          (2)                                                   (1)       (3)

 Source: Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) and authors’ calculations. Period is 1981-1999.
 The top three fields in an industry or sector are shown in bold with ranks shown in parentheses.




                                                   30
                                           Table II
                   Influence of Field and Industry on Mean Citation Rates
                               And Aggregate R&D Spillovers


                                     Within Field         Between Field             Total


 Firms Citing Universities
  Total
    Mean Citation Rate                   0.011                0.008                 0.010
    Aggregate R&D Spillover            226,855.3             88,872.2             315,727.5
 Firms Citing Other Firms
  Within Industry
    Mean Citation Rate                   0.018                0.015                0.017
    Aggregate R&D Spillover             36,541.9             20,931.2             57,473.1
  Between Industry
    Mean Citation Rate                   0.017                0.013                 0.015
    Aggregate R&D Spillover             59,581.2             44,114.1             103,695.3
  Total
    Mean Citation Rate                   0.017                0.013                 0.016
    Aggregate R&D Spillover             96,123.1             65,045.3             161,168.4

Notes: Period is 1981-1999. Mean citation rate is the average for each sector, industry, and field
combination. Aggregate R&D spillover is the sum of the citation rates times the R&D stocks for
each sector, industry, and field combination.




                                               31
                                        Table III
         Top Four R&D Spillovers, by Citing Industry and Citing and Cited Science,
                               Firms Citing Universities

                                                                        Aggregate R&D
         Citing Industry            Citing Field        Cited Field
                                                                          Spillover a
Petrochemicals                   Biology             Biology                8,507.8
                                 Chemistry           Chemistry              6,426.1
                                 Engineering         Engineering            3,916.2
                                 Medicine            Medicine               3,035.4

Drugs & Biotech.                 Biology             Biology                72,013.6
                                 Medicine            Medicine               45,169.1
                                 Biology             Medicine               24,016.5
                                 Medicine            Biology                17,528.2

Metals                           Engineering         Engineering             1,095.1
                                 Biology             Biology                  239.5
                                 Chemistry           Chemistry                225.7
                                 Physics             Physics                  220.7

Machinery except Computers       Engineering         Engineering              822.3
                                 Physics             Physics                  159.0
                                 Physics             Engineering              121.3
                                 Medicine            Medicine                  40.6

Computers                        Engineering         Engineering             2,033.0
                                 Physics             Physics                 1,853.4
                                 Comp. Science       Comp. Science           1,492.1
                                 Chemistry           Chemistry                547.7

Electrical Equipment             Engineering         Engineering             8,420.7
                                 Physics             Physics                 3,798.0
                                 Comp. Science       Comp. Science           3,249.3
                                 Physics             Engineering             1,972.9

Transportation Equipment         Engineering         Engineering             7,807.1
                                 Physics             Physics                 2,224.8
                                 Physics             Engineering             1,087.2
                                 Chemistry           Chemistry                971.7

Instruments                      Medicine            Medicine                3,508.5
                                 Biology             Biology                 2,190.7
                                 Engineering         Engineering             1,500.5
                                 Chemistry           Chemistry                979.8



                                            32
                                       Table III
        Top Four R&D Spillovers, by Citing Industry and Citing and Cited Science,
                              Firms Citing Universities

                                                                                  Aggregate R&D
        Citing Industry                 Citing Field           Cited Field
                                                                                    Spillover a

Communications Services             Physics                 Physics                    6,383.7
                                    Engineering             Engineering                2,127.0
                                    Comp. Science           Comp. Science              1,998.2
                                    Chemistry               Chemistry                  1,179.8

Software &Business Services         Physics                 Physics                    6,280.5
                                    Comp. Science           Comp. Science              4,649.6
                                    Engineering             Engineering                3,738.5
                                    Chemistry               Chemistry                  1,831.5

Misc. Agric. & Manufacturing        Biology                 Biology                     756.3
                                    Medicine                Medicine                    612.9
                                    Chemistry               Chemistry                   458.8
                                    Engineering             Engineering                 388.6

Notes: Table reports the top four aggregate R&D spillovers by citing industry and citing and
cited field. The top two aggregate R&D spillovers into each industry are shown in bold. a
Aggregate R&D spillover is the sum over citing and cited cells of the citation rate times the cited
R&D stock (in millions of 1992 dollars). Here the citation rate c ij / n j is the number of citations
from citing industry and industrial science field i to the cited academic science field j divided by
the number of potentially cited papers in j .




                                                 33
                                              Table IV
                    Top Six R&D Spillovers, by Citing and Cited Industry and Field,
                                     Firms Citing Other Firms
                                                                                       Aggregate
          Citing                     Cited                 Citing          Cited
                                                                                         R&D
         Industry                  Industry                Field           Field
                                                                                       Spillover a
Petrochemicals            Petrochemicals               Chemistry       Chemistry        2,742.3
                          Software & Bus. Services     Chemistry       Chemistry        1,312.6
                          Drugs & Biotech.             Biology         Biology          1,065.7
                          Petrochemicals               Biology         Biology          1,031.5
                          Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Physics           964.5
                          Instruments                  Chemistry       Chemistry         884.3

Drugs & Biotech.          Drugs & Biotech.             Biology         Biology          17,966.7
                          Drugs & Biotech.             Biology         Medicine         6,271.1
                          Drugs & Biotech.             Medicine        Medicine         4,704.0
                          Drugs & Biotech.             Medicine        Biology           4,670.0
                          Drugs & Biotech.             Chemistry       Chemistry        4,647.8
                          Drugs & Biotech.             Chemistry       Biology          2,737.7

Metals                    Communications Services      Physics         Physics           197.6
                          Petrochemicals               Chemistry       Chemistry         173.1
                          Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Physics           131.5
                          Drugs & Biotech.             Chemistry       Chemistry         126.7
                          Software & Bus. Services     Chemistry       Chemistry          91.5
                          Software & Bus. Services     Chemistry       Physics            65.3

Machinery except          Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Physics           308.3
Computers
                          Software & Bus. Services     Engineering     Engineering       204.9
                          Communications Services      Physics         Physics           139.3
                          Electrical Equipment         Engineering     Engineering        74.8
                          Electrical Equipment         Physics         Physics            67.7
                          Software & Bus. Services     Engineering     Physics            65.4

Computers                 Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Physics          1,732.2
                          Communications Services      Physics         Physics           778.2
                          Software & Bus. Services     Comp. Science   Comp. Science     500.7
                          Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Chemistry         496.2
                          Instruments                  Physics         Physics           372.4
                          Software & Bus. Services     Chemistry       Chemistry         339.9

Electrical Equipment      Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Physics          2,743.2
                          Communications Services      Physics         Physics          2,709.9



                                                  34
                                             Table IV
                   Top Six R&D Spillovers, by Citing and Cited Industry and Field,
                                    Firms Citing Other Firms
                                                                                      Aggregate
        Citing                      Cited                 Citing          Cited
                                                                                        R&D
       Industry                   Industry                Field           Field
                                                                                      Spillover a
Electrical Equipment     Communications Services      Physics         Engineering      1,528.7
                         Communications Services      Physics         Chemistry        1,262.1
                         Software & Bus. Services     Comp. Science   Comp. Science    1,200.1
                         Communications Services      Physics         Biology           884.0

Transportation           Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Physics          1,205.4
Equipment
                         Communications Services      Physics         Physics           964.7
                         Transportation               Engineering     Engineering       468.3
                         Equipment
                         Electrical Equipment         Engineering     Engineering       369.2
                         Software & Bus. Services     Chemistry       Chemistry         282.6
                         Electrical Equipment         Physics         Physics           274.0

Instruments              Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Physics           805.1
                         Communications Services      Physics         Physics           400.2
                         Drugs & Biotech.             Biology         Biology           358.1
                         Petrochemicals               Chemistry       Chemistry         346.2
                         Software & Bus. Services     Chemistry       Chemistry         290.9
                         Software & Bus. Services     Chemistry       Physics           257.6

Communications           Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Physics          2,099.5
Services
                         Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Chemistry        1,641.4
                         Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Engineering      1,199.4
                         Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Biology           756.9
                         Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Comp. Science     638.1
                         Software & Bus. Services     Chemistry       Physics           497.2

Software & Bus. Services Communications Services      Physics         Physics          1,402.1
                         Communications Services      Physics         Chemistry        1,073.2
                         Communications Services      Physics         Biology           842.1
                         Communications Services      Physics         Engineering       788.9
                         Software & Bus. Services     Comp. Science   Comp. Science     642.2
                         Petrochemicals               Chemistry       Chemistry         473.0

Misc. Agric. & Manuf.    Petrochemicals               Chemistry       Chemistry         200.1
                         Software & Bus. Services     Physics         Physics           162.5
                         Software & Bus. Services     Chemistry       Chemistry         117.4
                         Instruments                  Chemistry       Chemistry         90.0


                                                 35
                                               Table IV
                     Top Six R&D Spillovers, by Citing and Cited Industry and Field,
                                      Firms Citing Other Firms
                                                                                                        Aggregate
         Citing                          Cited                     Citing              Cited
                                                                                                           R&D
        Industry                       Industry                    Field               Field
                                                                                                        Spillover a
Misc. Agric. & Manuf.       Drugs & Biotech.               Biology                  Biology                 84.1
                            Communications Services        Physics                  Physics                 78.2
      Notes: Table reports the top six aggregate R&D spillovers by citing and cited industry and field.
      The top three aggregate R&D spillovers into each industry are shown in bold. a Aggregate
      R&D spillover is the sum over citing and cited cells of the citation rate times the cited R&D
      stock (in millions of 1992 dollars). Here the citation rate c ijk / n k is the number of citations from
       citing industry i and industrial science field j to industry k , divided by the number of potentially
       cited papers in k .




                                                         36
                                        Table V
      Herfindahl Indexes of the Concentration of R&D Spillovers, by Citing Industry


                                           Herfindahl Index         Herfindahl Index for
             Citing Industry                for Academic            Industrial Spillover:
                                              Spillover:

                                             By Cited Field      By Cited         By Cited
                                                                  Field           Industry


 Petrochemicals                                    0.23             0.28            0.20

 Drugs & Biotech.                                  0.47*           0.41*            0.70*

 Metals                                            0.33             0.26            0.16

 Machinery, Except Computers                       0.51*           0.39*            0.33

 Computers                                         0.25             0.31            0.31

 Electrical Equipment                              0.31             0.27            0.30

 Transportation Equipment                          0.39             0.32            0.19

 Instruments                                       0.25             0.26            0.17

 Miscellaneous Agric. & Manuf.                     0.23             0.27            0.18

 Communications Services                           0.28             0.25            0.44*

 Software & Business Services                      0.25             0.27            0.28

 Average                                           0.32             0.30            0.30
 Lower Bound                                       0.17             0.17            0.09

Notes: See the text for definitions of the Herfindahl indexes. *Top two most concentrated
industries.




                                              37
                                                                   Table VI
                                        Production Functions for Scientific Papers, by Industry and Field
                                                                                                                            Dependent Variable:
     Variable or Statistic                                 Dependent Variable: Log (Papers)                                Log (Citation-Weighted
                                                                                                                                   Papers)
                                   VI.1        VI.2       VI.3       VI.4        VI.5         VI.6            VI.7           VI.8          VI.9

Estimation Method                   OLS        OLS            OLS         OLS         OLS        OLS              OLS            OLS            OLS
Industry Dummies                     No         No             No         Yes          Yes       Yes              Yes             No            Yes
Field Dummies                        No         No             No         Yes          Yes       Yes              Yes             No            Yes
Year Dummies                         No         No             No         Yes          Yes       Yes              Yes             No            Yes
Sample                              Full       Full            Full       Full         Full  Drop Drugs Drop Metals, Drop Years Drop Years
                                  Sample     Sample         Sample      Sample       Sample  & Biotech. Mach., Misc. 1996-1999              1996-1999
Log (Industry Basic Research      0.850**    0.137**        0.098** 0.227** 0.180**            0.195**          0.097*         0.149**        -0.169*
Stock) ( E R )                    (0.040)    (0.033)         (0.022)    (0.049)      (0.038)   (0.042)          (0.042)        (0.044)        (0.082)
Log (Academic Research                       0.530**        0.496** 0.574** 0.565**            0.542**          0.631**        0.486**        0.655**
Spillover) ( E A )                           (0.055)         (0.031)    (0.071)      (0.043)   (0.049)          (0.045)        (0.046)        (0.062)
Zero Spillover Dummy u                                     -0.477**                 -0.571**  -0.579**         -0.664**       -0.560**       -0.776**
Log (Academic Res. Spillover)                                (0.069)                 (0.073)   (0.079)          (0.094)        (0.161)        (0.135)
Log (Industrial Research                         0.155** 0.319** 0.096** 0.244**               0.228**          0.227**        0.485**        0.355**
Spillover) ( E I )                               (0.022)     (0.021)    (0.031)      (0.033)   (0.036)          (0.038)        (0.032)        (0.053)
Zero Spillover Dummy u                                     -0.322**                 -0.274**  -0.245**         -0.253**       -0.455**       -0.308**
Log (Industrial Res. Spillover)                              (0.028)                 (0.035)   (0.040)          (0.042)        (0.046)        (0.058)
Number of Observations                747          747         747        747          747       663              559            478            478
R-square                             0.350        0.866       0.908      0.914        0.946     0.942            0.963          0.864          0.923
Root Mean Square Error               1.405        0.639       0.530      0.520        0.398     0.379            0.330          0.760          0.584
        Notes: Full sample is an imbalanced panel that includes 11 industry groups, up to six science fields, and up to 12 years from 1988-
        1999. Robust standard errors appear in parentheses. ** Coefficient is significantly different from zero at the one percent level. *
        Coefficient is significantly different from zero at the five percent level.




                                                                         38
                                      Table VII
        Production Functions for Scientific Papers, Decomposition of Spillovers
                     Within and Between Fields and Industries


                 Variable or Statistic                  VII.1      VII.2      VII.3


Estimation Method                                         OLS        OLS        OLS
Industry Dummies                                          Yes        Yes        Yes
Field Dummies                                             Yes        Yes        Yes
Year Dummies                                              Yes        Yes        Yes
Log (Industry Basic Research Stock)                     0.196**    0.199**    0.207**
                                                        (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.040)
Log (WF Academic Research Spillover) ( J A,WF )         0.378**    0.380**    0.367**
                                                        (0.051)    (0.049)    (0.051)
Zero WF Academic Spillover Dummy u                     -0.333**   -0.333**   -0.320**
Log (WF Academic Research Spillover)                    (0.069)    (0.068)    (0.069)
Log (BF Academic Research Spillover) ( J A, BF )        0.183**    0.191**    0.185**
                                                        (0.035)    (0.035)    (0.034)
Zero BF Academic Spillover Dummy u                     -0.148**   -0.155**   -0.150**
Log (BF Academic Research Spillover)                    (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.040)
Log (WF Industrial Research Spillover) ( J I ,WF )      0.146**
                                                        (0.028)
Zero WF Industrial Spillover Dummy u                   -0.147**
Log (WF Industrial Research Spillover)                  (0.033)
Log (BF Industrial Research Spillover) ( J I , BF )      0.108*
                                                        (0.025)
Zero BF Industrial Spillover Dummy u                    -0.116*
Log (BF Industrial Research Spillover)                  (0.029)
Log (WI Industrial Research Spillover) ( J I ,WI )                 0.117**
                                                                   (0.017)
Zero WI Industrial Spillover Dummy u                              -0.114**
Log (WI Industrial Research Spillover)                             (0.020)
Log (BI Industrial Research Spillover) ( J I , BI )                0.150**
                                                                   (0.030)
Zero BI Industrial Spillover Dummy u                              -0.157**
Log (BI Industrial Research Spillover)                             (0.039)
Log (WF, WI Industrial Res. Spillover) ( J I ,WFWI )                          0.100**
                                                                              (0.016)
Zero WF, WI Industrial Spillover Dummy u                                     -0.087**
Log (WF, WI Industrial Research Spillover)                                    (0.019)
Log (WF, BI Industrial Res. Spillover) ( J I ,WFBI )                          0.087**
                                                                              (0.027)



                                                 39
                                      Table VII
        Production Functions for Scientific Papers, Decomposition of Spillovers
                     Within and Between Fields and Industries


                 Variable or Statistic                     VII.1       VII.2         VII.3

Zero WF, BI Industrial Spillover Dummy u                                            -0.077*
Log (WF, BI Industrial Research Spillover)                                          (0.032)
Log (BF, WI Industrial Research Spillover)                                           0.013
( J I , BFWI )                                                                      (0.017)
Zero BF, WI Industrial Spillover Dummy u                                             -0.014
Log (BF, WI Industrial Research Spillover)                                          (0.018)
Log (BF, BI Industrial Research Spillover)( J I , BFBI )                            0.087**
                                                                                    (0.023)
Zero BF, BI Industrial Spillover Dummy u                                            -0.085*
Log (BF, BI Industrial Research Spillover)                                          (0.028)

R-square                                                   0.955       0.956         0.957
Root Mean Square Error                                     0.379       0.374         0.372

 Notes: Number of observations is N=747. Sample is an imbalanced panel that includes
 11 industry groups and up to six science fields and 12 years from 1988-1999. Robust
 standard errors appear in parentheses. ** Coefficient is significantly different from zero
 at the one percent level. * Coefficient is significantly different from zero at the five
 percent level.




                                                40
                                       Table VIII
      Tests of Equality Restrictions, Selected Regressions from Tables VI and VII


                                                      Wald F-Statistic
   Test of Restriction
                             Eq. VI.3      Eq. VI.5      Eq. VII.1       Eq. VII.2   Eq. VII.3
1. E R E A                    72.1**        34.7**
2. E A E I                    12.9**        18.6**
3. J A,WF J A, BF                                          6.0**           5.8*        5.4*
4. J A,WF     J I ,WF                                      9.9**
5. J A, BF J I , BF                                         3.5
6. J I ,WF J I , BF                                         1.0
7. J I ,WI J I , BI                                                        1.3
8. J I ,WFWI J I , BFWI                                                               11.0**
9. J I ,WFBI J I , BFBI                                                                 0.0
10. J I ,WFWI J I ,WFBI                                                                0.2
11. J I , BFWI J I , BFBI                                                             6.9**
Notes: The null H0 tests for equality of the indicated coefficient restrictions. ** Test
statistic is significant at the one percent level. * Test statistic is significant at the two
percent level. Significant values of the F-statistic indicate rejection of H0. Insignificant
values indicate acceptance of H0.




                                              41
