NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STOCHASTIC COMPONENTS OF INDIVIDUAL CONSUMPTION:
A TIME SERIES ANALYSIS OF GROUPED DATA
Orazio P. Attanasio
Margherita Borella
Working Paper 12456
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12456
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006

The authors would like to thank Manuel Arellano, Costas Meghir, Nicola Pavoni, Luigi Pistaferri, Harald
Uhlig and participants to the TMR meeting on “New Approaches to Economic Fluctuations”, Madrid,
January 31 1998, for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Orazio P. Attanasio and Margherita Borella. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Stochastic Components of Individual Consumption: A Time Series Analysis of Grouped Data
Orazio P. Attanasio and Margherita Borella
NBER Working Paper No. 12456
August 2006
JEL No. E2, D1, C3
ABSTRACT
In this paper we propose a method to characterize the time series properties of individual
consumption, income and interest rates using micro data, as studies in labor economics have
characterized the time series properties of hours and earnings. Our approach, however, does not
remove aggregate shocks. Having estimated the parameters of a flexible multivariate MA
representation we relate the coefficients of our statistical model to structural parameters of
theoretical models of consumption behavior. Our approach offers a unifying framework that
encompasses the Euler equation approach to the study of consumption and the studies that relate
innovations to income to innovations to consumption, such as those that have found the so-called
excess smoothness of consumption. Using a long time series of cross sections to construct synthetic
panel data for the UK, we estimate our model and find that the restriction of Euler equations are
typically not rejected, while the data show ‘excess smoothness’.
Orazio Attanasio
Department of Economics
University College London
Gower Street
London WC1E 6BT
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
o.attanasio@ucl.ac.uk
Margherita Borella
Center for Research on Pensions and Welfare Policies
via Real Collegio 30
10024 Moncalieri (TO)
ITALY
borella@cerp.unito.it

1.

Introduction

The time series properties of aggregate consumption (and some of its components) are well
known in the time series literature. The papers by Sargent (1978), Flavin (1981), Blinder and
Deaton (1985), Campbell (1987), West (1988), Campbell and Deaton (1989), Caballero (1990),
Quah (1990) are only some examples of this literature. Indeed, some of these properties
uncovered by this literature have stimulated the development of different theoretical models.
Very little is known, however, about the stochastic properties of consumption at the individual
level.
In this paper, we propose a new methodology to analyze the time series properties of individual
consumption expenditure, jointly with those of income and other (possibly aggregate) variables
of interest using household level data. Our approach fills an important gap in the existing
literature. Individual longitudinal data have been used to study the time series properties of hours
and earnings by several authors, including MaCurdy (1982), Abowd and Card (1989), Moffitt and
Gottshalk (1995) and Meghir and Pistaferri (2002). These studies model only labour market
variables. Moreover, they focus on the dynamic properties of purely idiosyncratic components
and treat aggregate shocks as a nuisance parameter that is eliminated, together with deterministic
life cycle effects, in preliminary regressions. Our contribution, instead, studies mainly
consumption. In addition, the availability of a long time series of cross-sections allows us to focus
on business cycle fluctuations rather than removing aggregate shocks by time dummies.
Relative to many papers that have studied the time series properties of consumption expenditure,
a novelty of our contribution lies in our use of micro level data. This is important for two
reasons. First, we can, at least in principle, look at the dynamics of individual consumption data.
Comparing and contrasting the time series properties of individual (or group level) and aggregate
consumption can be informative about the nature of insurance and credit markets available to
consumers or, more generally, on the smoothing mechanisms observed in the data. Second, even
when we work with aggregates, by constructing the theory-consistent possibly non linear
aggregates, we can avoid aggregation biases that have been shown to be important in the study of
the dynamic properties of consumption (see Attanasio and Weber, 1993). This second aspect is
crucial if we want to relate findings to the parameters of structural models of consumption
behaviour.

1

We represent the time series behaviour of consumption, income and interest rates as an MA
process whose parameters, given some assumptions, we can estimate. These parameters will
summarize the time series properties of the variables we model. Given a set of identifying
restrictions, we will be able to identify both patterns of dynamic dependence and some
contemporaneous correlations. Having characterized these properties of individual consumption,
income and interest rates, we map the pattern of correlations that emerges from the data to those
implied by different theoretical models. In particular, we show how to relate the coefficients of
our statistical model to several models that have been studied in the consumption literature. In
this sense, our approach provides a unifying framework that can be used to assess and compare
different pieces of evidence that have been accumulated in the literature. Moreover, our focus on
specific properties of the time series processes for consumption and other variables of interest
provides insight on the features of a model that might be able to fit the data when simpler
versions are rejected.
In the last 25 years, many empirical studies of consumption behaviour have focused on some
version of an Euler equation for intertemporal optimization and have estimated structural
parameters and tested the model by exploiting the over-identifying restrictions implied by such an
equation. These studies, too numerous to be listed here, have used both aggregate and individual
level data, reaching different conclusions about the validity of the model and about the
magnitude of the structural parameters that can be identified within such a framework. Most of
the implications of such theoretical structure are restrictions on the time series properties of
consumption. In Section 5 of this paper, we show what are the restrictions that the Euler
equations for consumption imposes on our MA representation of individual consumption,
income and interest rates and we show how, if these restrictions are not violated, one can use
estimates of the restricted MA process to estimate structural preference parameters, as is typically
done in the Euler equation literature. Our procedure makes it explicit which time series features
of the data lead to potential rejections of the overidentifying restrictions implied by Euler
equations and which lead to specific estimates of preference parameters. Moreover, our approach
allows us to identify aspects of individual preferences that, while not leading to violations of the
orthogonality conditions implied by an Euler equation, might be important determinants of
individual behaviour. We develop these implications of our approach in Section 5, where we
provide an interpretation for the coefficients whose estimates are reported in Section 4.

2

But our approach can also go beyond what is learned from the estimation of Euler equations. As
is well known, the Euler equation is silent about contemporaneous correlations between
consumption innovations and other sources of innovation to variables that are relevant for the
dynamic problem solved by the consumer, namely income and interest rates. The Euler equation
does not provide, without additional equations, a consumption function. And yet our approach
can identify some of the contemporaneous correlation and we can check whether these estimated
correlations are consistent with different versions of the model. Our contribution is therefore
also directly related to a strand of the literature on permanent income with Rational Expectations
that has looked at the implications of the life cycle- permanent income model for the time series
behaviour of consumption and income. Some of the relevant papers in this literature include
Sargent (1978), Flavin (1981), Campbell (1987) and Campbell and Deaton (1989), West (1988),
Hansen, Roberds and Sargent (1991). These papers worked with versions of the model that
would deliver a closed form solution for consumption as a function of permanent income and
test the restrictions implied by this closed form solution on the bi-variate representations of
consumption and income. Similar results, however, can be obtained by log-linearization. Many of
these papers concluded that consumption was ‘excessively smooth’ in that consumption did not
react enough to permanent innovation to income. We pursue, using micro data, a similar strategy.
In particular, we study the restrictions imposed by the life cycle model on the parameters of our
time series model that govern the contemporaneous correlation between income and
consumption. Following Attanasio and Pavoni (2006), we stress that we can have situations in
which the Euler equation for consumption is satisfied and there is no evidence of ‘excess
sensitivity’ of consumption and yet one can observe that consumption does not move enough in
reaction to changes in permanent income. Attanasio and Pavoni (2006) stress how this excess
smoothness is related to the violation of the intertemporal budget constraint with a single asset and
the presence of insurance of idiosyncratic shocks.
Our approach, therefore, can be seen as giving a unifying framework that uses simultaneously the
implications of the data covariance structure to estimate structural parameters and test the
orthogonality restrictions implied by the model (as in the Euler equation approach) and studying
how innovations to income are reflected (or not) in changes in consumption.
Most of the studies in the labour economics literature are based on large N asymptotics, as they
exploit the cross sectional variability to identify the parameters of interest. Because of this, some
of them, such as Abowd and Card (1989), allow the coefficient of interest to vary over time. Our

3

study, instead, focuses on the time series properties of individual consumption. The use of large
T asymptotics is an important distinguishing feature of our approach. While we remove
deterministic trends, we do not remove business cycle aggregate shocks. Indeed, our approach
can be described as an attempt to model these aggregate shocks and is therefore based on large T
asymptotics.1 Without relying on large-T asymptotics, our approach would not be able to
encompass the Euler equation approach, which, in general, cannot identify the parameters of
interest without a long time horizon.
The data on which we apply our approach are from the UK Family Expenditure Survey. The
FES is, to the best of our knowledge, the longest time series of cross section containing
exhaustive and detailed information on consumption, its components and several other variables
of interest. Unfortunately, the data do not have a longitudinal dimension, as each individual
household appears only once. To study the dynamics of our system, therefore, we rely on
synthetic cohort techniques, of the type proposed by Deaton (1985). As the theoretical model on
the background of our analysis is the life cycle model, it is natural to study consumption in its
relation to age and to divide the sample to form year of birth cohorts of individuals that are
followed over time.

2

We use surveys from 1974 to 2000 to form quarterly observations of

consumption and income at the cohort level. For comparison with the existing literature, we also
consider aggregate National Account data.
The lack of a longitudinal component to our data imposes an important limitation to our work, in
that we are forced to ignore pure idiosyncratic variability and to focus instead on the dynamics of
group averages. In this sense, the aggregate shocks become really the focus of our empirical
study. It should be stressed once more, however, that even if we are forced to aggregate the data,
we can control the aggregation directly and construct the non-linear transformation of the data
implied by the theory before aggregating them. Having said this, however, it is clear that, should
longitudinal data on consumption be available, an interesting extension of our study would be to
estimate our model on such data.

1

Another strand of the literature has focused on the time series properties of disaggregated business cycles. These
studies, including Watson and Engle (1983), Quah and Sargent (1994), Forni and Reichlin (1996), focus on the time
series properties and aim at characterizing the number of common factors and modeling their dynamic effects on
the sectors considered. Another set of papers that are related to ours are those by Cunha et al. (2004) and Cunha et
al. (2005) as well as Blundell et al. (2004). In these papers, the authors use schooling, income and consumption data
to identify the shocks that inform individual choices.
2 Cohorts, however, are not the only interesting group that can be formed. One can consider education or occupation
groups. Differences in the variability, persistence and covariance structures across these groups can be quite
interesting.

4

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we present our statistical model and
discuss its identification and estimation. In section 3 we describe the data sources, while in
section 4 we report the estimates of our statistical models. In section 5, we present a simple
theoretical framework that can be used to interpret the results in Section 4. Within this
framework, we show how to derive what the so-called ‘excess sensitivity’ and ‘excess smoothness’
tests. In section 6, we present possible extensions to the basic theoretical framework described in
Section 5. Section 7 concludes the paper.

2.

The Methodology

As stressed in the introduction, the main aims of this study are two. First, we would like to
identify innovations to consumption and other variables using both micro and aggregate data and
model their covariance structure. Second, we want to use this covariance structure to shed some
light on the plausibility of alternative theoretical models of consumption. It will be important to
stress the differences obtained with aggregate and micro data, as they will be informative about
the relevance of aggregation issues, as discussed in Attanasio and Weber (1993).
As the micro data we work with lack any longitudinal dimension, we are forced to use average
grouped data to estimate any dynamic model. This means that we are not able to model
idiosyncratic persistence, but only persistence at the group level.
As we focus on business cycle fluctuations, we remove from our data all age or cohort effects.
Effectively, our methodology removes all deterministic trends from the data and interprets them
as arising from a combination of cohort and age effects. This leaves us with group specific shocks
whose covariance structure is the focus of this study. It should be stressed, however, that, unlike
many studies in the literature on the micro dynamics of earnings, we do not remove time effects.
Indeed, the business cycle frequency is both important for our identification strategy and at the
centre of our focus.
In this section we sketch the main features of our approach. In particular, we write down the
statistical model that we estimate and discuss the identifying assumptions we make.
As the nature of our data forces us to work with grouped data, effectively our model is a model
of group shocks. However, as we construct group averages from our micro sample, the variables
we observe are affected by two sources of variability. On the one hand, we have genuine group

5

specific shocks. On the other, our sample averages are affected by measurement error arising
from the limited size of our sample. The latter source of variability constitute a nuisance which
can, however, be controlled for given the information on the sample structure and given the
information on within cells variability (see Deaton, 1985). We discuss these issues in the second
part of this section.

2.1.

The statistical model

Let us consider a generic variable z cth , where the index h denotes the individual household, the
index t the time period and the index c the group to which household h belongs. Without loss of
generality, such a variable can be written as:
(1)

z cth = z ct + η cth

where z ct denotes the mean of the variable x for group c at time t. Given a sample in which
group membership is observable, the mean in equation (1) can be easily estimated by the sample
means. In the next subsection we discuss the problems that arise because we do not observe z ct
but are forced to estimate it on the basis of samples of limited size. In this subsection, we treat
z ct as observable.
Notice that the variables in (1) can be non-linear transformations of the variables of interest. As
we work with micro data, we can control the aggregation directly. This turns up to be important
for at least three reasons. First, theoretical models often imply relationships among non linear
function of variables. Therefore, to give a structural interpretation to the results we present it will
be crucial to control aggregation. Second, in the case of corners, the theoretical relationships one
might want to consider at the aggregate level involve both means conditional on not being at a
corner and overall means. Third, within cell heterogeneity, that is the variability of η cth , is not
only useful to correct for the measurement error in the estimation of z ct , but can also be
informative to study the evolution of the inequality over time.
As stressed above, because we lack panel data, we can only study dynamic models by using
grouped observations. That means that we can only study the dynamics of z ct . Any purely
idiosyncratic persistence, embedded in η cth cannot be recovered by our methodology. This might
be a serious problem in evaluating the importance of precautionary saving or similar phenomena.

6

Nothing much can be done about this except noticing that to get a handle on persistence at the
individual level, a genuine panel dimension is necessary as it will be necessary to observe the
covariance between individual variables in subsequent time periods. Having said that, however, it
should be stressed that even a relatively short genuine panel might be sufficient to estimate a
model which requires big T asymptotics if repeated panels are available: one can then group the
cross moments and follow their dynamics over time.
The first step of our procedure consists in removing all deterministic trends from the variables of
interest. Denoting as ~z cth the variables before detrending, these are likely to be affected by time,
group and age effects. As within the framework of a life cycle model groups are often formed on
the basis of the year of birth of the household head, group effects are essentially cohort effects.
This implies the impossibility of disentangling age, time and cohort effects. In what follows we
label all deterministic trends in the data as ‘age and cohort’ effects. While this label is arbitrary,
disentangling the various effects is not the aim of the study which focuses, instead, on modeling
the innovation to income and consumption at the business cycle frequency.
To remove deterministic changes, therefore, we regress the variables of interest on a cohort
specific high order polynomial in age with cohort specific intercepts. Because we use quarterly
data, we also include seasonal effects in our first step regression.
3

(2)

~
z cth = δ c + ∑ α ci q ti + f c (t − c) + z cth
i =1

where f c (t − c) is the cohort specific polynomial in age (obtained as time-year of birth), q’s are
quarterly seasonal dummies and δ c the cohort specific intercepts. Equation (2) is estimated by
OLS. The cohort average of the residual, zct, reflects both genuine time variation in group
averages and measurement error arising from the limited sample sizes in computing the group
averages.3
It should be stressed again that equation (2) does not contain time dummies: as business cycle
shocks (either common across groups or not) are the focus of the study, we do not want to
remove them. Removing cohort specific age polynomial, however, does remove deterministic
trends from our data, which may but do not need to, be interpreted as a combination of age and
cohort effects. What we do not remove are business cycle fluctuations that are instead typically

3 More efficient estimates could be obtained by controlling for the heteroscedasticity induced by different cell sizes
and within cell variances.

7

removed in studies that introduce time dummies in an equation like (2). Having estimated the
parameters of such a regression, we interpret the cohort averages of the estimated residuals zct as
deviations of the average cohort data from the deterministic trends present in the data. It is the
cohort averages of these residuals that we model and study.
To take into account the possibility of stochastic trends (and because of the structural
interpretation we give to the covariance structure that we estimate), we take the first differences
of zct and study its time series properties. Consider three vectors of observable variables, x, y and
r, of dimension m,n and p, respectively. The model we propose to estimate is the following:
x
xy y
xr r
∆xct = ∑ α xx
j u c , t − j + ∑ α j u c ,t − j + ∑ α j u t − j
j

(3)

∆y ct =

j

∑α

j
yy
j

u cy,t − j + ∑ α jyr u tr− j

j

j

∑α

rt =

rr
j

u tr− j

j

where the shocks u cx,t , u cy,t and u tr are of dimensions m, n and p, respectively and the matrices of
coefficients of the appropriate dimensions. The variables x are choices for the individual
households: while in the basic specification we estimate x is non durable consumption (and
m=1), in general x can include several variables such as, for instance, different components of
consumption, hours of work and participation rates by adding more equations to the system.
These variables are affected by all the shocks present in the system. The vector y includes
variables who are household (or cohort) specific but are assumed not to be determined by
individual choice, at least at the frequency we are considering. These could include, for instance,
wage rates for male and females, and they can be group specific. In the specific model we
estimate we consider y to be income. The y variables are affected by all the shocks in the system
with the exception of the shocks specific to the variables in the first group (the choice variables).
The vector of r variables are also not determined by individual choices and, moreover, do not
vary across individuals. We think of these variables as prices. In the model we estimate below, we
have a single variable of this type, the interest rate, but we could consider many, such as the
prices of individual commodities.
The vector of unobservable random variables u is assumed to be stationary, uncorrelated over
time and with a block-diagonal variance-covariance matrix, as each shock is allowed to be

8

correlated across cohorts. A more detailed exposition of the type of model we estimate is given in
the Appendix.
The MA structure in equation (3) is quite general, but imposes some important and strong
restrictions that are used to (over-) identify the model. In particular, the triangular structure (at
least for the contemporaneous shocks) is crucial for identification. We assume that shocks to
individually determined variables, such as non-durable consumption, do not affect the variables
that are assumed to be given to the individual households.4 In addition to these restrictions, we
make the normalization assumption that the coefficient on the own residuals are equal to one.
For instance, we assume that all the components of the diagonal of the matrix αxx0 are equal to
one.

2.2.

Estimation

There are several ways in which one can estimate the model (3). By making assumptions on the
distribution of the shocks that enter the system (3) it is possible to compute the likelihood
function associated with a given sample and estimate the parameters of interest by maximizing
such a function. It would be also possible to avoid making specific functional form assumptions,
and use a method of moment estimator. In particular, one could compute variances covariances
and autocovariances of the series of interest and minimize the distance between the sample
moment and those implied by the parameters of the model. While the letter method is potentially
more attractive, we experienced a variety of numerical problems in its implementation, especially
when trying to correct for the presence of measurement error, which we discuss below. For this
reason we adopted the former method. The estimates we present assume that the residuals in
system (3) are Gaussian. The assumption of normality of the residuals can certainly be criticized.
Indeed, Abowd and Card (1989) report some evidence against normality within their framework.
We should stress, however, that we are modeling time series, rather than cross sectional
variability.
So far, for ease of exposition, we have assumed that the group means of the variables of interest
are observed. As, instead, they are estimated using samples of limited size, we have to consider

4

Identification requires that only contemporaneous shocks to ‘choice’ variables do not determine ‘non-choice’
variables. We make the stronger assumption partly for ease of notation.

9

the measurement error problem that this induces. That is, as the sample used in estimating the
cohort averages is refreshed in each period, the error induced by sample variation implies an
MA(1) structure in the changes in the variable. When considering the empirical counterpart of
system (3) we will need to take this structure into account explicitly. Given that we know the cell
size and we can estimate the within cell variance, we have a substantial amount of information on
the measurement error that we can use to correct the estimated sample moments.
More specifically, the changes in the variables we model can be decomposed into two
components,
(4)

∆z ct = ∆z ct + ∆η ct

where η ct is the error induced by the sample variability and that we will call ‘measurement error’.
We can estimate its variance consistently from the within cell variability and the cell size. We will
assume that is independent of ∆z ct , the changes in the innovations we are interested in modeling.
The time series variance of ∆z ct can then be consistently estimated by the sample equivalent of
the following expression:
(5)

 2

Var (∆z ct ) = Var (∆z ct ) − E 
Vari η cth 
 N ct


( )

where the second variance has a subscript ‘i’ to stress that is a cross sectional covariance.5
The within cell variance can be estimated from the micro data. If we assume that the variance
within cells is constant, one can estimate such a variance very efficiently. If one assumes that the
cross sectional variances in equation (5) are known, one can considerably simplify the
maximization of the likelihood function. We estimate such variances under the assumption that
they are constant across cell and can be estimated using the entire sample. As we have around
23,000 observations, we treat such variances are known.

5 The latter variance will be different in each cell and at each point in time, if nothing else because cell sizes can be
quite different. These variances can be averaged out to get a mean of the unconditional variance needed for the
correction.

10

2.3.

Comparison with the existing literature

One of the first papers to use panel data to infer the time series properties of individual level
variables is the widely cited paper by MaCurdy (1982) in which the author models deviations of
wages and earnings from a regression equation including several variables (such as age and
demographics) and a set of period dummies. These deviations are found to be well represented
by an IMA(2) model, where the second coefficient of the MA component, while significantly
different from zero, is estimated to be quite small. MaCurdy (1982) uses data from the PSID. The
same survey was later used by Abowd and Card (1989) who, generalizing MaCurdy’s approach,
allow for non stationarity of the processes for earnings and wages. While they also found that the
autocovariances of order higher than two are not significantly different from zero (and small in
magnitude), they reject the hypothesis of stationarity. Abowd and Card (1989) also related their
findings about correlations and autocorrelations in terms of alternative structural models,
performing a variance decomposition exercise6.
Altonji et al. (2002) probably constitutes the study closest to the present one. They consider the
covariances and autocovariances of wages, hours and food consumption in the PSID and use
them to estimate several factor models which are then given a structural interpretation.
The main conceptual difference between the existing studies in the literature and our approach is
the fact that we do not remove time effects and, indeed, focus on the modeling of business cycle
frequency shocks. For this reason we need to rely on T-asymptotics and for this reason our level
of flexibility in analyzing non-stationarity is limited.7 However, it is important to stress that the
difference is not merely technical but of focus: we aim at identifying the nature of business cycle
shocks to income and how these are absorbed by consumption and, possibly, its components
and other variables. In other words, ours is an attempt to model the time effects that are
removed in other studies. Our approach might be particularly informative in characterizing

6

Moffitt and Gottshalk (1995) have used the evolution in the cross sectional variances in earnings to identify
permanent and transitory components.
7 Throughout the study we assume stationarity, that is that the first and second moments we will be considering do
not vary over time. This might seem unfortunate as there is some evidence of non stationarity in micro studies such
as Abowd and Card (1989), Altonji et al (2002) and Meghir and Pistaferri (2004). However, it should be stressed,
once more, that we are modeling time series rather than cross sectional variability and, therefore, the moments we are
considering are conceptually different from those identified by the papers cited. Given that our estimators are based
on T-asymptotics, considering the possibility of time-varying moments would involve the parametrization of their
changes. We have not pursued this line of research.

11

smoothing mechanisms and to interpret the shocks we identify in terms of underlying structural
models.
The necessity of large T-asymptotics is also consistent with the same requirement in the
estimation of Euler equations in the absence of complete markets.8 In Section 5, we show how
our estimates can be used to derive some of the same parameters typically estimated in the Euler
equation approach. In particular, we will see what restrictions the Euler equation imposes on the
parameters of our model and how, when these are satisfied, some of the parameters of our model
have a direct structural interpretation. We will also show how our approach goes beyond what
can be learned from an Euler equation. Identification of the contemporaneous correlation
between income and consumption allows us to assess whether consumption reacts to income
shocks in a way that is consistent with specific models.
The second main difference between our procedure and those in the studies cited above is that
we focus on grouped data, while the others use individual data. The main reason of our exclusive
attention to grouped data is the lack of a longitudinal dimension in our data. This forces us to
give up the possibility of identifying any purely idiosyncratic dynamics. However, the focus on (a
fixed number of) groups and on the time series variability gives a greater flexibility in modelling
cross sectional heterogeneity (i.e. across groups, in our case) and a better chance to identify
genuine time series uncertainty (as distinct from cross sectional heterogeneity). Increasing the
number of groups would allow one to use N-asymptotics and give greater flexibility in the
analysis of non-stationary time series processes. In what follows we do not make any use of Nasymptotics arguments.
The approach we propose can attempt at modeling the dynamics of several components of
consumption and other relevant variables simultaneously. While other studies were limited by the
availability of consumption measures (the PSID contains only information on food expenditure),
the FES data set allows us to explore a much richer set up.
Finally, we only use the information on within group of heterogeneity to correct the estimated
sample moments for the small sample variability and measurement error. As pointed out by
several authors, the evolution of within cell heterogeneity over time and age can be quite
informative for a number of reasons. Deaton and Paxson (1994), for instance, relate the
evolution of the within cell variance in consumption and income and check that the implications
8 Notice that, at least in principle, we can allow for group specific fixed effects in all our equations without much
difficulty. Situations in which this is appropriate are discussed in section 5.

12

of the life cycle models for these cross sectional moments are satisfied. Blundell and Preston
(1998), instead, use the differences between changes in the cross sectional variance of
consumption and income to identify the variance of the permanent and transitory component of
income.
A number of studies in the macro time series literature are slightly related to what we are doing.
In particular, several studies papers have tried to identify the number of common factors in
disaggregated business cycle models (see Watson and Engle (1983), Quah and Sargent (1994),
Forni and Reichlin (1996)). Of more direct relevance, instead, are those studies that estimate time
series representations for consumption and income processes using aggregate data. These studies
include Sargent (1978), Flavin (1981), Campbell (1987), West (1988) Campbell and Deaton
(1989). Of particular relevance is the paper by Hansen, Roberds and Sargent (1991).

3.

Data

The data used in the estimation are drawn from the UK Family Expenditure Survey (FES) from
1974(1) to 2000(1). In this survey, about 8,000 families in the UK are interviewed each year and
they are asked to fill diaries in which they record all the expenditures they make for two weeks.
The survey records also information on demographic and labour supply variables for each
member of the family. From these figures, it is possible to reconstruct total family income. We
use these data to construct consumption and income grouped data at a quarterly frequency.
The FES has been widely used in the research on consumption. It has several advantages, among
which we should mention the fact that it is available over a long time period, which, as we discuss
above, is crucial for our identification strategy. Moreover, the quality of the data seems, at least
until very recently, very high. Tanner (1998) and more recently Brewer et al. (2006) show that,
when aggregated, the FES reproduces closely the dynamics of National Account consumption
data.
We select a sub-sample of the FES. In particular, we select all married or cohabitating couples,
living in England, Scotland or Wales, whose head is an employee. In order to have a balanced
sample in the estimation, we selected families whose head was born before 1953 or after 1940.
These selection rules result in a sample of 23,379 families. We define two seven-year-of-birth
groups. as described in table 1.

13

[Table 1 around here]
The variables we use in estimation are: non-durable consumption and disposable income, as well
as prices for non-durable consumption computed using the weights available from the FES.
Non-durable consumption is defined as the sum of: food, alcohol and tobacco, fuel, clothing,
transportation costs and services.
In order to remove deterministic trends and seasonal effects, we regress (the logarithm of) the
variables of interest on a polynomial in age and on quarterly dummies, as well as on the logarithm
of family size. These estimates, which correspond to equation 2 above, were carried out by OLS,
for each of the two cohorts separately.
The interest rate used in the estimation is the 3-month treasury bill rate, which has been deflated
using consumer price index constructed from the FES. The real interest rate has also been
detrended.
The aggregate non durable consumption and disposable income series used in section 6 are
drawn from the National Account Statistics quarterly data from 1974(1) to 2000(1).

4.

Results

In this section, we report our main estimation results. A structural interpretation of the
coefficients we estimate is given in the next section. Before we present estimates of the statistical
models we discussed in Section 2, it is worthwhile to present briefly some of the time series
properties of the data we use in estimation. In table 2, we report, for each of the two cohorts
considered, a measure of the time series volatility of the log changes in income and consumption.
In particular, we report the standard deviation (times 100) of the changes in detrended log
consumption and income. In the first two columns we report the raw standard deviation of our
pseudo-panel. In Columns (3) and (4) we correct the figures in the first two columns for our
estimate of the variability induced by changes in sample composition. As can be seen, given the
sample size of our cohorts and the heterogeneity within cell, the time series volatility of both

14

consumption and income is more than halved once we correct for ‘sampling variation’.9 We
compute this correction as shown in equation 5. After taking into account the correction for
measurement error, non durable consumption appears less volatile than disposable income, as
with aggregate data. The figures for aggregate data are reported in the last column of the table.
The volatility of both consumption and income is much lower than for either cohort considered,
even relative to the figures in which we attempt to control at the sampling errors induced by
relative small sample sizes.
[Table 2 around here]

4.1.

Univariate models

Before considering estimation of systems of equations as in (3), we report, in tables 3 to 5,
estimates of separate MA models for consumption, income, and the interest rate. For the first
two variables we use both micro and macro data. The models estimated on micro data are
specified as bivariate MA processes as the variables for the two cohorts are considered separately.
In particular, table 3 shows estimates of bivariate MA(4) and MA(8) models for non durable
consumption for both cohorts, both without and with correction for measurement error. The
model estimated is therefore:
q

x
∆xct = ∑ α xx
j u c ,t − j

c=1, 2

j =0

where xct is the logarithm of non durable expenditure for cohort c at time t, and q is the number
of lags. The measurement error term has been suppressed for ease of notation, and it is either
disregarded (estimates without correction) or treated as shown in the appendix (estimates with
correction for measurement error). The coefficient on the lag zero shock ( α 0xx ) is constrained to
be one, and it is not shown in the tables. The table also report estimates of the covariance matrix
of the shocks for the two cohorts10.
The first two columns in table 3 report results for the 4-lags specification of the model estimated
on cohort data without/with correction for measurement error, while the third column shows the
9

In the table, and in what follows, we refer to the correction, somewhat improperly, as a correction for measurement
error. The measurement error refers to the measurement of the population mean of cohort consumption and is
induced by the finite size of samples used in estimating them.

15

MA(4) estimated on aggregate data. Columns 4-6 report estimates for the 8-lag specifications.
Comparison between estimates based on micro data with or without correction reveals how
measurement error influences estimates of the parameters.
For the MA(4) specification, we find that correcting for measurement error, the coefficient on
the first lag, which in the first column is -0.715 reflecting the importance of the MA(1)
component induced by measurement error, is reduced to -0.03. Indeed, none of the individual
coefficient is statistically significant, almost suggesting that a random walk specification for
individual consumption. However, a formal test of this hypothesis rejects it. The p-value for the
hypothesis that the coefficients on lags 2 to 4 are equal to zero is 0.017. Moreover, while the sum
of the coefficients estimated without accounting for measurement error in table 3 is equal to -.94,
when removing the effect of measurement error the sum is still equal to -.83.
The results obtained on aggregate data, reported in the third column, are very different. The sum
of the coefficients of the MA(4) specification is positive and equal to 0.35, in line with the results
shown in Caballero (1990) for his MA(1) specification on US aggregate annual data. In Table 3
we also report the p-value of a likelihood ratio (LR) test of the restrictions imposed by the MA(4)
model with respect to the MA(8) model. The zero restrictions imposed by the four-lags
specification are not rejected, a result valid both for the model estimated on micro data (with or
without correction for measurement error) and on macro data. The evidence from this Table
clearly indicates that, in addition to the greater volatility, the synthetic cohort data present very
different dynamics. The possible explanations for these differences are many, ranging from
aggregation issues to measurement error in micro consumption data to the possibility of group
level taste shocks that are washed away in aggregate data.
Table 4 reports the analogous results for (the logarithm of the first difference of) disposable
income. Here the sum of the coefficients is always negative, apart from the 8-lag specification
estimated on aggregate data; the restrictions imposed by the 4-lag specification however cannot
be rejected (the LR test has a P-value of 89 per cent). A negative autocorrelation of the first
difference of income has been found in the US literature both with aggregate data (for example
by Watson, 1986) and with micro data (MaCurdy, 1982, Abowd and Card, 1989). Conversely
other works, such as Blinder and Deaton (1985) find, using aggregate data, a positive
autocorrelation in the differentiated series of income.

10

All variables have been multiplied by 10 in estimation.

16

As in the case of consumption (and as to be expected given the nature of the variation induced
by sampling errors), the sum of the MA coefficients is reduced, when estimating with cohort
data, in the models with correction for measurement error as compared to the specifications
where no correction is made. Also for the estimates based on cohort data the LR test favours the
4-lag specification, with a p-value equal to 5 per cent in the model without correction for
measurement error, and equal to 13 per cent in the model with correction.
Table 5 reports estimates for univariate MA models for the interest rate. The interest rate shows a
prolonged dynamics and the restrictions imposed by the MA(1) and MA(4) models are rejected.

4.2.

Multivariate models

Having estimated the univariate models, we now move on to the estimation of the main model
discussed in Section 2, the one in system (3). In particular, for each cohort, we consider two
variables, non-durable consumption and income. In addition, we have an equation for the real
interest rate. We start reporting, in Table 6, the results we obtained with grouped micro data
using a relatively non-parsimonious specification which uses 8 lags for each of the variables
considered, but imposing the triangular structure discussed above.
We start from such a general specification, because at least one of the univariate models (the one
for the interest rate) suggests such a long and complex dynamics. The evidence in Table 6 shows
that many of the coefficients we estimate are, perhaps not surprisingly, not significantly different
from zero. We therefore constrain these coefficients to zero in Table 7. We also tried with
intermediate specifications that constrained to zero only some of the insignificant coefficients in
Table 6. Given the interpretation of the results we give in the next section, we were particularly
careful with the coefficients for lag ‘income shocks’ in the specification for consumption.
In the case of consumption, we fail to reject the hypothesis that coefficient on lagged shocks are
statistically different from zero, with the only exception of lagged consumption shocks. This
evidence is at first sight at odds with the univariate model presented in the second column of
Table 3. As we mentioned above, however, more parsimonious univariate specifications wouldl
not be inconsistent with the dynamics observed in Table 7. We discuss possible interpretations of
this result in Section 5.
Contemporaneous shocks to both income and interest rates, however, have a significant effect on
consumption. In the case of income, consistently with the evidence on the univariate models, we
do not find a very long dynamics. Once again, this evidence is not inconsistent with the evidence

17

on earnings presented by other authors for the US. The only variable that exhibits long
persistence is the real interest rate. We postpone a structural interpretation of these parameters
until the next section.
In Table 8, we report the estimates we obtain estimating system (3) on aggregate data. The results
are dramatically different from those obtained on the micro data. First, several lagged
consumption shocks are significant, with the sum of these coefficients being 1.24 (rather than
the negative numbers in Tables 6 and 7). Second, several lags of income shocks are also strongly
significant. Unlike with the micro data, the joint hypothesis that the coefficients on the lagged
income shocks in the consumption equation are equal to zero is rejected at any standard level of
significance.

5.

A structural interpretation of the results

Having estimated the parameters in model (3), one can discuss the implications of these estimates
for alternative theoretical frameworks. Alternatively one can start from a theoretical framework
and think of the implication that it has for the parameters of model (3).
The starting point for a structural interpretation of the parameters in system (3) is the life cycle
model, interpreted as a flexible parameterization of a dynamic optimization problem in which the
decision unit is the household.
We start with the simplest version of the life cycle model as an example of a way in which a
theoretical framework can be used to impose restrictions on the parameters of model (3). We
then complicate the model to introduce a number of realistic elements. We neglect deterministic
trends (including age effects) as well as family size effects from all the variables in our analysis.
This implicitly assumes that the age and family size effects removed in the first step of our
estimation procedure capture completely the effect of demographic variables and that these are
considered as deterministic. As we focus on business cycle frequencies, we do not think that this
assumption is particularly strong.11

11

If one thinks that the age polynomials used in the first step are not sufficient to remove the effect of demographic
variables, and is willing to retain the assumption that they are deterministic, these variables can be used in the first
step regressions.

18

5.1.

A simple version of the life cycle model

A very simple version of the life cycle implies the following system of equations for a generic
individual:
(6)

log( λ t ) = Et [log( λ t +1 )] + Er
t t + 1 + kt + ε t + 1

(7)

log( λ t ) = log(Ux( xt , zt ))

where the variable k is a function of the discount factor and of higher moments of the
expectational error ε t+1 . Ux is the marginal utility of (non-durable) consumption, which is
assumed to depend on consumption and a vector of observable and unobservable variables z. λ t
is the marginal utility of wealth and represents the effect of all present and future variables
relevant for the optimization problem faced by the individual. r is the interest rate. The
specification in equations (6) and (7) also assumes intertemporal separability, in that the marginal
utility of consumption at t does not depend on variables from other time periods.
If one considers the fact that equations (6) and (7) refer to a single generic household, it is clear
why, even in such a simple framework, aggregating such an equation across groups of households
would generate group specific fixed effects. These could arise if, for instance, there are systematic
differences across groups in the discount factors, higher moments of the expectational errors, or
in the unobserved component of z. We do not report results that allow for these effects because
our groups are defined in terms of year of birth and we have removed cohort and age effects. In
a larger data set, where one could form groups based on, say, education level of the household
head, one could easily generalize model (3) to allow for them.
If we assume that the interest rate and k are constant over time and that the observable
component of the vector z contains only deterministic variables that can be captured by the
deterministic trends removed in our first step, equations (6) and (7) have very simple and strong
implications for the model in (3).
First, one can simplify the model considerably eliminating the last equation (that refers to the
interest rate). Furthermore, if the specification of the utility function is such that the marginal
utility can be approximated by a linear function of log consumption (as it is the case, for instance,
for a CRRA utility function), from equations (6) and (7) one can see that changes in log
consumption can be related to the expectational error ε t+1 and therefore should not exhibit any
serial correlation and should be uncorrelated with any information available at t. This is the
celebrated ‘random walk’ result, stressed by Hall (1978). It translates in our model into

19

restrictions on the coefficients on lags of all shocks of the consumption equation. The so-called
tests of ‘excess sensitivity’ of consumption to predictable components of income take the form
in our model of tests on the lagged income shocks being good predictors of consumption. Notice
that in Tables 6 and 7, we do not find any evidence of ‘excess sensitivity’ of consumption to
income, consistent with the evidence in Attanasio and Weber (1993). The picture that emerges
from aggregate data in Table 8 is, of course, very different, and consistent with previous evidence
such as that presented, for instance, by Campbell and Mankiw (1991).12
In the specification we estimated, we observe a significant coefficient on the lagged ‘consumption
shocks’ in the consumption equation. Notice that these shocks are uncorrelated with the
components that generate predictability of the income process. A possible explanation for this
observed persistence would be the possibility of an unobservable component in the vector of
preference shifters z. Such a component, which, for lack of a better term we label ‘unobserved
heterogeneity’, captures those aspects of preferences that are not directly modeled and that are
likely to be important for consumption. The time series properties of consumption innovations
would then be clearly affected by the time series properties of such a term. Suppose, for instance,
that the instantaneous utility function is given by:

ct1−γ
U (c t ) =
exp{vt }
1− γ
where the random variable vt captures unobserved taste shocks. If such a variable is constant
over time, first differencing would remove it completely. If instead it evolved as a random walk,
we would need to add a white noise term to the innovation of (log) consumption. Finally, if the
level of such a variable is a white noise, there would be an MA(1) component in the Euler
equation, of the type we observe. Notice that such an MA(1) term does not affect the consistency
of the GMM approach used in the estimation of Euler equation for consumption, if, for different
reasons, the instrument set includes variables lagged twice and more. Notice also that, if the taste
shock is purely idiosyncratic, aggregating over a group, it would have an effect similar to the
sample variability of the estimates of the group averages, which we labeled as measurement error
above. To obtain the type of result reported in Table 7 we need cohort specific taste shocks.
An alternative source of persistence in the consumption equation is the presence of time varying
higher moments of the expectational error. This is not an avenue that we explore.
12

Hall and Mishkin (1982) using the US micro data PSID find that consumption changes are related to lagged levels

20

The approach followed so far is quite similar to that of Altonji et al. (2002), with an important
difference: the fact that we do not remove time effects.13 A first and very simple generalization of
the model which stresses the differences between our methodology and that of Altonji et al. is to
consider time varying interest rates. This extension could be of particular interest as allows one to
estimate the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.
Allowing for a time variable interest rate involves adding an additional equation to the model, so
that one can measure the correlation between innovations to interest rates and consumption (and
other variables). One can either assume that the interest rate is the same for all groups or allow
for differences in intertemporal prices induced, for instance, by differences in marginal tax rates
across groups. The latter approach, however, involves the necessity of measuring group specific
interest rates.
If we consider an asset whose rate of return is the same across groups and that is widely held,
than equations (6) and (7) induce a set of additional restrictions on system (3). Let’s define
q

A ( L) = ∑ α xxj L j , and analogously for A xr ( L) and A rr ( L) . It is easy to show that an
xx

j =1

isoelastic utility function with a coefficient of relative risk aversion γ implies that:
(8)

γ ( A xx ( L)u cx,t +1 + A rx ( L)u cr,t +1 ) = A rr ( L)u cr,t +1 .

As this has to hold for every possible realization of the residuals, the restrictions on the
coefficients of system (3) are that:
(9)

A xx ( L) = 0 and

(10)

γA xr ( L) = A rr ( L) .

The second set of restrictions implies that, as long as the interest rate is predictable, one can
identify the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
Should one encounter a rejection of these restrictions, several alternative specifications are
possible depending on the nature of the rejection. We have already discussed the violation of the
hypothesis that the coefficients on lagged consumption shocks are zero. The fact that the
restriction about the proportionality of the coefficients on the interest rate lagged innovations is

of income, contradicting the prediction of the permanent income model.
13 Altonji et al. (2002) follow two different strategies that could be, in principle be pursued here. The first consists in
parametrizing the innovation to marginal utility of wealth as a function of the innovations of wages, non labor
income and possibly other variables deemed to be relevant for the problem. The other is to use explicitly the Euler
equation (8) to difference out λ t .

21

violated might be an indication of differences in interest rates and/or risk aversion across groups.
If one more lag in the interest rate innovation enters the system even this possibility can be tested
against more general misspecifications.
In Table 9 we report the estimated elasticity of intertemporal substitution implied by the
restriction in equation (10) and by the estimates of the coefficients we have fitted both on cohort
and aggregate data. The models estimated on cohort data imply an elasticity of intertemporal
substitution in the range of 0.6-0.7, depending on the specification, while the estimates based on
aggregate data are negative, indicating a misspecification of the model. This result is in line with
Attanasio and Weber (1993), who show the importance of correct aggregation in estimating
Euler equations for consumption.

5.2.

Excess smoothness

The restrictions we have discussed so far are derived from the orthogonality conditions implied
by the Euler equation for consumption derived from equations (6) and (7). This condition,
together with a set of intertemporal budget constraints (and initial and terminal conditions for
assets) pins down the allocation of consumption over the life cycle. In situations in which it is
possible to derive a closed form solution for consumption (as is the case, for example, with
quadratic utility and constant interest rates) then the solution imposes restrictions on the
coefficients of system (3) that relate income shocks to consumption. When a closed form
solution for consumption that pins down the relationship between income and consumption
innovations is not available, one can rely on approximate solutions, of the type developed by
Campbell (1994) and used, among others, by Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2005) and
Attanasio and Pavoni (2006).
The restrictions that the life cycle permanent income model imposes on the contemporaneous
correlation between consumption and income relates to the fact that consumption should react
to news about permanent income in a way that is mediated by the intertemporal budget
constraint and that depends on the information that current income shocks give about future
income. These are the type of restrictions that were studied by Flavin (1981), Campbell and
Deaton (1989), West (1988), Quah (1990) and Hansen, Roberds and Sargent (1991) (HRS)
among others. HRS, in particular, stress that given the Euler equation, the intertemporal budget

22

constraint imposes testable restrictions on the response of the (change of) non-durable
consumption to shocks to income whose violation has been interpreted as ‘excess smoothness’ of
consumption. It is worth comparing the HRS approach to the specification we have proposed.
HRS show that , in a simple version of the permanent income model, the model gives rise to a
representation of the following type:

∆y t = w t y + β111w t y−1 + β120 w tc + β121w tc −1
∆c t =

w tc + β 221w tc −1

E[ w t y ] = E[ w t y w t y−1 ] = E[ w tc ] = E[ w tc w tc −1 ]E[ w t y w tc ] = 0
Var ( w t y ) = σ wy2 ; Var ( w tc ) = σ wc2
HRS stress that an implication of the theory is that this representation is not

a Wold

representation for the joint time series of consumption and income. Such a representation,
assuming that consumption is a martingale (imposing the Euler equation) can be used to test the
restrictions imposed by the intertemporal budget constraint. The test proposed does not require
the specification of the information set observed by the consumer.
The structure of this representation is quite similar to ours, except that we have the opposite
triangular structure, that is in the system (3) consumption is allowed to depend on all shocks,
while income is not allowed to depend on the consumption shock. Under special circumstances,
the two representations are equivalent. If, for instance, all the lag coefficients in our consumption
equation are zero, one can map one specification into another. We need such a restriction so that,
in our simple model, consumption is a martingale. However, in more general circumstances in
which the HRS specification allows for lags in the consumption equation (maybe originated by
temporal non-separabilities), the two specifications impose different restrictions on the data.
In a recent contribution, Attanasio and Pavoni (2006) discuss how violations of the intertemporal
budget constraint can arise in a situation in which the Euler equation is satisfied but consumption
is partly insured in a model with moral hazard and hidden assets. In particular, Attanasio and
Pavoni (2006) stress the difference between the restrictions that imply the lack of correlation
between predicted income and predicted consumption and the restrictions that involve the
contemporaneous correlation of income and consumption. The latter can arise even with an
Euler equation holding, if the intertemporal budget constraint with a single asset is violated, maybe
because it ignores state contingent transfers that insure part of permanent shocks.

23

In our model, the intertemporal budget constraint with a constant interest rate (and the Euler
equation) implies that:
q

(11)

α 0xy = α yy (z ) = ∑ α jyy z j
j =0

where z = (1 / 1 + r ) and r is the interest rate. Campbell (1987), West (1988) and Campbell and
Deaton (1989), Hansen, Roberds and Sargent (1991) report results on versions of this test
obtained from aggregate time series on income, consumption and saving that imply that
consumption responds too little to innovations in income, a result that has been labeled the
excess smoothness of consumption. In our framework, this result would imply that the left-handside of (11) would be less than the right hand side.14
Using the results we obtained estimating various versions of system (3), and following Attanasio
and Pavoni (2006), we can test the restriction in equation (11) against the alternative of excess
smoothness. We evaluate the term α yy (z ) at a quarterly interest rate equal to 1 per cent. We
report these results in Table 10. Of particular interest are the results derived from the estimates in
Table 7 where the restrictions implied by the Euler equations are imposed (it should be stressed
that, as we mentioned above, these restrictions are not rejected). The excess smoothness test
equals 0.65 with an estimated standard error of 0.17 implying a rejection of the hypothesis that
the ratio of the left-hand-side and right-hand-side of equation (11) is one at the 5% level.
Turning to the estimates based on aggregate data, we find a much more significant rejection of
the hypothesis that the excess smoothness parameters equal (1). These results are consistent with
those presented in Campbell (1987) and Campbell and Deaton (1989).
We also estimated the same specifications using our cohort data in the first difference of the
levels, instead of the first difference of the logarithms, and find results very similar to those
obtained with the cohort data in first difference of the logarithm. The results are reported in the
bottom panel of Table 10.

14 Hansen Roberds and Sargent (1991) stress that without imposing the Euler equation, the intertemporal budget
constraint does not impose restrictions on the time series properties of savings.

24

6.

Extensions

The simple versions of the model considered above can be extended in a variety of ways. While
we leave the empirical investigations of these extensions to future research, here we sketch the
implications of some generalizations of the simple model.

6.1.

Non separability with labour supply and other components of consumption

Implicit in the formulation of the model above is the assumption that non durable consumption
is separable from other components of consumption excluded from the analysis (such as durables
and housing) as well as from leisure. The latter might be particularly important as deviations from
this assumption could explain observed correlation between expected income and consumption.
Indeed, in many empirical analysis of Euler equations based on micro data (such as those of
Attanasio and Weber (1993), Blundell, Browning and Meghir (1994), Banks, Blundell and Preston
(1994), Attanasio and Browning (1995), Attanasio and Weber (1995)) labour supply, and in
particular, female labour force participation seems to play an important role.15 This evidence is
not entirely surprising, as many components of consumption expenditure are accounted by job
related expenses or, in the case of female labour force participation, might substitute for home
production services.
The generalization of the simple model proposed in the previous section is straightforward:
equations (6) and (7) still hold, except that the marginal utility of consumption has to depend on
the excluded commodities and on labour supply. It should be stressed that equations (6) and (7)
are robust to the presence of various kinds of complications in the determination of durables
and/or labour supply, such as fixed adjustment costs and the like. The marginal utility of non
durable consumption is defined as a function of non durable consumption and the optimal level
of the other relevant variables, regardless of how they are determined.
The difficulty, in the case of durable consumption, concerns the observability of the existing
stock of durables at each point in time.16 In the case of labour supply and in particular female
labour supply, for which corner solutions are important, one has to allow the marginal utility
depend explicitly on participation at the individual level. Given the nature of the data, this does
not constitute an important problem. If the (log of) marginal utility of consumption depends

15

Browning and Meghir (1991) test explicitly for the dependence of a demand system on labour supply behaviour.
One might try to construct group level estimates of the existing stock of durables by cumulating the observed
expenditures. We have not yet attempted this procedure.

16

25

additively on a participation indicator, aggregating equation (7) one has a model in which average
changes in log non durable consumption depend, among other things, on the (changes) in
participation rates at a point in time for a given cohort. It is therefore necessary to model female
participation rates in a way analogous to the way in which we model non durable consumption,
wages, or income. Such an equation can be easily added to the system of equations (3). It should
be stressed that this procedure, while allowing the study of the properties of non durable
consumption is silent about the determinants of labour force participation.

6.2.

Multiple commodities

So far we have worked with the assumption of a single and homogeneous non durable good.
More precisely, we have considered total non durable consumption and studied its allocation
over time as a function of a single price index. Of course, this approach is only justified under
stringent conditions on preferences (see Gorman, 1953).17 It might therefore be important to
model simultaneously the allocation of resources over time and, at an point in time, among
several commodities. Furthermore, even when the Gorman aggregation conditions are satisfied,
the study of a demand system can be of interest. Finally, the consideration of several Euler
equations simultaneously might give more powerful tests of the model considered.
Let’s then assume that q is a vector of m commodities, with prices p. Instead of equation (7) we
will then have m equations relating the marginal utility of each commodity to its price and to the
marginal utility of wealth λ :
(7’)

log( pti ) + log( λ t ) = log(Uqi ( qti , zt )); i = 1,..., m

where the index i refers to the commodity. As we are writing (7’) as an equality, we are implicitely
ruling out the possibility of corners in any of the m commodities. From equation (7’) it is also
clear why it is important to have an unobserved component in preferences. Without it, one could
consider equation (7’) for two different commodities to eliminate the marginal utility of wealth
and obtain an equation that has no error!

17

Blundell, Browning and Meghir (1994) and Attanasio and Weber (1995) address this issue. In the first paper, that
uses UK data, the authors find that while the restrictions that would grant the use of a single price index are formally
rejected, the use of a Stone price index constitute a good approximation of the ‘true’ price index that should be used.
Attanasio and Weber (1995), using a slightly different parametrization of preferences and US data, find a more
important role for a second price index.

26

From our perspective, to map a system of equations such as (7’) in anything like (3) involves
considering the innovations in each commodity (and possibly in total consumption) and
modelling the vector of relative prices. As far as the latter are concerned, they can be treated in a
fashion similar to the interest rate: they can be assumed to be constant across consumers. Three
different possibilities are open for the treatment of commodities. On the one hand one can
consider m-1 equations obtained by using a specific commodity as a benchmark and eliminate
therefore the marginal utility of wealth from the system. This approach involves therefore to
consider static relationships, possibly expressed in ratios of marginal utilities and relative prices.
Second, one can use a function of total non durable expenditure as an approximation of the
marginal utility of wealth and use it in each of the m equations. The last alternative is to use
equation (6) in each of the expressions in (7’) and therefore derive an Euler equation for each of
the commodities considered.
Several considerations are in order. First, regardless of the approach used, the discussion above
about the possibility that the vector z includes some choice variables is relevant here. The
demand system that one obtains eliminating the marginal utility of wealth is effectively the
conditional demand system discussed in detail by Browning and Meghir (1991).
Second, the first two approaches are essentially static and can be expressed in terms of the levels
of the variables of interest. The residuals of these equations arise from unobserved
hetereogeneity across consumers (groups) and measurement error. Indeed, the first two
approches give rise to equations that can in principle be estimated using cross sectional data
(except that one has to have enough price variability, that can only be observed over time). On
the other hand, these equations, within the framework of a life cycle model with intertemporally
separable preferences, are uniformative about the way in which households react to shocks.18
Third, the last approach, that of deriving m Euler equations, is intrinsically dynamic and is the
natural extention of what we do considering a single commodity. This is the preferable line as it
delivers some interesting restriction of the system of equations (7’) (extended for changes in
prices). In particular, one can see that the innovations to that system of equations, once one
controls for changes in prices, should be driven by a single factor: the innovations to the marginal
utility of wealth.

18

Meghir and Weber (1996) interpret any evidence of dynamics in a system of demand equations as an indication of
intertemporal non-separability. Using US data they are unable to identify any dynamic effect, once they condition on
durable and semi-durable consumption.

27

6.3.

Absorption of shocks by different commodities

As mentioned above, the existence of complete contingent markets implies strong restrictions to
the variance covariance structure of the residuals of system (3). In particular, the
contemporaneous innovations to the marginal utility of wealth should be perfectly correlated
across groups. This is the idea exploited in a number of empirical applications and tests of the
perfect insurance hypothesis, such as Hayashi, Altonji and Kotlikoff (1996) and Attanasio and
Davis (1996). While Hayashi et al. focus on individual US data and reject strongly the hypothesis
of risk sharing, even among related families, Attanasio and Davis use data grouped by education
and cohort and reject the hypothesis of complete markets only when they consider relatively low
frequency changes. This last result might be either an indication that high frequency are
effectively insured against or that they are effectively self insured, so that Attanasio and Davis’
test lack the necessarily power to reject the null.
Regardless of the interpretation of the result, if group shocks to wages are not reflected in
consumption at high frequency, it might be interesting to study whether other variables (such as
durable expenditure, labour supply) absorb such shocks or whether smoothing mechanisms such
as income support or borrowing are capable of absorbing completely transitory shocks. A similar
question has recently been asked by Gruber (1997) and Dynarski and Gruber (1997) by
considering how consumption, several of its components and other variables vary with shocks to
income.
Our framework is suitable to analyze the correlation between several components of
consumption (and labour supply) with innovations to wages or other variables. Deviations from
the complete market benchmark, or even from the self-insurance paradigm implied by the life
cycle model might be reflected in particular pattern of correlations in systems analogous to (7’).
Browning and Crossley (2003), for instance, have suggested that Canadian unemployed
households might react to income shocks by delaying the replacement of small durables. They
identify these effects by estimating a small demand system and verifying that income support
variables have an effect on the expenditure on small durables over and above that accounted for
by total expenditure in any particular period. Our approach suggests to consider the variability of
various components of consumption for different groups and to measure the correlation between
the innovations to the components that are most variable and that to income or wages. However,
as the estimation of such a system is particularly cumbersome, we leave this topic for future
research.

28

The problems discussed in this section would be best addressed by considering finer groups than
those defined by year of birth cohorts. Attanasio and Davis (1996), for instance, find that most of
the variability in relative wages is explained by variations across education groups (rather than
across cohorts). Furthermore, on a priori basis, some groups are more likely to be able to smooth
shocks by borrowing or by decumulating assets, while alternative smoothing mechanism might be
used by those groups that do not have access to them. Attanasio (1997), for instance, has found
that in the US, not only that the expenditure of households headed by individual with low
education is relatively more volatile, but that most of the difference is accounted for by
differences in the volatility of durable expenditure.

7.

Conclusions

In this paper we have analyzed the time series properties of individual consumption expenditure
and income. The methodology we propose consists in estimating multivariate moving average
systems for synthetic panels constructed from time series of repeated cross sections. This
approach has the advantage of allowing to explicitly take into account the measurement error
present in the individual measures of consumption and income. Data are drawn from the UK
Family Expenditure Survey.
We find evidence that consumption changes are correlated to lagged consumption shocks.
Instead we cannot reject the hypothesis that lagged interest rate and income shocks have no
effects on consumption changes. This evidence is coherent with the results of ‘no-excess
sensitivity’ of consumption reported on micro data by Attanasio and Weber (1993, 1995),
Blundell et al. (1994) and Attanasio and Browning (1995). The results are not induced by the
method we use: when using aggregate data we obtain that lagged income shocks do predict
consumption changes, as in Campbell and Mankiw (1990). When we use the estimated
parameters to identify the elasticity of intertemporal substitution using micro data, we estimates
in the range of 0.6, which is a bit lower but not inconsistent with the estimates reported by
Attanasio and Weber (1993). Notice that our identification of persistence in consumption growth
induced by consumption shocks of the type we identified might be explained by taste shocks or
movements in second moments.

29

Our approach can be also used to assess the extent to which innovation to income (or interest
rates) are reflected into consumption. The Euler equation approach is typically completely silent
about this. Consistently with what reported by Attanasio and Pavoni (2006), we show that our
micro data exhibit some evidence of ‘excess smoothness’ of consumption, in that innovations to
(permanent) income are not fully reflected into innovations to consumption. This result,
consistent with Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2004) can be interpreted, following Hansen,
Roberds and Sargent (1991) as a violation of the intertemporal budget constraint with a single asset.
Attanasio and Pavoni (2006) construct a model with moral hazard and hidden assets that generate
this type of dynamics. Indeed, Attanasio and Pavoni (2006) give the excess smoothness
parameter an interpretation in terms of the severity of the moral hazard problem.
In the last section of the paper, we have proposed a number of extensions to the simple
theoretical framework we presented in Section 5. These features would lead to the estimation of a
model richer than the one presented in Section 4. Such a model could include the consideration
of several components of consumption as well as additional variables, such as labour supply. We
have left this empirical work for future research.

30

References
Abowd, J. and D. Card (1989), “On the Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours Changes”,
Econometrica, 57, 411-445.
Altonji, J.G., A.P. Martins and A. Siow (2002), “Dynamic Factors Models of Consumption,
Hours and Income”, Research in Economics, 56, 3-59.
Attanasio, O.P. (1997) “Consumption and saving behaviour: modelling recent trends”, Fiscal
Studies, 18(1), 23-47.
Attanasio, O.P. and M. Browning (1995) “Consumption over the Life-Cycle and over the
Business Cycle”, American Economic Review, 85, 1118-1137.
Attanasio, O.P. and S.J. Davis (1996) “Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution of
Consumption”, Journal of Political Economy, 104(6), 1227-62.
Attanasio, O.P. and N. Pavoni (2006): “Risk Sharing in Private Information Models with Asset
Accumulation: Explaining the Excess Smoothness of Consumption”, UCL Mimeo.
Attanasio, O.P. and G. Weber (1995), “Is Consumption Growth Consistent with Intertemporal
Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey”, Journal of Political Economy,
103, 1121-1157.
Attanasio, O.P. and G. Weber (1993), “Consumption Growth, the Interest Rate and
Aggregation”, Review of Economic Studies, 60, 631-49.
Banks, J., R. Blundell and I. Preston (1994), “Life-Cycle Expenditure Allocations and the
Consumption Cost of Children”, European Economic Review, 38(7), 1391-1410.
Blinder, A.S. and Deaton, A.S. (1985) “The Time-Series Consumption Revisited”, Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 465-521.
Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri and I. Preston (2004) "Consumption inequality and partial insurance",
IFS Working Papers W04/28, Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Blundell, R., M. Browning and C. Meghir (1994), “Consumer Demand and the Lifetime
Allocation of Consumption”, Review of Economic Studies, 61, 57-80.
Blundell, R. and I. Preston (1998), “Consumption Inequality and Income Uncertainty”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 113, 603-40.
Brewer, M., A. Goodman, J. Shaw and L. Sibieta (2006), Poverty and Inequality in Britain: 2006, IFS
Commentary 101 (http://www.ifs.org.uk/comms/comm101.pdf), London: IFS

31

Browning, M. and C. Meghir (1991), “The Effect of Male and Female Labour Supply on
Commodity Demands”, Econometrica, 53, 503-44.
Browning, M. and T. Crossley (2003) “Shocks, Stocks and Socks”, Department of Economics
Working Papers 2003-07, McMaster University.
Caballero, R.J. (1990), “Expenditure on Durable Goods: A Case for Slow Adjustment”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 105, 727-43.
Campbell, J.Y. (1987) “Does Saving Anticipate Declining Labor Income? An Alternative Test of
the Permanent Income Hypothesis”, Econometrica, 55(6), 1249-73.
Campbell, J.Y. (1994) “Inspecting the mechanism: An analytical approach to the stochastic
growth model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 33, pp. 463-506.
Campbell, J. Y. and A.S. Deaton (1989): “Why Is Consumption So Smooth?”, Review of Economic
Studies 56, pp. 357–374.
Campbell, J.Y. and N.G. Mankiw (1991) : “"The Response of Consumption to Income: A CrossCountry Investigation", European Economic Review 35, pp. 723–767.
Cunha, F., Heckman, J., and Navarro, S. (2004). “Separating heterogeneity from uncertainty an
Aiyagari-Laitner economy”, Paper presented at the Goldwater Conference on Labor Markets in
Arizona, March, 2004.
Cunha, F., J. Heckman and Navarro, S. (2005). "Separating Uncertainty from Heterogeneity in
Life Cycle Earnings," NBER Working Papers 11024, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Deaton, A. (1985) “Panel Data from Time Series of Cross-Sections”, Journal of Econometrics, 30,
109-26.
Deaton, A. and C. Paxon (1994), “Intertemporal choice and inequality”, Journal of Political
Economy, 102, 437-467.
Dynarski, S. and J. Gruber (1997) “Can Families Smooth Variable Earnings?”, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 0(1), 229-84.
Flavin, M.A. (1981) “The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations about Future
Income”, Journal of Political Economy, 89(5), 974-1009.
Forni, M., and L. Reichlin (1996) “ Dynamic Common Factors in Large Cross-Sections” Empirical
Economics, 21, 27-42.
Gorman, W.M. (1959), “Separable Utility and Aggregation”, Econometrica, 27, 469-481.
Gruber, J. (1997) “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance” American
Economic Review, 87(1), 192-205.

32

Hall, R.E. (1978) “Stochastic Implications of the Life-Cycle Permament Income Hypothesis:
Theory and Evidence”, Journal of Political Economy, 86, 971-87.
Hansen, L.P., W. Roberds and T.J. Sargent (1991) “Time Series Implications of Present Value
Budget Balance and of Martingale Models of Consumption and Taxes”, in Lars P. Hansen and
Thomas J. Sargent, Rational Expectations Econometrics, Boulder. Westview, 121-61.
Hayashi, F., J. Altonji and L. Kotlikoff (1996) “Risk-Sharing between and within Families”,
Econometrica, 64(2), 261-94.
MaCurdy, T.E. (1982), “The Use of Time Series Processes to Model the Error Structure of
Earnings in a Longitudinal Data Analysis”, Journal of Econometrics, 18, 83-114.
Meghir, C. and L. Pistaferri (2004): “Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity”, Econometrica,
72, 1-32.
Meghir, C. and G. Weber (1996), “Intertemporal Non-Separability or Liquidity Constraints? A
Disaggregate Analysis on US Panel Data”, Econometrica, 64(5), 1151-81 .
Moffitt, R.A. and P. Gottschalk (1995), “Trends in the Covariance Structure of Earnings in the
U.S.: 1969-1987”, mimeo, Johns Hopkins University.
.
Quah, D. (1990), “Permanent and Transitory Movements in Labor Income: An Explanation for
"Excess Smoothness" in Consumption”, Journal of Political Economy. 98, pp. 449-475
Quah, D. and T.J. Sargent (1994), “A Dynamic Index Model for Large Cross Sections”. In: Stock
J., Watson M. (eds) Business Cycles, indicators and forecasting. NBER and University of
Chicago.
Sargent, T.J. (1978) “Rational Expectations, Econometric Exogeneity and Consumption”, Journal
of Political Economy, 86(4), 673-700.
Tanner, S. (1998), ‘How Much Do Consumers Spend? Comparing the FES and National
Accounts’ in Banks, J. and P. Johnson (eds), How Reliable is the Family Expenditure Survey? Trends in
Incomes and Expenditures Over Time, IFS Report 57 (http://www.ifs.org.uk/comms/r57.pdf),
London: IFS.
Watson, M.W. (1986) “Univariate Detrending Methods with Stochastic Trends”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 18, 49-75.
Watson M.W. and R.F. Engle, (1983) “Alternative Algorithms for the Estimation of Dynamic
Factor, MIMIC, and Time Varying Coefficient Regression Models”, Journal of Econometrics, 23,
385-400.
West, K.D. (1988) “The Insensitivity of Consumption to News About Income”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 21, 17-34.

33

TABLES
Table 1 – Cohort definition
Cohort

Year of Birth

Age in 1974

Age in 2000

Mean Cell Size

1

1940-46

31

57

104

2

1947-53

24

50

118

Table 2 – Volatility

Total

After correction

Aggregate data

Cohort 1

Cohort 2

Cohort 1

Cohort 2

Non-durable

6.19

5.48

2.31

2.14

0.83

Income

5.22

5.41

2.56

3.67

1.67

34

Table 3 – Non-durable consumption, cohort data (with/without correction for meas. error) and
aggregate data

u cx,t −1
u

x
c ,t − 2

u

x
c ,t − 3

u

x
c ,t − 4

u

x
c ,t − 5

u

x
c ,t − 6

u

x
c ,t − 7

u

x
c ,t −8

Cohort data
Without
Correction

Cohort Data
With
Correction

Aggregate Data

Cohort data
Without
Correction

-0.715

-0.030

-0.060

-0.726

0.083

0.014

(0.079)

(1.074)

(0.104)

(0.085)

(1.421)

(0.103)

-0.074

-0.050

0.364

-0.073

0.306

0.351

(0.091)

(0.973)

(0.076)

(0.093)

(1.953)

(0.085)

-0.167

-0.766

-0.071

-0.136

-1.055

-0.050

(0.097)

(1.898)

(0.116)

(0.099)

(1.597)

(0.128)

0.021

0.013

0.112

0.062

-0.093

0.136

(0.078)

(0.421)

(0.085)

(0.093)

(1.445)

(0.102)

-

-

-

0.016

0.202

0.181

(0.101)

(1.600)

(0.116)

0.024

0.559

0.131

(0.103)

(2.830)

(0.118)

-0.075

-0.640

0.046

(0.105)

(1.499)

(0.104)

-0.029

-0.154

0.327

(0.081)

(1.012)

(0.095)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Cohort Data Aggregate Data
With
Correction

-0.833
0.946

0.346
0.275

-0.937

-0.792

1.136

LR P-value

-0.936
0.907

Var (u1x )

0.0059

0.2653

0.0306

0.0054

Sum of coeff.

0.2684

0.0514

x
2

Var (u )

0.1857

0.0272

0.1844

0.0147

Cov(u1x , u 2x )

0.0276

0.0161

0.0280

0.0091

Log L

52.73

53.27

53.75

54.49

214.64

Note: The three elements are reported of the symmetric covariance matrix for
as estimation is carried on 2 cohorts. Standard errors in parenthesis.

35

[

u cx,t = u1x,t

219.76

′
u 2x,t , which is (2×2)

]

Table 4 – Disposable income, cohort data (with/without correction for meas.error) and aggregate
data.
Cohort data
Without
Correction

Cohort Data
With
Correction

Aggregate Data

Cohort Data
Without
Correction

Cohort data
With
Correction

Aggregate Data

-0.757

-0.618

-0.294

-0.865

-0.546

-0.251

(0.086)

(0.197)

(0.089)

(0.094)

(0.486)

(0.096)

0.073

0.404

0.205

0.142

0.580

0.195

(0.107)

(0.583)

(0.106)

(0.106)

(1.167)

(0.109)

-0.162

-0.449

-0.223

-0.152

-0.930

-0.176

(0.090)

(0.421)

(0.087)

(0.097)

(0.790)

(0.101)

-0.066

-0.204

0.151

0.077

0.789

0.153

(0.088)

(0.318)

(0.101)

(0.131)

(1.130)

(0.126)

-

-

-

0.007

-0.351

0.124

(0.117)

(1.056)

(0.115)

-0.115

0.131

0.066

(0.114)

(1.463)

(0.118)

0.008

0.406

-0.008

(0.089)

(0.747)

(0.129)

u cY,t −1
u

Y
c ,t − 2

u

Y
c ,t − 3

u

Y
c ,t − 4

u

Y
c ,t − 5

u

Y
c ,t − 6

u

Y
c ,t − 7

u

Y
c ,t −8

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-0.162

-0.938

0.110

-

-

-

(0.091)

(1.222)

(0.102)

Sum of coeff.

-0.91

-0.858

0.213

0.052

-0.161
0.888

-1.06

LR P-value

-0.867
0.132

0.1819

0.0491

0.0246

0.1597

0.0222

0.0241

0.1646

0.0687

0.1421

0.0330

Cov(u , u )

0.0072

0.0149

-0.0048

0.0041

Log L

77.07

76.53

86.48

83.60

y
1

Var (u )
y
2

Var (u )
y
1

y
2

140.57

Note: see note to table 3.

36

141.71

Table 5 – Interest rate
Coeff

S.E.

Coeff.

S.E.

Coeff.

S.E.

0.509

(0.054)

0.389

(0.067)

0.452

(0.064)

u cR,t −2

-

-

-0.318

(0.053)

0.039

(0.083)

u cR,t −3

-

-

-0.699

(0.069)

-0.526

(0.090)

u cR,t −4

-

-

-0.310

(0.079)

-0.555

(0.099)

u cR,t −5

-

-

-

-

-0.618

(0.089)

u cR,t −6

-

-

-

-

-0.064

(0.098)

u cR,t −7

-

-

-

-

0.250

(0.090)

u cR,t −8

-

-

-

-

0.094

(0.099)

u

R
c ,t −1

Sum of coeff.
LR P-value
Variance
Log L

0.509
0.0005
0.0322
126.71

-0.938
0.003
0.0229
144.33

-0.928
0.0168
160.41

37

Table 6 – Consumption, income and interest rate, 8 lags
Non durable

u cx,t

S.E.

Income

S.E.

Interest rate

S.E.

1

u

x
c ,t −1

-0.221

(3.158)

u

x
c ,t − 2

0.356

(3.260)

u

x
c ,t − 3

-0.247

(4.971)

u

x
c ,t − 4

0.105

(3.784)

u

x
c ,t − 5

-0.202

(4.477)

u

x
c ,t − 6

-0.339

(4.197)

u

x
c ,t − 7

-0.397

(3.785)

u

x
c ,t −8

-0.046

(2.370)

u

Y
c,t

0.535

(0.310)

1

u

Y
c ,t −1

-0.330

(0.679)

-0.775

(0.551)

u

Y
c ,t − 2

-0.278

(0.431)

0.370

(0.611)

u

Y
c ,t − 3

-0.130

(0.872)

-0.303

(0.598)

u

Y
c ,t − 4

0.362

(0.644)

0.258

(0.666)

u

Y
c ,t − 5

0.181

(0.580)

0.015

(0.550)

u

Y
c ,t − 6

-0.188

(0.630)

-0.074

(0.488)

u

Y
c ,t − 7

0.028

(0.594)

0.081

(0.487)

u

Y
c ,t −8

-0.379

(0.568)

-0.458

(0.427)

u

R
c,t

0.712

(0.560)

0.828

(0.435)

1

u

R
c ,t −1

-0.397

(0.742)

-0.655

(0.707)

0.456

(0.101)

u

R
c ,t − 2

0.114

(0.631)

0.059

(0.586)

0.063

(0.131)

u

R
c ,t − 3

-0.651

(0.603)

-0.021

(0.595)

-0.475

(0.120)

u

R
c ,t − 4

0.354

(0.577)

0.006

(0.689)

-0.506

(0.110)

u

R
c ,t − 5

0.243

(0.515)

-0.049

(0.462)

-0.645

(0.143)

u

R
c ,t − 6

-0.024

(0.614)

0.081

(0.490)

-0.112

(0.141)

u

R
c ,t − 7

-0.400

(0.662)

0.021

(0.531)

0.209

(0.128)

u

R
c ,t −8

0.091
0.0077
0.0057
355.87

(0.667)
0.0057
0.0066

-0.089
0.0452
0.0012

(0.518)
0.0012
0.0484

0.047
0.0170

(0.126)

Note: The (2×2) covariance matrix is reported for

u cz,t = u1z,t

Covariance
Matrix
Log L

[

38

′
u 2z,t , with z = x, y.

]

Table 7 – Consumption, income and interest rate, 8 lags, constrained
Non durable

u cx,t

S.E.

Income

S.E.

Interest rate

S.E.

1

u cx,t −1

-0.679

(0.157)

ucY, t

0.484

(0.153)

1

u cY,t −1

-

-

-0.632

(0.251)

u cY,t −2

-

-

0.380

(0.328)

ucR, t

0.735

(0.363)

0.820

(0.341)

1

u cR,t −1

-0.369

(0.546)

-0.633

(0.497)

0.446

(0.086)

u cR,t −2

0.060

(0.392)

-0.090

(0.396)

0.032

(0.092)

u cR,t −3

-0.629

(0.434)

-

-

-0.524

(0.095)

u cR,t −4

0.395

(0.384)

-

-

-0.552

(0.092)

u cR,t −5

-

-

-

-

-0.623

(0.104)

u cR,t −6

-

-

-

-

-0.058

(0.106)

u cR,t −7

-

-

-

-

0.272

(0.089)

u cR,t −8

-

-

-

-

0.079

(0.099)

Covariance

0.0377

0.0083

0.0361

0.0078

0.0169

Matrix

0.0083

0.0242

0.0078

0.0431

Log L

335.03

Note: see note to table 6; P-value LR test wrt model in table 6: 0.10; P-value LR test 1 zero restriction on the
coefficient on

u cY,t −1

in the consumption equation: 0.11.

39

Table 8 – Consumption, income and interest rate, 8 lags, aggregate
Non durable

u cx,t

S.E.

Income

S.E.

Interest rate

S.E.

1

u cx,t −1

-0.553

(0.051)

u cx,t −2

0.232

(0.150)

u cx,t −3

-0.163

(0.260)

u cx,t −4

0.417

(0.136)

u cx,t −5

0.427

(0.196)

u cx,t −6

0.494

(0.185)

u cx,t −7

0.109

(0.244)

u cx,t −8

0.282

(0.205)

ucY, t

0.087

(0.030)

1

u

Y
c ,t −1

0.083

(0.054)

-0.227

(0.141)

u

Y
c ,t − 2

0.082

(0.048)

0.456

(0.102)

u

Y
c ,t − 3

0.194

(0.040)

-0.114

(0.186)

u

Y
c ,t − 4

-0.035

(0.073)

0.232

(0.187)

u cY,t −5

0.124

(0.053)

0.191

(0.179)

u cY,t −6

0.114

(0.084)

0.280

(0.155)

u cY,t −7

0.012

(0.090)

0.238

(0.151)

u cY,t −8

-0.012

(0.096)

0.149

(0.164)

ucR, t

0.083

(0.082)

0.010

(0.179)

1

u cR,t −1

0.215

(0.064)

0.211

(0.174)

0.491

(0.118)

u cR,t −2

0.075

(0.102)

-0.247

(0.216)

0.198

(0.138)

u cR,t −3

-0.025

(0.083)

-0.157

(0.217)

-0.394

(0.095)

u cR,t −4

0.099

(0.073)

-0.001

(0.134)

-0.486

(0.148)

u cR,t −5

0.112

(0.084)

0.132

(0.224)

-0.619

(0.136)

u cR,t −6

0.045

(0.093)

0.194

(0.202)

-0.173

(0.167)

u cR,t −7

-0.014

(0.071)

-0.105

(0.186)

0.132

(0.135)

u cR,t −8

0.032

(0.113)

0.375

(0.159)

0.001

(0.119)

Variance
Log L

0.0023
569.89

0.0216

0.0175

40

Table 9 – Elasticity of intertemporal substitution
Model

Cohort Data

Aggregate Data

ND, Y, R
Unrestricted
(Tables 6 and 8)

0.69
(0.63)

-0.64
(0.38)

ND, Y, R
Restricted
(Table 7)

0.58
(0.41)

-

Note: standard errors in parenthesis.

Table 10 – Excess smoothness

α 0xy

α yy (z )

α 0xy / α yy (z )

S.E.

ND, Y, R
Unrestricted
(Table 6)

0.54

0.15

3.64

3.40

ND, Y, R
Restricted
(Table 7)

0.48

0.75

0.65

0.17

0.09

2.25

0.04

0.02

ND, Y, R
Unrestricted
(not shown)

0.38

0.14

2.66

4.44

ND, Y, R
Restricted
(not shown)

0.42

0.78

0.54

0.11

Model
Cohort Data

Aggregate Data
ND, Y, R
Unrestricted
(Table 8)
Cohort Data in levels

Note: the discounted sum of the income coefficients has been computed at a quarterly interest rate equal to 1%.
q

In the second column, α yy ( z ) = ∑ α jyy z j where z=1/(1+r). In the last column, the standard errors for the
j =0

quantity

α

xy
0

/α

yy

(z ) are reported.

41

Appendix
A1. The state space representation of the model
For ease of notation, a multivariate MA(1) model is considered in which there are three variables
(i.e. first difference of log consumption, of income, and the interest rate) and two cohorts. These
summarize the three types of variables included in the model:

∆xt1 = u tx1 + α 1xx u tx−11 + α 0xy u ty1 + α 1xy u ty−11 + α 0xr u tr + α 1xr u tr−1 + η tx1 − η tx−11
∆xt2 = u tx 2 + α 1xx u tx−21 + α 0xy u ty 2 + α 1xy u ty−21 + α 0xr u tr + α 1xr u tr−1 + η tx 2 − η tx−21
∆y t1 =

u ty1 + α 1yy u ty−11 + α 0yr u tr + α 1yr u tr−1 + η ty1 − η ty−11

∆y t2 =

u ty 2 + α 1yy u ty−21 + α 0yr u tr + α 1yr u tr−1 + η ty 2 − η ty−21
u tr + α 1rr u tr−1

rt =

The model may be easily written in state space representation, where the state vector is:
′

ξ t +1 = [u tx+11 u tx+21 u ty+11 u ty+21 u tr+1 η tx+11 η tx+21 η ty+11 η ty+21 u tx1 Κ η ty 2 ]

of dimension equal to (n*c+z)×(q+1)+n*c*2=k, where q is the number of lags, n is the number of
cohort specific variables, c is the number of cohorts, z is the number of fixed-across-cohort
variables, and the second term in the sum is the measurement error terms (which does not
depend on the number of lags in the model).
Define:
M=(n*c+z)

i.e. the number of dependent variables in the model (5 in the example);

k

the dimension of the space vector;

k1=M+n*c

i.e. the number of variables at time t+1 in the space vector plus the
measurement error component at time t+1.

The state and measurement equations are:

ξt +1 = Fξt + v t
X t = Hξt
where Xt is the vector of M dependent variables, H is a (M×k) matrix containing the α
parameters as well as block of zeros, F is a (k×k) matrix of zero’s and one’s and ν is the state
equation disturbance vector, where the first k1 entries are given by the variables at time t+1 in the
state vector, and all the other entries are always zero. The variance-covariance matrix Q of ν is a
diagonal matrix apart from the entries in which there is the correlation among error terms for the

42

same cohort. The measurement equation has no noise, so its variance-covariance matrix, R, is
equal to zero. All these matrices are described in the last section.
The log likelihood function of the model is given by:

log L = −

NT
1 T
1 T
log 2π − ∑ log Gt − ∑ ε t ′ Gt−1ε t
2
2 t =1
2 t =1

which is the prediction error decomposition form of the likelihood. The prediction errors are
given by:

ε t = X t − Hξ$t / t −1
with associated MSE:

Gt = HPt / t −1 H ′ + R
where the matrix R is the variance-covariance matrix of the disturbance term in the measurement
equation, and in this case is equal to zero.
The prediction errors and their MSE’s can be calculated using the Kalman filter recursions:

ξ$t / t −1 = Fξ$t
Pt / t −1 = FPt −1 F ′ + Q
ξ$t = ξ$t / t −1 + Pt / t −1 H ′( HPt / t −1 H ′ + R) −1 ( X t − Hξ$t / t −1 )
Pt = Pt / t −1 − Pt / t −1 H ′( HPt / t −1 H ′ + R) −1 HPt / t −1

Definition of the matrices
Matrix H, in the measurement equation, is given by:
⎡1
⎢
⎢0
⎢0
⎢
⎢0
⎢0
⎣

0 α 0xy
1

0

0
0

1
0

0
1

α 0xr
α 0xr
α 0yr
α 0yr

0

0

0

1

0

α

xy
0

1 0 0 0 α 1xx

0

α

α 1xy
0

0

α

0 1 0 0

0

0 0 1 0
0 0 0 1

0
0

0
0

α 1yy

0

0

α 1yy

0 0 0 0

0

0

0

0

xx
1

xy
1

α 1xr
α 1xr
α 1yr
α 1yr
α 1rr

−1 0 0 0 ⎤
⎥
0 −1 0 0 ⎥
0 0 −1 0 ⎥
⎥
0 0 0 − 1⎥
0 0 0 0 ⎥⎦

The matrix F, in the transition equation, is given by:

⎡0 0 ⎤
⎢ I 0⎥
⎣
⎦
where the three zero blocks are of dimension (k1× k1), and I is an identity matrix of dimension k1.
The error term in the transition equation is:

υ t +1 = [u tx+11 u tx+21 u ty+11 u ty+21 u tr+1 η tx+11 η tx+21 η ty+11 η ty+21 0

43

]′

where the zero block is a vector of dimension k-k1.
The (k1× k1) upper-left block of the variance-covariance matrix of ν, Q, is:

⎡ σ 2ux1
⎢ 2
⎢σ ux1x2
⎢ 0
⎢
⎢ M
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣ 0

σ 2ux1x2
σ 2ux2
0
0
M

0
0
0
0
2
2
σ uy1 σ uy1y2
σ 2uy1y2 σ 2uy2
0
M

0
0
M

0

0

0

0
M

0
M

0
M

0
M

0
σ 2ur
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
2
2
σ ηx1
0
σ ηx1y1
2
0
σ ηx2
0
2
σ ηx1y1
0
σ 2ηy1
0
σ 2ηx2y2
0

0 ⎤
⎥
M ⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
0 ⎥
⎥
0 ⎥
σ 2ηx2y2 ⎥
⎥
0 ⎥
⎥
σ 2ηy2 ⎦

while the other three (k-k1×k-k1) blocks are zero.
The variances of the measurement error terms are treated as known in the estimation.

44

A2 – Estimates for consumption and interest rate
Table A1 – Consumption and interest rate, 8 lags
Nondurable

u cx,t

S.E.

Interest
Rate

S.E.

1

u cx,t −1

0.043

(3.575)

u cx,t −2

0.243

(2.732)

u cx,t −3

-0.693

(1.235)

x
c ,t − 4

-0.336

(2.196)

u cx,t −5

-0.002

(5.162)

u cx,t −6

0.748

(5.278)

u cx,t −7

-0.430

(1.915)

x
c ,t −8

-0.394

(2.306)

ucR, t

0.826

(0.394)

1

u cR,t −1

-0.382

(0.578)

0.457

(0.082)

u cR,t −2

0.073

(0.467)

0.042

(0.108)

R
c ,t − 3

-0.653

(0.492)

-0.499

(0.111)

u cR,t −4

0.353

(0.491)

-0.519

(0.097)

u cR,t −5

0.256

(0.383)

-0.623

(0.107)

u cR,t −6

0.000

(0.491)

-0.091

(0.105)

R
c ,t − 7

-0.444

(0.510)

0.220

(0.100)

u cR,t −8

0.162

(0.431)

0.067

(0.119)

0.0025
0.0133

0.0169

u

u

u

u

Covariance
Matrix
Log L

0.0221
0.0025
222.73
Note: see note to table 6.

45

Table A2 – Consumption and interest rate, 8 lags, aggregate.
Nondurable

u cx,t

S.E.

Interest
Rate

S.E.

1

u cx,t −1

-0.030

(0.148)

u cx,t −2

0.402

(0.102)

u cx,t −3

0.002

(0.155)

x
c ,t − 4

0.128

(0.111)

u cx,t −5

0.130

(0.153)

u cx,t −6

0.112

(0.171)

u cx,t −7

0.029

(0.124)

x
c ,t −8

0.275

(0.147)

ucR, t

0.046

(0.078)

1

u cR,t −1

0.166

(0.080)

0.462

(0.078)

u cR,t −2

-0.004

(0.067)

0.052

(0.109)

R
c ,t − 3

-0.045

(0.059)

-0.521

(0.126)

u cR,t −4

-0.017

(0.080)

-0.553

(0.119)

u cR,t −5

0.048

(0.066)

-0.583

(0.108)

u cR,t −6

0.060

(0.083)

-0.052

(0.109)

R
c ,t − 7

-0.003

(0.073)

0.202

(0.114)

u cR,t −8

0.011

(0.083)

0.070

(0.129)

Variance
Log L

0.0048
386.20

u

u

u

u

0.0169

Table A3 – Elasticity of intertemporal substitution
Model
ND, R
(Tables A1 and A2)

Cohort Data

Aggregate Data

0.67
(0.43)

-0.23
(0.35)

Note: standard errors in parenthesis

46

