                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE WELFARE EFFECTS OF TRADE AND
                   CAPITAL MARKET LIBERALIZATION:
            CONSEQUENCES OF DIFFERENT SEQUENCING SCENARIOS


                           Sebastian Edwards
                        Sweder van Wijnbergen


                        Working   Paper No. 12145




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            December 1983




        We thank Gene Grossnan and the participants of the
International Economics Workshop at the University of Chicago for
helpful conumnts. The research reported here is part of the NI3ER's
research program in International Studies and project in
Productivity (World Economy). Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #1245
                                                     December 1983



                        The Welfare Effects of Trade and
                         Capital Market Liberalization:
                 Consequences of Different Sequencing Scenarios


                                    ABSTRACT




       This paper deals with the dynamics of trade and capital account

liberalization in a developing country. The welfare consequences of trade and

capital account liberalization under alternative sequencing scenarios are

investigated. We draw on standard trade theory results to show that the

opening of the capital account in the presence of trade distortions may be

welfare reducing if foreign borrowing is used to increase investment. However

we demonstrate that this welfare reducing effect of opening the capital

account will not occur if shadow prices are used to guide investment

decisions.

       It is then shown that if capital market restrictions fall

disproportionally on investment (as opposed to consumption) a gradual

reduction of import tariffs is superior to an abrupt trade liberalization.



Sebastian Edwards                                  Sweder van Wijnbergen
Department of Economics                            DRD
UCLA                                               The World Bank
405 Hilgard Avenue                                 1818 "H" Street NW
Los Angeles, CA 90024                              Washington, D.C. 20433
(213) 825—1011                                     (202) 676—1233
                                        1




I.   Introduction

     For many years economists have argued that developing countries should

"liberalize" their economies. A number of empirical studies have suggested

that this liberalization process ——   consisting   of freeing domestic markets and

opening—up the economy to the rest of the world —     will   result in higher rates

of growth and more equitable income distribution.' However, in spite of this

empirical evidence, and of the widespread beliefs among economists of the

merits of liberalizing LDCs economies, little serious efforts to that effect

have been taken by these countries. Many times liberalization attempts are

frustrated at different stages, with these economies reverting to inward—

looking developing strategies.

     One of the ist important problems in the analysis of liberalization

reforms and of their failures refers to the dynamic aspects of these

processes. The characteristics of the transition between a repressed state

and a liberalized economy are not generally understood, and only recently

serious research efforts in this area have developed.2 Among these dynamic

aspects those related to the speed and order of liberalization are

particularly important. With respect to the former, the main question is how

fast an economy should be liberalized, i.e., cold—turkey vs. gradual

approaches. Regarding the order of liberalization the main question is what

are the welfare consequences of alternative sequencing scenario's (i.e., trade

liberalization while maintaining a closed capital account like Chile in the

late seventies or capital market liberalization while retaining trade




     'See, for example, Little, Scitovsky and Scott (1970); Krueger (1978,
1983); Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1978); Little (1982) and Balassa (1982, 1983).

     20n the dynamics of liberalization see the general discussion in Krueger
(1984). See also Khan and Zahier (1983), and Edwards (1983).
                                      2




barriers, as was the case in Argentina in the same period).

     The purpose of the present paper is to addre8s some aspects of these two

problems — speed and order of liberalization. The analysis focuses on the

opening—up of the economy to the rest of the world, concentrating on the

liberalization of the current and capital accounts of the balance of

payments. We investigate the welfare consequences of trade and capital market

liberalization processes under alternative sequencing scenarios. The analysis

assumes that the simultaneous and instantaneous opening of both accounts of

the balance of payments is not considered as a policy option. The recent

experience of a group of countries in Latin America is in fact one of partial

(i.e., one market only) liberalization. While in Argentina the capital ccount

was liberalized, the trade account retained its controls. In Chile the

opposite was the case. Moreover, historically trade liberalization has often

been implemented during periods of severe constraints on external borrowing

(e.g., the IMF routinely pushes for trade liberalization as part of its

"rescue programs").

     We draw on standard trade theory results to show that the opening of the

capital account in the presence of trade distortions may be welfare reducing,

if foreign borrowing is used to increase Investment and investment decisions

are made using domestic market prices, cautioning against following this

sequence. However, we demonstrate that this welfare reducing effect of open-

ing the capital account will not occur if shadow prices are used to guide

Investment decisions for the new capital goods brought in. We also demon-

strate that the welfare costs of capital market restrictions are increased if

they fall disproportionally on Investment as opposed to consumption. This is

empirically an important case. We then show that under such circumstances

gradual reduction of tariffs is superior to an abrupt liberalization.
                                       3




     The paper is organized in two parts. In Section 2 a one period model is

developed and some preliminaries are presented. The analysis in this section

is carried out in terms of welfare effects of tansfers and factor movements

from abroad, and previous results by Johnson (1967), Bertrand and Flatters

(1971), Brecher and Diaz—Alejandro (1977), Grossman (1983) and van Wijnbergen

(1983a) are summarized and discussed. This analysis is useful for the

investigation of the effect of liberalizing the capital account presented in

the following section. The reason for this is that the effects of opening of

the capital account can be viewed as the combination of a positive transfer

today, plus a (larger) negative transfer tomorrow. In this section we point

out that the distinction between transfers in the form of consumption goods

and transfer in the form of capital (i.e., machinery) is critical for the

welfare analysis. The crucial role of shadow prices in the investment process

is also discussed.

     In Section 3 a two—period model Is developed and the welfare effects of

reducing import tariffs in an economy with capital market distortions are

analyzed. Here our argument for a gradual trade liberalization in an economy

where the capital market distortions fall disproportionately on investment is

fully developed. Finally in Section 4 some concluding remarks are presented,

and the policy implications of our analysis are discussed.



2. Welfare Effects of Transfers and Foreign Investment in a One—Period
    Framework

     In this section we develop a simple one—period model of a small open

economy to analyze the effects of transfers and direct investment on

welfare. Regarding transfers, we consider two possible forms in which these

can be made: in the form of consumption goods and in the form of capital
                                        4




(i.e., machines).3 Since this analysis is based on a one—period model, it

cannot really deal with issues of borrowing in the international capital

market. However, moSt of the issues that arise in a two—period model with

foreign borrowing and lending are already present in the single—period

analysis with exogenous transfers presented here [see Edwards 19831. The

reason for this is that the effect of opening the capital account can be

viewed as a positive transfer today (when a foreign loan is obtained), plus a

larger negative transfer tomorrow when the foreign loan is repaid, if the

capital market distortion takes the form of a quantity constraint on foreign

borrowing.

     We first look at the effects of a transfer in the form of capital (i.e.,

the donor ships machines to the recipient country) on the recipient country's

welfare. The analysis is developed for the case of a small country with two

goods, whose importable is assumed to be capital intensive.4 The country in

question uses convex technology that can be described by a twice differenti-

able convex revenue function. Similarly, consumer preferences will be sum-

marized by a twice differentiable concave expenditure function. [See Dixit

and Norman (1980) for a discussion of the properties of revenue and expendi-

ture functions. I   The economy is distorted by production subsidies and

consumption taxes on the importable good. The model is given by equations (1)

through (4):


                    R(l,q;K,L) + C E(1,p;U)                                 (1)




     31n their well—known textbook Caves and Jones (1981, Ch. 4) make a
distinction between these two possible forms of making a transfer.

     4mis corresponds to the standard capital intensity assumption for
developing countries.
                                             5



                       G =            —                                           (2)
                                          aRq(l,q,K,L)

                                                                                  (3)



                      qp*+a                                                       (4)



where

        R: revenue function

        E: expenditure function

        q: domestic producer's price of commodity two relative to commodity


        K: stock of capital

        L: total labor available in the economy

       p*: world price of commodity two relative to commodity one

         : consumption tax on good two

         a:   production subsidy on good two


 p
Rq =   :
E = ..!: compensated
        ap
                         demand for good two

              supply function for good two

        C: government (net) revenue from taxation



       Equation (1) is the budget constraint for a distorted economy, where G

equals net government revenue. Good one is taken to be the numeraire

commodity, and it is assumed that this country imports good two, so that

(E — Rq) > 0. Notice that in the case of a tariff        cx =   B.   The effect of a

transfer in the form of capital on welfare can be found by totally

differentiating (1), and using (2) through (4):


                      au
                      —=     (RKaRK)
                                  q
                                                                                 (5)
                      dK E(l —     BCE)
                                        6



where the subindex refers to a partial derivative with respect to that

particular variable. CE captures the pure income effect of a change in

expenditure on good 2; 0 < PCE < 1 if both goods are normal. Therefore,

(1 —
       C)   is positive but smaller than one.5 RK is the marginal product-

ivity of capital and RqK is the Rybczynski term, which will be positive if

good two (the importable) is capital intensive as we have assumed. The

denominator of this expression is positive; however, the numerator can be

either positive or negative, depending on whether RK     cZRK.
                                                                 It   follows that

a transfer in the form of capital will be welfare worsening in a distorted

small economy if


                                                                              (6)
                    RK<ZRqK


       This result, of course, is the one obtained by Johnson in his classical

1967 article on capital accumulation in the presence of tariffs.6 If the
                                                                                    -

transfer results in an intensification of the preexisting distortion welfare

may be reduced.

       The above discussion assumes capital is accumulated as a result of a

transfer from abroad, which is made in the forms of machines. Brecher and

Diaz—Alejandro (1977) have analyzed an alternative case where capital

accumulation occurs due to foreign investment. This case differs from the

previous one in that now foreign investors will take their profits out of the

domestic country. In this case the budget constraint (equation (1)), is

written in the following form:




       5me derivation   of (5) uses the identity       CE E.
       6See also Bertand and Flatters (1971).
                                              7




                     R(l,q,K      + dK,L) + C — H =   E(l,p,U)              (7)




where H are profits remitted to the foreign country, and will be given by

H = pdK   where p is the rate of profit obtained by the foreign investor.

The change in welfare is now equal to:




                    EdU -
                              U
                                  - qK —
                                  (l—C ) F:
                                                                            (8)


     If the rate of profits obtained by foreign investors is equal to the

marginal productivity of capital in the domestic country (i.e., p =

expression   (8) becomes:




                    EdU   —        'qK
                              u (1—SC)
                                    E
                                                                            C)

This means that if foreign investors repatriate the full rental rate, under

the assumption that the importable good is capital—intensive (i.e.,

RqK > 0) welfare will always decrease as a result of foreign investment.

This result is independent of the relationship between czRqK and RK. This

is exactly the Brecher—Diaz Alejandro (1977) result. If, however, the return

to foreign investment is taxed, it is possible that foreign investment will be

welfare improving. The tax required for this to be accomplished has to exceed

qK' and could conceivably drive the after tax rate of return to foreigners

below their alternative rate of return r*, and so become prohibitive, a

point made by Grossman (1983) and van Wijnbergen (1983a).
                                        8




     Consider the case where the country obtains a transfer that has to be

used for consumption.7 In this case equation (1) becomes:


                   R(l,q;K,L) + G + T       E(1,p;U)                       (10)


where T is the transfer. Totally differentiating (10) we obtain:



                                    >0                                       11
                   dT E(l_CE)

which is always greater than zero: a transfer made in the form of consumption

goods, can never be welfare worsening. (We are ignoring "induced" distortions

a la Brecher—Bhagwati (1982) and transfer induced changes in the world

relative price vector).

     In the presence of distorted trade, then, a transfer in the form of

capital (i.e., machines) may be welfare worsening; while a consumption

transfer will always be welfare improving. This suggests that if a transfer

is given partially in terms of consumption goods and partially in terms of

capital, a reduction in welfare in the recipient country could result even

under stability (which is assured by the small country assumption). This kind

of immiserizing transfer is similar to the distortion—induced transfers ana—

lyzed by Brecher and Bhagwati (1982). The relevance of this case —— where the

transfer is made in capital and goods —— stems from the fact that in the real

world it is common to find aid which is given on the condition that part of

the resources are used for investment (i.e., to increase the capital stock).

     Should we therefore conclude that foreign aid channeled into investment

(typical World Bank practice) has dubious welfare effects in distorted




     71n Section 3 we will endogenize both size and use of the transfer.
                                                 9




economies, while consumption out of aid is to be encouraged? Clearly this is

much too sweeping a statement to be true. In fact, we will show that the

immiserizing effects of capital transfers can be eliminated completely by

using shadow prices to guide the sectoral allocation of, and technology choice

incorporated in, the influx of capital goods.

          Consider again our two—sector economy. In order to simplify the

exposition we now assume that            =   = r,      so that p = q =   (p   + r). We

already showed that introducing a gift (i.e., transfer) of machines could be

welfare derteriorating if allocation and technology choice are governed by the

relative price vector (l,q) which can be represented by adding it to K in

the argument list of R. However, deciding on allocation and technology

choice using world prices (l,p*), which clearly are the appropriate shadow

prices in this context, leads to different results. This can be modelled by

introducing a separate revenue function summarizing the optimal allocation of

labor use (L) of the new machines by the Shadow Pricing Agency (note that we

have CRT technology). Of course, labor use on new machines means less labor

available for old machines: the shadow wage rate is positive. Choosing L

is clearly equivalent to setting a shadow wage rate. All this boils down to

the following structure:


                   R(l,q;K,L —   t) +   T(Eq —
                                                 Rq)
                                                       + R(l,p*;K*,L)    E(l,q,U)            (12)


where          is the capital transfer. We assume that output is actually sold at

market prices so that if protected goods were to be produced with the new

capital goods, the tariff revenue replacement effect exactly cancels that part

of total revenues represented by the excess of market price q of over

justifying our use of (l,p*) which omits that component, and the absence of

TR        in the tariff revenue term. It is possible moreover that R                =   0,   we
     p*
                                               10




do not impose incomplete specialization on the Shadow Pricing Agency.

     Differentiating (12) we obtain:



                     (_RL +            + TRqL) dt + LdK*   EUdU
                                                                                  (13)




Optimally choosing L implies setting                  0 which yields the intuitively
                                        dL
appealing formula for the shadow wage rate



                          =        —                                              (14)
                              RL       TRqL



This means that the shadow wage rate RL is above or below the market wage

depending on whether the Rybczynski term RqL is negative or positive. In

our example q is the price of the capital—intensive good, 80 RqL < 0 and

the shadow wage is above the market wage. This makes sense: protecting the

capital intensive sector leads to overproduction of the capital intensive

good; to reconcile that with a fixed aggregate capital labor ratio, overly

labor intensive techniques in any given sector have to be chosen so that the

market wage is below the wage that would obtain in the absence of relative

price distortions.

      Inserting (14) into (13) immediately gives the result that with shadow

pricing immiserization is ruled out:



                                                                                  (15)
                     dL                   dK


 3. Trade and Capital Market Liberalization in a Two—Periods World

      The static framework of the previous section is not really a satisfactory

 framework for the analysis of capital market distortions. Capital market
                                         11




distortions are in a sense isomorphic to trade distortions, in that they

involve barriers to trade between goods today and goods tomorrow, in the same

way that trade barriers interfere with trade in different goods at any moment

of time. Accordingly, an intertemporal framework is appropriate.

     In this section we develop a simple two period model, similar to the one

in van Wijnbergen (1984), and use it to derive expressions for the welfare

costs of capital market distortions. In particular we analyze quantity

constraints in international capital markets under various rationing

mechanisms.

     We then extend the model to a two—commodity per period setting in order

to analyze trade liberalization under external balance constraints,

empirically a very important case.

     We draw on recent work on the relation between temporary tariffs and

private savings [i.e., Razin and Svensson (1983) and van Wijnbergen (1983b)]

to analyze the question of cold turkey versus gradualism in trade liberaliza—

tion in the case where external rationing falls disportionately on investment.

We unambiguously establish that under those circumstances gradualism Is the

optimal strategy.

     3.1 The Welfare Costs of External Capital Market Constraints.

     Consider a simple two period—one sector open economy with endogenous

investment. Assume first that there are no capital market distortions so that

the domestic discount factor 6 (one over one plus the interest rate) equals
                            *                       *
the world discount factor 6 ,   (i.e.,        6    6 ).       The model can be summarized

by the intertemporal budget constraint with savings and production decisions

already solved via the use of revenue and expenditure functions:



                         L) + 6* R2(K ÷   I,      L) —    I   =   E(1,   6*; W)       (16)
                                                      12




where 6 is the world discount factor [6*                            1/(1 + r*)1, or the price of

future goods in terms of today's goods. R1 refers to the revenue function in

period 1, while R2 is the revenue function in period 2. E, on the other

hand, is the intertemporal aggregate expenditure function, and gives the mini-

mum discounted value of expenditure required to achieve the level of welfare

W, given the discount factor 6. Investment (I) is determined by value

maximization of the firm, which leads to an equivalent of "Tobin's q" being

set equal to one:



                       6* R(K +     I,   L)       1                                           (17)

or                                                         2
                              *               —           RK
                       I   1(6 );                         *2     > 0                          (17a)
                                        16*           6



     If there is a binding external borrowing constraint the current account

deficit in period one will be equal to the constant


                       CA1 =—T      •                                                             (18)

     The unconstrained first period deficit would have been larger

(CA1 = — T < —   T) where "'"            indicates             a variable from the unconstraint

solution. The optimal policy response is clearly to charge a cost of foreign

borrowing r above the world rate of interest r* to consumers and investors

alike. A convenient way of parametrizing this is to assume there is a tax on

foreign borrowing that pushes the domestic discount factor 6 below the
                 *
foreign one, 6

                       b=6*_6>0                                                                   (19)



b    (r —   r*)/((1   + r) (1 + r*)), the discounted value of tax payments per
                                                13




unit repaid. Equation (16) then becomes


         R1(K, L) + 6 R2(K + I, L) + b (R2 —                 —   1(6) = E(1,   6, W)
                                                      E6)                                   (20)


where   6 is determined by the requirement


                          —                                                                 (21)
                              E6)

or the future surplus discounted at the world rate of interest should equal

the maximum allowable deficit today.

     Equation (19) simply says that to satisfy the external balance

constraint, future goods should be made cheaper in terms of current goods so

that people will willingly shift expenditure towards tomorrow. Expression

(21) indicates that this process should continue until the constraint just

ceases to be binding. Differentiation of (20) gives us the expression for the

welfare effects of a change In 6 (because of a change in T):


                   (6    6)             + R 161 d6 =                                       (22)
                                                        EWdW



     Integration then yields the approximate total welfare gain8 to be

expected from such an increase in T that 6 will equal 5* where the

constraint just ceases to be binding:


                         = 1      (* — 6)2                                                  (23)
                   Ew                      (E66 + R.I6)

     Since homogeneity of compensated demand functions implies E66 =                   —



= — E16/6,   (23) can be written as

                              1   (6*     6)2
                         =                                                                 (23a)
                   Ew                            (E16+ 16)




     8Approximate because we assume        E66 and 16 to be constant when
performing the integration.
                                                         14




where we used the fact that       $5
                                               = 1

     So the cost of the distortion, In familiar Harberger fashion, is

proportional to (compensated) savings and investment elasticities and to the
                                                          *
square of the equivalent price wedge 5 —                        6    introduced by the distortion.

An alternative way of writing (23) may be useful for empirical work; note that

the first period current account equals


                   CA1        —        I   —
                                               E1, CA= — I$5 E16.

         1   — 6 2 CA1   •   Therefore               (23) can be written as
where CA6


                   E          —   1        (* —          )2   CA'                                       (23b)
                                                $5                  5•



     Equation (23) gives the social cost of the externally imposed constraint
on the current account if the optimal policy response is followed.                                 In prac-

tice however rationing often falls disproportionately on investment rather

than consumption. It is easily demonstrated that in that case the social loss

caused by the constraint Is larger.

     Since we will use this rationing nchanisrn below it is useful to

elaborate on this point. We will assume, without loss of generality, that

only investment is rationed. If we make the simplifying assumption that tax

revenues are handed back to the public in the period where they are levied,

the model with only investment rationed becomes


                   R1(K, L) + $5* R2(K + I(), L) —                        I()    =   E(1,   $5*,   W)   (24a)



                   . R2(K    + I,          L) =      1                                                  (24b)



                    6*(R2(K + I()), L)                    —              W)) =                          (24c)
                                                              E6(1,5*,
                                       15




 where     is the inverse of one plus the market clearing rate of interest

 under this rationing mechanism.

      Comparing (24c) with (21) yields, after linearization:


                     *

                     *       1 + E16/I > 1                                   (25)



for positive savings elasticities. Since the distortionary costs are

proportional to the square of the price wedge, (25) indicates that the

investment rationing scheme leads to larger welfare losses, This rationing

scheme however may be the only feasible one available. In the next section we

draw on some recent work on the impact of temporary tariffs on the consumption

rate of interest and private savings to construct an argument for gradual

trade liberalization under such circumstances.

     3.2 Trade Reform Under an External Balance Constraint: A Second Best
          Argument for Gradualism

     Consider an extension to two goods of the model of Section 3.1, wIth an

external balance constraint falling on investment only. We will exploit the

link between temporary tariffs and private savings via the consumption rate of

interest stressed by Razin and Svensson (1983) and van Wijnbergen (l983b) to

construct an argument for gradualism in liberalizing trade.

     Cold turkey liberalization implies that the pre—liberalization tariff     T

is lowered to zero in both periods. Gradualism implies a zero tariff in

period 2 but a lower but positive tariff in period one (T** in Figure

1). The differential welfare effect can accordingly be obtained by evaluating

the welfare effect of a tariff       in period one under the assumption of a

zero tariff in period two.

    To do so we of course have to extend the model to at least two traded

goods Cx and y) each period. By choice of normalization assume that
                        16




rAXL.




                              L


                              I                   I




                             -J




        0                                         2.
                                                       t1YM€




        Figure 1: Cold Turkey Versus Gradualism
                                           17




 good x is the untaxed commodity. The budget constraint then becomes



                     R1(1,p1;K) + 6* R2(l,p2;K+I) —    1(6) + t(E     — R1       )   =
                           y               y                     P'      P1
                                                                  y          y


                           E(111(1,p'),6*]12;W)                                          (26)




where p1, the domestic price of good y in period one, equals the world

price plus tariff rate, P =     P    + r. We assume that aggregate utility W Is
                            y
weakly homothetically identically separable, which allows us to write the

expenditure function as a function of within period price indices rti(l,P1)

i =   1,2,   the discount factor 6* and welfare W (see Svensson and Razin

(1983)).

      The capital market constraint is represented by


                     6*(R2(l,p2;K+I(6)) —                               = T              (27)
                                            112E11 (r11(l,P),6*n2,W))

      Investment is determined by setting the value of capital (evaluated at

the "virtual discount factor"       6, since investment is rationed) equal to its

reproduction costs:9


                     6R = 1,                                                             (28)


where we made the simplifying assumption that investment goods consist of good

one only, or, alternatively, that the good—2 components can be imported free

of tariffs.




     9The concept of "virtual prices" at which rations are willingly consumed
is Introduced by Neary and Roberts (1980).
                                                   18




    Simple differentiation of (26) and (27) and inserting (28) give us



                    = 1(1   —                         + [C2E T(E11 —          R111fl         (29)
            ''
                                TC1)1I2ll1 1 o*E1111]

                                      (A)                              (B)



   is a positive constant (see the Appendix for explicit formulas).

                 El, the marginal propensity to spend (on all goods) in period
C2E = E
two. Equation (29) tells us that a small tariff will increase                     5, or lower

the interest rate that has to be charged to investors in order to hit the

capital market constraint.

     The mechanism is clear: a small tariff decreases the consumption

discount factor                       or, equivalently, increases the Consumption Rate of
                                 )

Interest.        This leads t        higher   private savings, leaving more room for

investment given the external current account constraint.                    Accordingly,   cS




can go up, closer to the world market discount factor 6. The effect

corresponds to term (A) in (29). If however the tariff is too large, term

(B), which is proportional to                 r, will dominate and reverse the result.

     The reason is once again clear: a large first period tariff will inflict
                                                        consumption smoothing will then lead to
a large first period real income loss;

downward pressure on the firBt period current account.                   If the real income

loss is large enough this effect will offset the positive effect via the

CR1. Define             as the tariff rate where these two effects will just cancel

 each other out in the margin.

     We are now ready to look at the welfare effects of a small first period

 tariff under the external balance constraint with investment rationing:




                                               2 E11 (6*_6) + (E11 - R111)
                                                                                                 (30)



                                                  (+;C)                  (—;D)
                                              19



 where         > 0 (see the Appendix for a precise expression).                Equation (30)
 backs up our claim in the introduction to this section: a first period

 tariff, if not too large, is welfare improving under the external balance

 constraint—cum—investment_ratjonlng mechanism considered. The first term,

 C, is proportional to the size of the capital market distortion (*t5) and

 the compensated sensitivity of savings with respect to the rate of interest

          )   and is positive. A temporary tariff will raise the
 (E11                                                            consumption rate
     21
 of interest, increasing private savings, therefore leaving more room for pri-

 vate investment (which was too low because of the external balance constraint

and the rationing mechanism adopted) and so reduces the distortionary costs of

the external balance constraint—cum—investment—ratjonjng.

        If the first period tariff is too large however, the second term, D,

will increase since it is proportional to           r. In that case the static welfare

losses because of the first period relative price distortion may offset the
                                             **
dynamic gains via the CR1. Define t                as the rate where these effects
                                                                          **        *
cancel on the margin. It is straightforward to show that              r         < T ,   I.e.,
the marginal welfare effect flips sign as t increases before the effect on

5 is reversed (cf., the Appendix).

        Setting the marginal net welfare gain of a first period tariff equal to

zero implicitly defines the (second best) optimal first period tariff:



                       T              E      (*)/(            - R1        )   > 0
                            ll2II1
                                     Py 2l              PP
                                                         yy      PP
                                                                                           (31)
                                                                     yy
(31) shows that under the investment rationing scheme adopted in response to

the external balance constraint, the first period (second best) optimal tariff

is 8trictly positive. This establishes the superiority of gradualism over

cold turkey liberalization under the external balance constraint—cum—
                                      20




investment—rationing.

     To recapitulate, we start off by analyzing the very realistic (for most

LDC's) case where an exogenously imposed external balance constraint fell

disproportionately on investment rather than on consumption (in fact we

assumed, for analytical convenience, that it fell completely on investment;

this is immaterial however). Under those circumstances a small first period

tariff was shown to be welfare improving because of its favorable effects on

private savings (via the CR1) and the ensuing relaxation of the rationing of

private investment. Since gradual trade liberalization can be considered as

complete liberalization with a small tariff put back on in period 1, this

constitutes an argument for gradualism when liberalizing trade under external

balance constraints.

     It should be emphasized however that this is conditional on investment

taking a disproportionate share of the adjustment burden to the external

constraint; if a market clearing real interest rate above world levels can be

charged to consumers and Investors alike, it can be shown that the argument

for additional first period relative price distortions via temporary tariffs

disappears, the favorable CR1 effects not withstandirLg)° However in most

LDC's such a first best rationing device is typically unavailable, so that

our argument for gradualism stands.



4. Concluding Remarks

     In a first best world without externalities, market imperfections and

without constraints on commodity taxation the issues addressed in this paper

—— how to liberalize trade in factors and goods, is of no interest:




     '°A proof of this statement is available on request from the authors.
                                      21




instantaneous complete liberalization will always be optimal for a country too

small to influence the world relative price vector. However capital market

liberalization may be considered while political, distributional or revenue

considerations bar instantaneous trade liberalization; alternatively, trade

liberalization may be chosen (or imposed) while external constraints prevent

foreign borrowing. The recent experience of a group of countries in South

America is one of partial (i.e., one market only) liberalization. While in

Argentina the capital account was liberalized, the trade account retained its

controls. In Chile the opposite was the case.

     In this paper we discuss the consequences of these two alternative

sequences of liberalization. We first review the literature on immiserizing

transfers, extending it in several respects. We discuss immiserizing capital

transfers a la Johnson (1967) and capital inflows a la Brecher—Alejandro

(1977) and show that immiserization is possible even if the full rental rate

differential is taxed. We then show that a transfer in the form of consump-

tion goods will never be welfare reducing. An   interesting   consequence is that

foreign aid that stipulates that at least part of the transwer has to be

invested can be immiserizing while aid that is purely consumed cannot (in the

small country case). So it is possible to have immiserlzation, if liberallz—

ing capital market leads to more investment (as it will If the external

balance constraint fell on both consumers and investors alike), It is

straightforward to show that the private sector will invest both too much and

in the wrong sector if tariffs protect the capital intensive sector. We

demonstrate that shadow pricing of new investment projects, would avoid that.

If, however, Imposing the use of shadow prices on the private sector in evalu-

ating new projects is infeasible, opening up capital markets while restricting

trade could lead to immiserization, cautioning against this sequence.
                                      22




    Capital market distortions are in a sense isomorphic to trade distortions

in that they imply barriers to trade in goods across time rather than between

countries at a given moment in time; accordingly, one needs an interteniporal

framework for a satisfactory analysis of the welfare cost of capital market

constraints. This is provided in Section 3 of this paper.

     We derive a simple expression linking the cost of capital market

distortions to the square of the induced interest rate differential and the

(compensated) interest elasticity of savings and investment. The same

procedure is used to demonstrate the increase in distortionary cost if

external rationing falls disproportionately on investment, empirically a vey

important case.

     We finally draw on recent work on the relation between temporary tariffs

and private savings via the consumption rate of interest to analyze the

question of cold turkey vs. gradualism in trade liberalization in the case

where external rationing falls disproportionately on investment, and establish

unambiguously that under those circumstances gradualism is the optimal

strategy. Most examples of trade liberalization took place under external

balance constraints; in most cases of external balance constraints investment

takes a disproportionate share of the adjustment burden; so this conclusion is

of great policy relevance.
                                         23



                                   Ref erences




Balassa, R. (1982a): "Disequilibrium Analysis in Developing Economies: An

   Overview," World Development.

__________ (1982b):    "Exports, Policy Choice and Economic Growth in Developing

   Countries After the 1973 011 Shock," DRD Discussion Paper No. 48, World Bank.

Bertrand, T. and F. Flatters (1971): "Tariffs, Capital Accumulation, and

   Imrniserizlng Growth," Journal of International Economics.

Bhagwati, J, and T.N. Srinivasan (1979): "Trade Policy and Development," in

   R, Dornbusch, and J. Frenkel (eds.), International Economic Policy: Theory

   and Evidence, Johns Hopkins Press.

Brecher, R, and J. Bhagwati (1982): "Immiserizing Transfers from Abroad,"

   Journal of International Economics,

__________ and C. Diaz Alejandro (1977): "Tariffs, Foreign Capital and

   Immiserlzing Growth," Journal of International Economics.

Caves, R. and R, Jones (1981): World Trade and Payments, 3rd ed., Boston:

   Little, Brown.

Dixit, A. and V. Norman (1980): Theory of International Trade, U.K: Nisbets,

   Welwyn.

Edwards, S. (1983): "The Order of Liberalization of the Current and Capital

   Accounts of the Balance of Payments: A Survey of the Major Issues,"

   Working Paper, UCLA.

Grossman, G. (1983):   'The Gains from International Factor Movements,"

   forthcoming in Journal of International Economics.

Johnson, H. (1967): "The Possibility of Income Losses from Increased

   Efficiency or Factor Accumulation in the Presence of Tariffs," Economic

   Journal.
                                        24




Khan, M. and R. Zahier (1982): "The Macroeconomic Effects of Changes in

   Barriers to Trade and Capital Flows: A Simulation Analysis," IMF Staff

   Papers, June.

Krueger, A.O. (1978): Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:

   Liberalization Attempts and Consequences, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.

__________ (1983):     Trade and Employment in Developing Countries, University

   of Chicago Press.

                       "The Problems of Liberalization," in A.C. Harberger (ed.)
__________ (1984):
   World Economic Growth, forthcoming ICS Press.

Little, I.M.D. (1982): Economic Development, Basic Books.

__________ T. Scitovsky and M. Scott (1970): Industry and Trade in Some
   Developing Countries, Oxford University Press.

Nussa, M. (1979): "The Two Sector Model in Terms of Its Dual: A Geometric

   Exposition," Journal of International Economics.

Neary, P. anad K. Roberts (1980): "The Theory of Household Behavior Under

   Rationing," European Economic Review.

Razin, A. and L, Svensson (1983): An Asymmetry Between Export and Import

   Taxes," Economic Letters.

Svensson, L. and R. Razin (1983): The Terms of Trade, Spending and the

   Current Account; the Harberger-LaurserrMetzler Effect," Journal of

   Political Economy.

van Wijnbergen, S. (1983a)      "The Economics of a Duty Free Zone," mimeo, World

   Bank.

                        "Tariffs, Employment and the Current Account: the Role
__________ (1983b):
    of Real Wage Resistance," mimeo, World Bank.

                        "The Dutch Disease: A Disease After All?" forthcoming
__________ (1984):
    Economic Journal.
                                                              25



                                                        APPENDIX



      Consider   the model of Section 3.3 in differentiated form:



  (l-C) -    (*_)      41                               jt(E
                                                                        - R
                                                              PyPy
                             EWdWI
                                               =1
                                                        I



                                                                            *                 I
                                                                                                        (A.l)
                                                                                          dTI
     C2E
              _6*4           Id I-211
                                   py
                                      2l                                                      I

                                                                                              F




 The determinant of the matrIx on the LHS equals:



                        =                       S
                                                    *2                      *             2
                                                             + C2E(I5 —5)
                            —(l—tC1)
                                C-)                                         (+)

which appears of indeterminate sign. However some manipulation yields



                       =
                            _(l_C2E)5*             4 — C2 +                 rC15 4                      (A.2)

                            <
                                                       *2                   + P C
                                                                                     1        *
                                                                                     yly 5 4
                                                                   C
                                    (lC)S Rx —                         2E

                                —     (1   —
                                               .11.)        PC1
                                                   y
                                           *        2
                             P'C
                                xld5 RK_C2E_                            (3. _.L...) P1C
                                                                                         ,l yly
                                                                                         y

where we used P1C + P1C + C2E
                 xld        ylf
                                                            1 and &k                4 = 1.
     Cramer's rule applied to (A.l) now gives




           — .— (l—tC1) 2'll E11 +                                          C2ET(Ell —            R11   (A.3)
                                                                                             yy   pp
                                               y                                                   yy
which is expression (29) in the text with y =                                   —
                                                  26




       The expression for               becomes




             Ew
                   = -
                                 [IIII E11(6-6) + t(E11 — R111fl                       (A.4)



                                                             = — L6*2Re
which is expression (30) in the text with

       Setting (A.3) to zero to derive                 and (A.4) to zero to derive T


yields:

                        T** =QT —
                                   *




                                            E           tC ) > 0 so T        <
with    n = C2 < 1,                                         ly
                                    Pl 21l
                               112111

                                        y
                                                       **
       Finally A.4 immediately shows that T                 > 0, so that the claim made ins

the text is in fact true:
                        **                  *
                        0<T <t.




                              > 0 we assumed 1 —                             > 0. This is a
        111n claiming                                       (r/p)(S*PC1/&)
 reasonable assumption: 'r/p < 1 by construction
                                                                 and (6*pC1f/5) < 1 even

 for severe capital market distortions under plausible import shares. The
                         **
 important result T           > 0 does not depend on that assumption.
