NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONTRACTUAL TRADEOFFS AND SMES’ CHOICE OF
ORGANIZATIONAL FORM: A VIEW FROM U.S. AND
FRENCH HISTORY, 1830-2000
Naomi R. Lamoreaux
Jean-Laurent Rosenthal
Working Paper 12455
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12455
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006

The authors would like to thank participants in seminars and conferences at the California Institute of
Technology, Princeton University, Stanford University, the University of British Columbia, the University
of Southern California, UCLA, and the UC Riverside meeting of the All-UC Economic History Group. They
are grateful to Daniel Bogart, Hongbin Cai, Stephen Cullenberg, Harold Demsetz, Peter Gourevich, Timothy
Guinnane, Ron Harris, Hugo Hopenhayn, Gonzalo Islas-Rojas, Kenneth Sokoloff, and William Summerhill
for their detailed and helpful comments; to Juan-Francisco Aveleyra, Christopher Cook, Sarah Cullem, Alena
Laptiovna, and Sarah Shen for research assistance; and to UCLA’s Dean of Social Sciences, UCLA’s
International Institute, and the Academic Senate of the University of California, for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Contractual Tradeoffs and SMEs’ Choice of Organizational Form: A View From U.S. and
French History, 1830-2000
Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal
NBER Working Paper No. 12455
August 2006
JEL No. D21, D86, K2, K22, L22, N8
ABSTRACT

Today the vast majority of multi-owner firms in the United States are corporations, but that was not
the case in the past. Before the advent of the income tax, tort litigation, and significant federal
regulation, entrepreneurs more often than not chose to organize as partnerships, a form that
economists consider seriously flawed. Why would they make such a terrible mistake? We begin
by noting that corporations created new types of contracting problems for businesses at the same
time as they solved problems afflicting partnerships. We then model the tradeoffs involved in the
choice of corporations versus partnerships and confirm that the model’s assumptions are consistent
with U.S. legal rules up through the 1940s. The model implies that partnerships and corporations are
complementary organizational forms, and we show that data from the U.S. Census of Manufactures
strongly supports that implication. We also verify that the model’s assumptions hold for the broader
set of organizational choices available under the French Code de Commerce and use data on
multi-owner firms registered in Paris in the 1830s and 1840s to demonstrate the complementary
character of the basic forms. Despite much literature emphasizing the fundamentally different
environments for business associated with the French and U.S. legal regimes, the basic calculus
underpinning the choice of organizational form was the same in both countries.
Naomi R. Lamoreaux
Department of Economics
UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
lamoreaux@econ.ucla.edu

Jean-Laurent Rosenthal
Division of Humanities and Social Sciences
California Institute of Technology
Mail Code 228-77, Pasadena, CA 91125
jlr@hss.caltech.edu

I. Introduction
The vast majority of multi-owner firms in the United States today, including virtually all
large-scale enterprises, are organized as corporations. Perhaps it is not surprising, therefore, that
most economic theorists take the superiority of the corporate form for granted (see, for example,
Williamson 1985; Hart 1995; Bolton and Scharfstein 1998; and Tirole 2001). Rather than
compare the advantages and disadvantages of corporations with those of other possible
organizational forms, they focus their attention on understanding the agency problems that
corporations, especially large ones, routinely face (for a notable exception, see Cai 2003). A
quick glance back to the beginning of the twentieth century, however, suggests that the
numerical predominance of the corporation is a relatively recent phenomenon. Although then, as
now, the largest firms generally were corporations, at the turn of the century the most popular
form of multi-owner enterprise was the partnership. Before the advent of the income tax, before
the explosion of tort litigation, before the growth of federal regulation, business people who
joined together to found an enterprise more often than not chose a form of organization whose
drawbacks economists consider to be both serious and obvious. Why would they make such a
terrible mistake?
We approach this question by noting that the agency problems that have been the focus of
so much of the economics literature afflict corporations in particular, not multi-owner firms in
general (e.g., Demsetz 1972; Tirole 2001; Romano 1987; Laporta et al. 1998; and Bebchuk and
Ferrell 1999). Problems of delegated management and minority oppression arise precisely
because the corporate form concentrates power in a small group of officers. Partnerships do not
have these problems because each member of the firm has full ownership rights. Of course,

2

partnerships have other problems that follow from this characteristic of joint control. Most
obviously, they suffer from the possibility that disputes will arise among the firm’s various
owners and disrupt its operations or, even worse, force what was otherwise a successful
enterprise to dissolve. Economists have tended to view these flaws as nearly fatal to the form
(see, for example, Blair 2003). Hence there has been little effort in the literature to model
organizational choice as a tradeoff between the flaws of partnerships, on the one hand, and those
of corporations, on the other.1
In this paper we take on this modeling task. In effect, we ask the question: if business
people’s decisions were not biased by exogenous factors such as tax or regulatory policy, what
would govern their organizational choices? We focus initially on the choice between
partnerships and corporations because these were the main options available to business people
in the U.S. (and in other countries with Anglo-American legal regimes). Then, however, we
examine the expanded set of organizational choices available to business people in France under
the Code de Commerce (and in other countries with similar code-based legal systems). We find
that the trade-offs among these various organizational forms differed in degree but not in kind
from those available under Anglo-American law. In other words, despite much literature
emphasizing the fundamentally different environments for business associated with these
alternative legal regimes (see especially La Porta et al. 1997 and 1998), the basic calculus
underpinning the choice of organizational form was the same.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II frames the theory by isolating the essential
differences between the partnership and corporate forms. Section III develops our model of
1

Legal scholars have not all been so dismissive of partnerships. For a defense of the form, see Ribstein 2005.
Hansmann and Kraakman (2000) take an intermediate position. In their view, the essential characteristic of a
business entity is that it must be able to partition the assets of the firm from those of the people who make it up.

3

organizational choice. In Section IV we confront the model with the legal rules and quantitative
evidence for the U.S. in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Then in Section V we do
the same for France. For both countries we find that the legal rules support the model’s key
assumption that corporations and partnerships address different governance problems. We also
find strong quantitative evidence for the model’s main implication that partnerships and
corporations were complements rather than substitutes. In both countries very large firms were
more likely to be corporations than partnerships, but owners of small- and medium-size firms
seem to have weighed the advantages of one form over another, sometimes deciding in favor of
partnerships and sometimes corporations. Their choices varied both within and across industries,
suggesting that owners based their decisions on their own individual characteristics, as well as on
the types of business in which they were engaged.

II. Framing the theory
In 1892 Andrew Carnegie and about a score of other businessmen organized the Carnegie
Steel Company, Ltd. Capitalized at $25 million, the company included four major steel plants,
several iron furnaces and mills, two coke works, and an assortment of other properties. In other
words, it was a very large concern and, by that standard, might have been expected to organize as
a corporation. But the associates chose instead a complicated form of partnership that was in
some respects similar to today’s limited liability company (Wall 1970, 321-22, 535-37).
This choice of organizational form presents an intriguing puzzle. The company had large,
firm-specific investments that could not be liquidated easily. At the same time, none of the
partners, except perhaps Carnegie himself, had human capital that was critical to the enterprise’s
Partnerships accomplished this purpose, but corporations did so more securely. See also Hansmann, Kraakman, and

4

success. According to the arguments of Williamson, Hart, Demsetz, and other theorists, Carnegie
Steel should have been organized as a corporation. But it was not, and the choice was not a
matter of accident or oversight. The associates had to seek out expert legal assistance to draft the
firm’s complicated partnership contract. That they did so in a period when organizing a
corporation was a simple, routine matter suggests that they thought there were severe drawbacks
to the corporate form.
Although relatively few firms this large organized as partnerships, the Carnegie example
is a useful way of highlighting the broader phenomenon with which we are concerned: the
continued, widespread use of the partnership form decades after the passage of general
incorporation laws. Of course, the corporate form was also adopted by large numbers of firms
during this period, but it was not nearly as dominant as it would become during the late twentieth
century. Clearly, although some business people thought corporations were a better way of
organizing their enterprises than partnerships, others came to just the opposite conclusion. Our
problem is to understand the tradeoffs that these choices involved.
Because both partnerships and corporations were broadly popular, it does not make sense
to think of the two organizational forms as pure substitutes, with the corporation an
overwhelming improvement over the partnership. To be sure, a key advantage of incorporation
was that it enabled firms to raise funds on the equities markets. Some firms (railroad companies,
for example) required so much capital that this ability was critical to their success. But in the
nineteenth century relatively few corporations ever carried out a public offering or listed their
stock on an exchange. If access to capital markets was the primary motivation for incorporation,
then there should have been at most a few thousand rather than hundreds of thousands of

Squire 2006.

5

corporations in the United States (Navin and Sears 1955; Baskin and Miranti 1997; Lamoreaux
and Rosenthal 2005).
Corporations also benefited from limited liability, but this advantage could raise the cost
of borrowing to the firm. Indeed, in order to gain access to credit most corporations depended on
their stockholders personally to endorse their debts.2 Although the need to secure stockholders’
voluntary assent meant that members of corporations could control the extent of their obligations
in a way that was not possible in partnerships, it also made it more difficult for the firm to act
expeditiously. In other words, limited liability was not an unalloyed boon but imposed costs that
could affect the firm’s access to credit and its flexibility in making decisions.
The tradeoffs associated with the choice to incorporate were even starker where internal
governance was concerned. Governance problems arise whenever the manager of a firm does
not own it outright. Given that most individuals have limited wealth and credit, many enterprises
necessarily have more than one owner. As a result, they face a variety of transaction costs. In an
ideal world one might imagine that business people could devise sophisticated contracts that
would enable them to eliminate all transaction costs, regardless of which organizational form
they chose. Yet even if such contracts existed, it is not obvious that founding entrepreneurs
would adopt efficient governance rules. As Bebchuck (2002) has shown asymmetric information
may lead founding entrepreneurs deliberately to choose poor governance arrangements. As a
point of fact, moreover, the literature has identified a slew of real-world problems that firms

2

For this reason, the credit reports gathered by R. G. Dun & Co. typically assessed the creditworthiness of a
corporation’s major stockholders, as well as the firm itself. See, for example, the 2 December 1869 entry for the
Gorham Manufacturing Co. in Rhode Island: “Since the Senior Gorham’s death + the consequent deprivation of his
endorsement their credit has been weakened.” Rhode Island vol. 9, R. G. Dun & Co., Baker Library, Harvard
Graduate School of Business Administration. Shareholders in large corporations might also be called upon to bear
responsibility for debts. See Bain (1999, 133) for an account of how Collis Huntington, Leland Stanford, Charles
Crocker, and Mark Hopkins all had to endorse personally the obligations of the Central Pacific when the company
was building its half of the first transcontinental railroad. See also Hurst 1964, 414, 862, and note 104; Hurst 1970,
28; and Forbes 1986.

6

cannot easily contract away. These include providing managers with the incentives to work hard
enough to insure the project’s success (Hart 1995), giving stakeholders the incentive to monitor
management’s activities (Demsetz 1972; Zweibel 1995; Bolton and Von Thaden 1998),
accommodating members’ desire to withdraw from the firm if conflicts over strategy arise
(Lamoreaux and Rosenthal 2006), and limiting the extent to which majority owners or managers
can extract private benefits of control (Tirole 2001).
The general assumption in the literature is that the corporation is more efficient in
reducing these kinds of transaction costs than the partnership, except for a small number of
unusual industries or exceptional firms. Alchian and Demsetz (1972) emphasize the
inefficiencies that follow from the partners’ joint control, the weakened incentive to exert effort
and the relative ineffectiveness of monitoring. In Hart’s model of partnerships (1995), there is no
joint control—each partner exercises authority over a different set of assets—but joint ownership
implies shared returns, which in turn reduce the incentives of either partner to make discretionary
investments in the assets they control. When these authors turn to corporations, however, they
sweep all the multi-owner problems away. Alchian and Demsetz assume the corporation’s
hierarchy is an efficient mechanism to induce effort. In Hart’s model of the corporation the
managers make investment decisions as if they owned the whole firm.
These assumptions about corporations are clearly wrong. Although a corporation does
have delegated management, it remains a multi-owner firm. Hence the incentives facing the
manager of a corporation cannot be the same as those of a sole proprietor. Indeed, this last
observation lies at the core of the burgeoning literature on corporate governance, which
highlights the conflicts that arise within corporations between shareholders and managers, on the
one hand, and among different factions of shareholders, on the other (Tirole 2001; Demsetz and

7

Lehn 1985; Pagano and Roell 1998). For some scholars, the solution to conflict between
shareholders and managers is large block holders (Demsetz 1972; Zwiebel 1995). According to
this view monitoring is both non-contractible and costly, so only the investor with the largest
stake in the firm will do any monitoring and that investor must own a big chunk of the firm to be
willing to monitor at all. Other scholars, however, have argued that dominant block holders play
a more ambiguous role. Large shareholders will want to use their control rights for private gain,
and unless they own nearly all the firm, they will increase their earnings at the expense of other
shareholders (Zingales 1995; Yarrow 1985). The problem is a serious one because charters often
give control either to a particular group of stockholders (through dual class shares or special
voting schemes) or to professional managers (through poison pills or staggered boards). As a
result, control is often exercised by individuals who own just a small fraction of the firm and yet
have the capacity to extract private benefits. As the scandals of the late 1990s revealed, the
extent of their extraction can be significant indeed.
These problems of corporate governance are rooted in the form’s legal history, for the
business corporation was originally adopted to solve a key problem of the partnership form: the
likelihood that otherwise profitable enterprises would suffer untimely dissolution.3 Legally,
partnerships had no existence or identity that was independent of the specific individuals who
formed them. If any partner died or decided to withdraw from the business, the firm had to
dissolve. Although a variety of legal devices could be employed to limit the damage a partner’s
withdrawal could cause (Ribstein 2005), these arrangements were cumbersome and often of
uncertain enforceability (Lamoreaux and Rosenthal 2006).4 Moreover, the problem was

3

For a recent strong restatement of this argument about the origins of corporations, see Blair 2003.
Dissolution did not necessarily mean liquidation, of course. It was possible for the remaining partners to buy out a
withdrawing member and continue the business on their own. Once a course was set for dissolution, however, there
was always the risk that liquidation would be necessary if the partners could not agree on a buyout price or if there
4

8

particularly onerous for firms with many owners because the likelihood of a death or crippling
dispute among the associates increased with the number of partners.
Corporations were able to solve the problem of untimely dissolution because they were
legal persons that existed without regard to the identity of their shareholders. Shareholders
might withdraw from the enterprise by selling their stakes, but they could not force the firm to
refund their investments, and they had no power to act on behalf of the enterprise. Corporations
were run by officers and a board of directors duly elected by the firm’s membership. Although
in principle these officers and directors served at the pleasure of shareholders, during their terms
in office they had considerable leeway to act as they saw fit. Moreover, because replacing
management always required a substantial ownership stake—half the shares or more—
disgruntled shareholders typically found them difficult to depose.
Management’s ability to extract private benefits was thus enshrined in the very essence of
the corporation. To make matters worse, any individual (or group of individuals willing to act in
concert) who acquired half or more of the firm had the power to require management to do its
bidding. Hence the problem of disciplining management could easily become the more difficult
problem of disciplining controlling shareholders. Whereas disgruntled minority stakeholders
could force a partnership to dissolve, they had no similar power in a corporation. As a result,
whoever was in control could make decisions with little regard to the interests of other members
of the firm and even expropriate some of the minority’s earnings (Lamoreaux and Rosenthal
2006).

were not enough ready assets to make a payoff possible. If, as a consequence, firm-specific assets had to be sold, the
cost to the partners was potentially very high.

9

III. The basic model
In this section we examine these essential differences between partnerships and
corporations using a simple static model. We reduce the number of parties to two: an
entrepreneur/manager and an investor. The entrepreneur contributes a business plan, a specific
amount of wealth, and work effort. She is not rich enough to carry out the project on her own.
The investor can provide the extra capital the entrepreneur needs if it worth his while. More
formally, we assume that the entrepreneur has an idea that requires 1 unit of capital to realize. If
the project succeeds, it earns Π; if it fails, it earns L. (L can be thought of as the liquidation value
of the project.) If funded, the project succeeds with probability p, which depends on the effort the
entrepreneur exerts. For now we assume there is an efficient level of effort that will generate a
probability of success p*. The entrepreneur’s opportunity cost for the efficient level of effort is
w, which is paid as a wage. Therefore, the return to the project will be R= pΠ + [1-p]L-w. We
assume that Π is large enough that for some p the project is socially valuable (R>1+r, where r is
the rate of interest). The entrepreneur is risk neutral and has a wealth level We<1. To finance the
project she turns to an investor, who is also risk neutral and has limited wealth. Indeed, if
organizational form is going to matter, the associates must face wealth constraints. Otherwise,
one or the other of them can operate the firm as a sole proprietorship. The model has three
periods. In each period only one player moves. Each player’s decisions are all observable to the
other player, so we can restrict our analysis to pure strategies.
In period one the entrepreneur (who we assume “owns” the idea for the project) decides
on the organizational form (corporation or partnership), the stake to offer the investor, and her
own wage. We define a partnership to be a firm under the joint control of the partners. Hence the
capacity of a partner to act is not related to his or her equity stake. We define a corporation to be

10

a firm that is controlled by the majority shareholder. That is, whoever owns the larger equity
stake can act as a dictator. If the investor is the controlling shareholder, he can determine how
the entrepreneur will manage the firm. In period two the investor decides whether or not to
accept the entrepreneur’s offer and whether or not to monitor the entrepreneur’s effort in period
three.5 If the investor does not participate, the project is not undertaken and the game ends. If
the project is undertaken, then in period three the entrepreneur chooses her effort level if the
investor does not monitor. If the firm is organized as a corporation, whoever is the controlling
shareholder decides whether to extract private benefits. Then profits (or losses) are realized and
distributed among the owners.
We assume that neither the investor nor the entrepreneur can commit to future actions at
the beginning of play. When contracting on organizational form and equity distribution, the
entrepreneur cannot commit to provide the efficient level of effort. Similarly, the investor cannot
commit to monitor the entrepreneur to prevent her from shirking. If the firm is organized as a
partnership, the associates cannot commit to staying in the business. If the firm is organized as a
corporation, the controlling stockholder cannot commit not to extract private benefits. However,
the decisions that the entrepreneur makes about organizational form and the distribution of
equity in period one will determine which of these various problems are likely to afflict the firm.
Solving the model always involves comparing the returns to partnerships with those to
corporations. Our analysis proceeds in three steps. We begin by considering the choice of
organizational form when the firm faces only one transaction cost. We replicate the standard
finding of the literature that, if there is only one type of transaction cost, one organizational form

5

This assumption (that the investor can commit to a monitoring decision in period two) is made for simplicity—to
insure that the model has a pure strategy equilibrium. It would be more realistic to assume that the investor cannot
commit and that monitoring and effort are chosen simultaneously. It is easy to show that our model would then have
a mixed strategy equilibrium that is analogous to the pure strategy equilibrium.

11

will dominate over the other. We also show, however, that whether partnerships or corporations
prevail depends on the nature of the transaction cost. We then move on to consider
organizational choice when there are several transaction costs and equity stakes are given. In
this part of the paper, we in effect analyze the model’s last two periods first in order to
characterize the fundamental advantages and disadvantages of the two organizational forms. In
the final step, we consider the joint choice of equity stakes and organizational form when the
investor and the entrepreneur together have just enough capital to start the business (We+Wi=1).
This step allows us to show that both organizational forms continue to have advantages and
disadvantages when transaction costs matter and capital markets are imperfect. Finally, we
consider what happens to these choices when capital constraints are relaxed.

III.A. When only one transaction cost is present
III.A.1. Shirking.
Even though the entrepreneur earns a wage such that she is willing to exert the optimal
level of effort, she will shirk unless she has the proper incentives. We consider the two classic
ways of inducing effort: giving the entrepreneur a sufficient equity interest in the firm; and
monitoring her activities.
Take the case of equity first. We assume that the entrepreneur’s effort increases with her
ownership share S in such a way that p(S) is concave and the efficient level of effort, p* = p(1).
Denote the socially efficient return, p*Π + [1-p*]L-w by R*. We assume that R* =R(1)> (1+r)
and R0(0) <(1+r).6 If the only motivation to effort is the entrepreneur’s stake, then the return to

6

The entrepreneur cares about income and but dislikes effort. In the absence of monitoring, her effort choice
depends upon the tradeoff between effort (E) and the return to her equity stake (Y). U(Y,-E) = U(S[p(E)Π +[1-

12

the firm will be R0 = p(S)Π + [1-p(S)]L-w. Without some capacity to induce effort firms will
only form if the entrepreneur owns enough of the firm.
Consider now the case of monitoring, which we define as gathering verifiable
information about effort. If the entrepreneur owns none of the firm, she has no incentive to
provide effort even though she is getting paid for it. If the investor does not monitor, the
entrepreneur always claims that she exerts the optimal level of effort, whether she does or not,
and gets paid w. If the investor monitors, he can block the payment of w if p<p*. We assume that
the entrepreneur has access to the same verifiable information about effort so that a request for w
cannot be blocked if p=p*. The investor bears a fixed cost of monitoring, cm, that does not
depend on his or the entrepreneur’s ownership stake. Because in the types of small and medium
size firms we have in mind the investor is knowledgeable about the business, monitoring is cheap
and has only a small effect on profits. Nonetheless, the investor will only monitor when he owns
enough of the firm to make it worth his while. In our model, moreover, monitoring can only
occur when the investor exercises control because he must have access to the books of the firm
on a timely basis as well as the ability to inspect its operations. The firm’s return when there is
monitoring, Rm = p*Π + [1-p*]L-w- cm > 1+r.
Definition: Let Sm be the value of S such that R* -cm/[1-S] = R0(S).
If the investor monitors he earns [1-S]R*-cm. If he does not, he earns [1-S]R0(S). R* is a
constant. R0(S)+cm/[1-S] is increasing in S and is greater than R* for S≈1 and less than R* for
S=0. Hence there is a unique Sm such that R*-cm/[1-Sm] = R0(Sm). At S=Sm, the investor is

p(E)]L], -E). Her optimal effort, given her equity stake S, requires S[∂U/∂Y][∂p/∂E][Π –L]-∂U/∂E=0. Optimal
effort is clearly increasing in S. If S is 0, effort is nil, and we assume the project fails for sure.

13

indifferent between monitoring and not monitoring. If cm is small enough, as we assume to be
the case, Sm >½.

Proposition 1: If shirking is the only problem, profits are higher in a partnership than in a
corporation for S between ½ and Sm. For all other equity stakes, profits are the same in both
organizational forms. (See Table 1.)
Monitoring occurs when two conditions are met: the investor finds it profitable; and he
has adequate control. For S<½, the investor wants to monitor and has control (in a corporation
because he is the majority shareholder and in a partnership because he is joint owner). For S
between ½ and Sm, monitoring is profitable for the investor. Joint ownership allows him to do so
in a partnership, but in a corporation he is the minority shareholder and does not have the control
needed to monitor. For S>Sm the investor does not want to monitor, and both forms lead to the
same outcome. As Figure 1 illustrates, if shirking were the only problem, there is no range of
equity stakes for which the corporation is superior to the partnership, whereas the partnership is
superior for ½< S<Sm. This conclusion stands a good deal of its literature on its head. Because
most economists view joint ownership strictly from the point of view of income rights, they
conclude that the partnership inevitably creates a tragedy of the commons. We focus on control
rights and show that joint control enables partnerships to solve problems that corporations
cannot.

III.A.2. Untimely dissolution
The value of the corporation is apparent, however, when we consider the problem of
untimely dissolution. As noted in Section II, this problem afflicts partnerships but not

14

corporations (or more precisely it affects partnerships far more severely than corporations).7 We
model untimely dissolution in the following simple way: During the life of a partnership a
dispute among the partners may arise that, if the firm is successful, will force its dissolution, and
if the firm is not successful, will add to its liquidation costs. We assume that the firm’s expected
return is reduced by a given fraction d. Again, this is a reduced form assumption; d could be
large either because disputes are very costly or because they occur very frequently. Unlike in
Section III.A.1, effort is contractible, so p=p*, and there is no need for monitoring.
Proposition 2: If untimely dissolution is the only problem, only corporations are organized. (See
Table 2.)
Partnerships earn Rp= [p*Π+[1-p*]L-w][1-d] or [1-d]R*. Corporations earn Rc= R*.
Clearly Rp< Rc.

III.A.3. Minority Oppression
As we noted in Section II, the control with which corporations endow dominant
stakeholders enables them to shift the flow of the firm’s revenue stream in their favor—that is,
they can extract private benefits. In our simple model with two stakeholders whoever has the
majority of shares controls the firm.8 We assume that he or she can legally appropriate a fraction
ω of the returns from successful projects and of the assets from failed ones, and that if

7

In our model untimely dissolution serves as a proxy for all losses in earnings associated with joint control. Clearly
problems of untimely dissolution will increase with the number of partners; hence it is not surprising that few
ordinary partnerships ever involve more than four partners.
8
Problems of minority oppression might be alleviated if there are more than two stockholders, none of which has an
outright majority. For example, if management has only a minority of the shares, then the other stockholders can
credibly threaten to remove it should if oppression occur. It is also possible, however, that some stockholders will be
tempted to join management and share in the spoils of private extraction. Moreover, as the number of shareholders
increases, owners face a collective action problem in limiting private extraction.

15

appropriation occurs, it is socially inefficient.9 A fraction β of the firm’s return is wasted,
leaving (1-β-ω) to be distributed among the shareholders. Effort is contractible (p=p*), and there
is no untimely dissolution (d=0).
If the firm organizes as a partnership, there is no possibility of appropriation because of
joint control. Hence Rp = p*Π+[1-p*]L-w. In a corporation, however, returns depend on whether
there is appropriation or not. Whether the controlling stockholder steals depends on the
distribution of equity.
Definition: Let Sca be the equity stake such that the entrepreneur wants to extract private benefits
only if her stake is less than Sca. It is easy to show that Sca= max{ω/[β+ω], ½}. By symmetry, if
the investor owns less than Sca, he will want to extract private benefits.
It follows that if 1-Sca<S<Sca, then Rc = [p*Π+[1-p*]L-w][1- β], the return to the
controlling stockholder who owns S of the firm is SR*[1-β-ω]+R*ω, and that to the minority
shareholder is (1-S)R*[1-β-ω].
Proposition 3: If minority oppression is the only problem, corporations and partnerships have the
same return if one or the other party owns at least Sca. If neither party owns Sca, then partnerships
are strictly preferred. (See Table 3.)

III.A.4. Single transaction cost theories reconsidered.
In each of preceding cases involving a single transaction cost, one organizational form
turned out to be at least weakly superior to the other over the entire range of equity stakes,
though which form was superior depended on whether the problem was shirking, untimely
9

For a discussion of the extent to which appropriation was likely to be found legal by U.S. courts, see Lamoreaux

16

dissolution, or minority oppression. If each firm faced exactly the same transaction cost, then
one organizational form might very well prevail throughout the economy. Because most theories
of organizational choice were designed to explain the predominance of the corporation in the
post World War II era, it is no surprise that they were single transaction-cost theories. It is also
no surprise that they focused on untimely dissolution or the cost of joint ownership, rather than
on the benefits of joint control or the cost of minority oppression. Our exploration of the effects
of different types of transaction costs on organizational choice suggests that greater caution is in
order before generalizing about which form is best. For some firms and industries the cost of
untimely dissolution is likely to be more serious than the loss from inefficient appropriation, but
for other firms and industries appropriation will be the critical problem to avoid. All other things
being equal, firms in the former situation will choose to organize as corporations, but firms in the
latter will prefer partnerships.

III.B. Shirking, costly dissolution, and private benefits of control together.
Taking these transaction costs one at a time is somewhat artificial. If a firm faces all three
transaction costs, its returns depend on the entrepreneur’s choice of organizational form and
equity stake. A partnership without monitoring will earn Rp0= [p(S)Π + [1-p(S)]L-w](1-d). A
partnership with monitoring will earn Rpm = [p*Π + [1- p*]L-w](1-d)-cm. Again, a unique Spm
exist such that monitoring occurs only if S<Spm. A corporation without monitoring or private
extraction will earn Rc00 = p(S)Π + [1-p(S)]L-w; one with monitoring but no extraction will earn
Rcm0=p*Π + [1- p*]L-w-cm. A corporation without monitoring but with private appropriation will
earn Rc0a=[p(S)Π + [1-p(S)] L-w](1-β); one with both will earn Rcma=[p*Π + [1- p*]L-w](1-β)-cm.

and Rosenthal 2006.

17

Again, the investor can monitor in a corporation only if S<1/2, and there will be appropriation if
1-Sca<S<Sca.
Proposition 4: The choice of organizational form depends on the relative magnitude of the
different transaction costs and on equity stakes. More precisely, we can distinguish three cases.
A. The case (see Table 4) where dissolution costs are less than appropriation costs (d<β):
If S<1-Sca, corporations are the most efficient organizational form. They do not suffer
from untimely dissolution or from appropriation (because the investor, who is in control, owns so
much of the firm that he would lose more from the decline in its aggregate return than he would
gain from appropriation). The investor also monitors, so the entrepreneur exerts the efficient
level of effort.
If 1-Sca< S< Sca, partnerships prevail. The losses from appropriation in a corporation are
larger than the losses from untimely dissolution in a partnership. The investor can monitor in a
partnership over the same range of equity stakes where he can monitor in a corporation. And he
can also monitor in a partnership for equity stakes between ½ and Spm.10
If S>Sca, corporations are superior to partnerships. There is no untimely dissolution, and
there is no appropriation (because now the entrepreneur owns enough of the firm not to want to
steal). There is no monitoring, and effort reflects the entrepreneur’s stake.
B. The case (see Table 5) where dissolution costs are greater than appropriation costs (d≥ β) and
the value of monitoring is high (that is, [1-β]Rc0a(½) <[1-d]R*-cm):
As in Case A, if S ≤ 1-Sca or S ≥ Sca, corporations are the most efficient organization. If
1-Sca < S ≤ ½, corporations still prevail because d>β. Because [1-β]Rc0a(½) < [1-d]R*, there
10

As in section III.A.1, Spm is defined as the equity stake of the entrepreneur such that the investor is indifferent
between monitoring in a partnership and not monitoring in a corporation.

18

exists an S’ such that the return to a partnership with monitoring is equal to that of a corporation
without monitoring (Rpm(S)= Rcoa(S)). Hence if S is between ½ and S’, partnerships will prevail
because monitoring is sufficiently valuable to offset the costs of dissolution. If S’≤S< Sca,
corporations prevail. Because the entrepreneur now owns a large stake, the value of monitoring
is low enough that it does not offset the higher cost of dissolution relative to appropriation.
C. The case (see Table 6) where dissolution costs are greater than or equal to appropriation costs
(d≥ β) and the value of monitoring is low ([1-β]Rc0a(½) ≥[1-d]R*-cm):
Corporations will prevail over the entire range of equity states. For S<½ and S > Spm,
the argument is the same as in Case B. For S between ½ and Spm the monitoring option offered
by partnership is insufficient to offset the high cost of dissolution, and corporations are preferred.
Discussion: When monitoring is valuable or dissolution is not too costly a problem relative to
appropriation, partnerships are more desirable than corporations; otherwise the reverse is the
case. The two forms of organization, in other words, are complements. To be sure, any given
firm has to choose to be either a corporation or a partnership, and thus in that sense the two
forms can be seen as substitutes. At the level of the economy, however, the forms are clearly
complements if governance problems (rather than relative tax rates or other policy variables)
drive organizational choice. That is, to the extent that the transaction costs we have highlighted
vary across firms, both partnerships and corporations will prevail in equilibrium. Furthermore, if
firms face identical transaction costs but have different distributions of equity, they may very
well choose different organizational forms. We have not, we must stress, obtained these results
by constructing the model in a way unfavorable to corporations. To the contrary, by assuming
that monitoring costs and the probability of untimely dissolution are not related to equity states
but that the likelihood of appropriation is, we have given corporations a hidden advantage.
19

Finally, it is important to note that, given our assumption that equity stakes are
exogenous, there are circumstances under which the entrepreneur may maximize her returns by
choosing a suboptimal organizational form. Consider the case where the entrepreneur’s equity
stake is near fifty percent. If she owns slightly more than half the firm, she may prefer a
corporation even if dissolution is much less costly than appropriation (d<β), because she will
secure private benefits of control only if the firm is organized as a corporation. On the other
hand, if her equity stake is slightly below a half, she may prefer a partnership even if d>β,
because in a corporation the investor will have control and will be able to appropriate some of
firm’s return.

III.C. Endogenous equity stakes.
We now check the generality of our findings by relaxing the assumption that equity
stakes are exogenous. We shift the focus of attention back to the first period, when the
entrepreneur acquires the capital she needs to realize her idea, and make two further
assumptions: (1) that the joint wealth of the entrepreneur and the investor exactly equals the
capital required for the entrepreneur’s project (We+Wi =1); and (2) that the entrepreneur makes a
take it or leave offer to the investor that includes both the firm’s organizational form and the
distribution of its equity.
One can show that equilibria always exist, though they may involve the firm not forming.
One can also show that they are generically unique.11 Fully characterizing the equilibria is
tedious because they depend on the absolute value of parameters such as Π and L and also on the

11

Multiple equilibria arise when d= β. For d≠β they arise for at most three discrete values of We. In these cases the
entrepreneur may be indifferent between the partnership and corporate forms or between two different equity stakes
within an organizational form. We break all ties in favor of corporations.

20

relative values of others like d and β. Instead, we offer five propositions that highlight the most
interesting results.12 The first three propositions detail the most important new insights we gain
from allowing equity stakes to be endogenous. They show that transaction costs affect less
profitable firms more than profitable ones, and that transaction costs can significantly reduce
entry when wealth constraints bind. The last two propositions demonstrate that the key results
from the analysis of exogenous stakes still hold for the endogenous case: partnerships and
corporations are complements; and the transaction costs faced by the firm together with the
wealth of the associates jointly determine how the firm is organized.
Proposition 5: Firms with very high or very low returns have the fewest governance problems.
When profits are high enough, the entrepreneur can secure the investor’s capital by
offering him a sufficiently tiny stake that the firm operates as if it were a sole proprietorship.
When profits are very low, the only firms that form are those where one of the two parties
contributes nearly all the capital and is effectively the sole owner. Firms with more even
distributions of investment cannot form because the participation constraints cannot be satisfied.
Proposition 6: Some equity stakes are never offered in equilibrium, in particular those that are
slightly larger than 1-Sca, ½, and Spm, as well as those that are slightly smaller than Sca.
If equity stakes only determined income flows, then the entrepreneur would simply offer
the investor the smallest stake that secured his participation. However, equity stakes also affect
both control rights in corporations and the inventor’s incentive to monitor regardless of
organizational form. As a result, the entrepreneur does not always minimize the investor’s stake,
because doing so may change control rights and the investor’s incentives in ways that adversely

12

The proofs of the propositions are of limited technical interest and thus have been relegated to the appendix.

21

affect the aggregate return of the firm. Consider the case where the investor could afford a stake
Sca. Then firm’s return would R*-cm. To buy Sca the investor must have wealth Wi= [Sca [R*]cm]/[1+r]. Now suppose Wi is slightly less than [Sca [R*]-cm]/[1+r]. If the investor gets a stake
that is slightly less than Sca, he will want to appropriate. His return will jump up, and the firm’s
return will jump down. Both those movements imply that the entrepreneur’s return falls
discretely. She is better off keeping the investor’s stake at Sca, even though he cannot quite
afford to pay her [Sca [R*]-cm]/[1+r]. More generally, the function that maps equity stakes into
the entrepreneur’s returns has discrete jumps at (1-Sca), ½, Spm, and Sca, introducing flat spots
into the equilibrium relationship between investor wealth and investor equity stakes. At the right
edge of a flat spot there will be a discontinuous increase in the entrepreneur’s equity stake,
leaving a gap in the observed distribution of equity stakes.
Proposition 7: As d and β increase, firms with relatively equal investment stakes are less likely
to form.
Firms bear few transaction costs if either the entrepreneur or the investor owns almost all
the firm. For firms where the entrepreneur must sell more than 1-Sca but the investor cannot
afford Sca, aggregate returns will be reduced by either a dissolution cost or an appropriation cost.
Firms will earn strictly less than the max of {[1-d]R*, [1-β] R*}. If R* is close enough to 1+r, the
aggregate participation constraint will bind, and it is more likely to do so as d or β increases. In
any case so long as the distributions of d and β across firms are not too closely correlated, for
some firms participation constraints are likely to bind in corporations but not in partnerships
whereas for other firms the situation will be just the reverse. As a result, low-profit firms are
likely to be a mix of corporations and partnerships.

22

Proposition 8: If П is small enough, for two intervals of the entrepreneur’s wealth, {1, We1} and
{We2, 0}, the firm organizes as a corporation. For wealth between We1 and We2 the firm does not
form. As Π increases, the range where the firm does not form shrinks and ultimately disappears.
Instead, there will be a middle range of the entrepreneur’s wealth such that the firm is organized
as a partnership. As Π increases further, the lower range of wealth where the firm organizes as a
corporation will disappear, and as Π continues to increase, the range at which it organizes as a
partnership will also disappear. If Π is large enough, the firm operates as a corporation under the
entrepreneur’s control whatever her initial wealth endowment.
If Π is sufficiently close to 1+r, the firm cannot bear any significant transaction costs if it
is to meet the associates’ participation constraints. Hence it can only operate if it can be a quasisole proprietorship (S>Sca, or S<1-Sca). As Π rises, some firms with more even divisions of
equity will be able to form. Let We1 be the level of entrepreneurial wealth such that the firm
forms if the entrepreneur invests at least We1 but does not form if she invests less.
Symmetrically, We2 is the level of entrepreneurial wealth such that the firm forms only if the
entrepreneur invests less than We2. By definition, at We1 and We2 the return to the firm is exactly
1+r. The second part of the proposition simply says that We1 is decreasing in Π, except where
the return function has jumps. Consider the case where, at We1, the firm is run as a corporation
without monitoring. When Π increases, R(S) must increase for every S. That means that the
entrepreneur can sell a little bit more of the firm while maintaining the same return on capital.
Hence We1 falls.
Now let us consider the effect of relaxing the assumption that We+Wi=1. We do not fully
eliminate the wealth constraint, however. That is, we do not allow We≥1 or Wi≥R*/(1+r) because
in those cases either the entrepreneur or the investor could assume sole ownership.

23

Proposition 9: The first best outcome (R=R*) cannot only be reached if wealth constraints are
fully relaxed. When the first best cannot be reached, the firm will be either a partnership or a
corporation depending on the relative intensity of the various transaction costs and the relative
wealth of the two associates. Holding one associate’s wealth constant, aggregate returns are
weakly increasing in the wealth of the other.
As Proposition 9 suggests, one has to eliminate wealth constraints to make governance
questions irrelevant to the profitability of the firm. Nevertheless, as the associates’ wealth
increases, the entrepreneur gains greater flexibility in organizing the firm. She uses that
increased flexibility to avoid those equity distributions that have the worst transaction costs.
Making equity stakes endogenous does not dramatically alter the previous section’s
conclusion that partnerships and corporations are, from the standpoint of the economy,
complementary organizational forms. If the entrepreneur is the residual claimant, she finds that
corporations are valuable under a number of circumstances (for example, when investment
stakes are relatively extreme or when firms have very high profits), but partnerships are better for
firms with relatively even investment stakes and with intermediate levels of profits. In our model
all but the most profitable firms suffer from either shirking or monitoring costs and either
dissolution or appropriation costs. Having access to more than one organizational form allows
the associates to reduce the burden of such costs.

IV. The Model, the Law and U.S Enterprises, 1850-1950
For the model to capture the essential features of the U.S. legal rules during the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the following assumptions must hold: (1) business
people have access to only two alternative organizational forms, partnerships and corporations;

24

(2) disputes among members of a firm can lead to untimely dissolution in partnerships, but not in
corporations; (3) majority shareholders are dictators and can adversely affect the interests of
minority owners in corporations, but not in partnerships; and (4) side contracts that mitigate
disputes in partnerships and minority oppression in corporations are unimportant or
unenforceable.
The first assumption fits the U.S. case well. Although the partnership form crossed the
Atlantic with the first settlers, incorporation initially required government permission in the form
of a special legislative act. During the early nineteenth century several of the most industrial
states made corporate charters increasingly easy to obtain and, around mid-century, most states
routinized the process by passing general incorporation laws (Evans 1948; Hurst 1970; Maier
1993; Blair 2003). Although most states passed legislation during the 1820s and 1830s
permitting businesses to adopt a third organizational form, the limited partnership, the statutes
were so restrictive and the courts so conservative in interpreting them that few firms exploited
the option (Lamoreaux and Rosenthal 2005; see also Lewis 1917; Warren 1929; Howard 1934).13
The second assumption, that partnerships suffered from untimely dissolution but
corporations did not, also finds support in U.S. law. Under the common law partnerships were
not legal persons. They had no identity independent of the specific individuals who formed them
and, in effect, existed only at the will of the members. Associates could exit from firms and
force them to dissolve whenever they thought that their partners had proved untrustworthy or
were pursuing business strategies that seemed ill advised. Corporations, by contrast, were legal
persons and were in no way dependent on the existence or ongoing participation of the people

13

A small number of states also passed enabling legislation during the 1870s and 1880s for a precursor of the
limited liability company called the partnership association, but this form was also little used (Warren 1929;
Stransky 1956; Schwartz 1965; Gazur and Goff 1991).

25

who founded them. They could only be dissolved by a majority vote of their stockholders
(Lamoreaux and Rosenthal 2006).
The third assumption captures differences between corporations and partnerships in terms
of owners’ capacity to intervene in their firms’ affairs. Any and all members of a partnership
could act in its name, whereas only officers elected by stockholders could encumber a
corporation or allocate its resources (Freund 1896). In the U.S., both statute and practice quickly
converged to a standard one-vote-per-share, majority-rule governance structure for corporations
that made shareholders who possessed enough stock to decide elections effectively dictators
(Dunlavy 2004). Although this governance structure prevented disagreements among
stockholders from hobbling the firm or subjecting it to untimely dissolution, it also potentially
subjected minority shareholders to exploitation. There were a variety of ways in which
controlling shareholders could use their power to tilt the firm’s revenue stream in their direction.
Among the most common techniques were electing themselves to corporate offices and then
voting themselves high salaries or negotiating lucrative contracts with other firms in which they
had an interest. In the absence of egregious fraud, the courts were reluctant to intervene and put
a stop to such practices.14
One might assume that, in a common law country like the U.S., the flaws of both the
partnership and corporate forms would be relatively easy to remedy by means of side contracts.
Business people did try, but the contracts they drafted often proved difficult to enforce. Hence
the fourth assumption is a reasonable approximation as well. Take, for example, the problem of
untimely dissolution in partnerships. Although partners could contract in advance not to dissolve
the firm before the expiration of a specified period of time, the courts were extremely reluctant to

26

enforce such agreements when disputes arose among the partners. Indeed, some courts worried
that restrictions on dissolution might themselves be pernicious and went so far as to declare that
the right to dissolve a partnership at will could not be contracted away.15 At the same time,
agreements that reduced the likelihood of disputes were also often unenforceable. For example,
although partners could and often did sign agreements that restricted the ability of one or more of
their number to contract debts on behalf of the firm, these arrangements were not legally binding
with respect to third parties who had not been given formal notice of their terms. Although a
partner might seek an injunction in equity against a member of the firm who violated such an
agreement, this remedy could do little more than force the dissolution of the firm (Story 1859;
Warren 1929).
Contracting around the fundamental features of the corporate form was equally difficult.
Members of corporations might attempt to use shareholders’ agreements to protect themselves
against the tyranny of the majority, but these contracts often turned out to be unenforceable. For
example, there was a high probability that agreements that required shareholders’ unanimity (or
even a super-majority vote) for corporate decisions would be overturned by the courts (Hornstein
1950 and 1953; Cary 1953; O’Neil 1953, 1958, and 1965; Gower 1956). Even worse,
shareholders who entered into such agreements risked being held partners and thus unlimitedly
liable for their firms’ debts.16 Although the courts would not permit stockholders to opt out of
the standard corporate governance rules, they did allow them to contract among themselves to
exercise their votes in particular ways. For example, the courts were usually willing to enforce
14

See, for examples, Hodges v. New England Screw Company, 1 R.I. 312 (1850); Faud v. Yates, 57 Ill. 416 (1870);
Hawes v. Oakland, 104 U.S. 450 (1881); Dunphy v. Traveller Newspaper Association, 146 Mass. 495 (1888);
Burden v. Burden, 159 N.Y. 287 (1899). For a discussion of this case law, see Lamoreaux and Rosenthal 2006.
15
Solomon v. Kirkwood, 55 Mich. 256 (1884), citing Skinner v. Dayton, 19 Johns. 513 (N.Y. 1822). Partners that
sought unilaterally to dissolve a partnership before its term was up might be subject to damages, but disputes among
the partners were always grounds for dissolution. See Lamoreaux and Rosenthal 2006.

27

agreements among stockholders to vote for particular persons as directors or to place their stock
in voting trusts whose officers in turn would choose the directors of the firm. The problem,
however, was that such agreements could actually worsen the situation of minority shareholders
by making it easier for a controlling group to solidify its power.17
That the four basic assumptions of our model reasonably capture the organizational
choices that U.S. business people faced in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries is not
surprising because we built the model with the U.S. legal rules in mind. We now turn to the
1900 U.S. Census of Manufactures, the first to provide data on organizational form, to explore
the fit of our model to the empirical evidence. In particular, we use Census data to test the main
implication of our model—that partnerships and corporations are complementary forms of
organization—against the view championed by Alchian and Demsetz and Hart that corporations
are superior substitutes for partnerships. If the latter scholars are correct, we should expect the
distribution of organizational forms to be driven largely by technological factors that affect the
magnitude of the non-contractible problems that incorporation resolves. For example, we should
find capital intensive industries and those characterized by economies of scale to be dominated
by corporations. More generally, we should find industries with large numbers of corporations
to have very few partnerships and vice versa.
The manuscript Census returns have been lost, so we analyze the distribution of
corporations and partnerships at the most disaggregated level possible: 322 individual industries
broken down by state and territorial units, yielding about 4,700 industry-state observations with
16

See, for example, Vandyke v. Brown 4 Halstead 657 (1852); Jackson v. Hooper, 76 N.J. Eq. 592 (1910); and
Benintendi v. Kenton Hotel, 294 N.Y. 118 (1945).
17
See, for example, Brown v. Pacific Mail Steamship Co., 5 Blatchf. 525 (1867); and Faulds v. Yates, 57 Ill. 416
(1870). Even when such contracts were employed by the minority to protect their interests, there were limits to what
they could achieve. Most importantly, they could not be used to bind the directors to pursue a particular set of
policies or elect specific people as officers. See, for examples, Guernsey v. Cook, 120 Mass. 501 (1876); Cone v.
Russell, N.J. Eq. 208 (1891); and Manson v. Curtis, 223 N.Y. 313 (1918).

28

at least one multi-owner firm. Table 7 reports the results of various OLS regressions of capital
and labor per establishment on the share of partnerships among multi-owner firms, some of
which include fixed effects for states and/or industries. It also reports the same analysis as Tobit
regressions because the share of partnerships is censored both at 0 and at 1. The results are
qualitatively similar.18
The regressions provide some support for the conventional view that partnerships and
corporations were substitutes. In additional (unreported) OLS specifications, industry fixed
effects alone explain a large amount (47 percent) of the total variation in the share of multiowner firms that were partnerships. State fixed effects are statistically significant, but they
explain only a small part (less than 7 percent) of the variance. Capital per establishment and
employment per establishment together explain some 36 percent of the variance. Of course, the
scale variables and the industry fixed effects have an important common component. Considered
all together, these sets of variables can explain some 60 percent of the total variation in the share
of multi-owner firms that were partnerships.19
Nevertheless, if we consider the implications of the coefficients reported in Table 7, the
news is not all good for the substitutes view. Column 9 (the most favorable to that perspective)
reports a coefficient of -0.14 for the log of capital. Note that the mean share of multi-owner firms
across all industry-state branches that were partnerships was 61 percent and the standard
deviation of the log of capital was 1.76. If one moves from branches where capital per

18

The Tobit regressions failed to converge with fixed effects for state and industry, so we instead used fixed effects
for region and sector (as defined by the census). The results are similar but the sector fixed effects obviously absorb
less of the variance than the industry fixed effects.
19
Additional regressions using value added per establishment or capital per worker confirm that industries that were
capital intensive or operated at a large scale had more corporations. We also performed (again with similar results)
the same analysis using state-industry aggregates (for example, total capital in iron and steel in Iowa). Because
establishment size is partly given by technology (which is deployed at the establishment level) and partly the result
of the magnitude of demand (which operates at a more aggregate level) one could argue in favor of either
specification.

29

establishment was around the mean to those where it was at least one standard deviation higher,
the share of partnerships falls to 36 percent. At two standard deviations from the mean, it falls to
11 percent. Although these are large reductions in the share of partnerships, partnerships
remained popular until average capital per establishment became quite large.
If the substitutes view is correct, one might also expect corporations to be relatively more
prevalent in the more advanced parts of the economy. We define the manufacturing belt to
include the band of states in southern New England, the northern Middle Atlantic, and the East
North Central regions that are conventionally viewed as the main manufacturing centers during
this period. When we include in the regressions an interaction term between a dummy for the
manufacturing belt and capital per establishment (see specifications 5 and 8 in Table 7), the
estimated coefficient is positive, suggesting that in the U.S. manufacturing heartland partnerships
were actually slightly more popular than elsewhere. More precisely, firms in industry cells with
larger average establishment sizes were more likely to be partnerships within the manufacturing
belt than in other parts of the country.
The persistence of partnerships in state-industry branches with large establishments,
particularly in the manufacturing belt, is problematic for the substitutes hypothesis, but the
aggregate data offers even stronger evidence against this view (see Table 8). Consider the 322
industries enumerated by the Census, and define an industry to be dominated by a single
organizational form if 90 percent of its multi-owner firms are either partnerships or corporations.
Such industries accounted for 22 percent of the capital in manufacturing, 19.5 percent of
employment, and 24 percent of value added.20 By contrast, industries where both forms were

20

Giving a very liberal interpretation to “dominant,” and taking an industry to be dominated by a form if 80 percent
of all multi-owner firms were of one or the other type, expands the figures to 47 percent of capital, 57.5 percent of
employment and 48 percent of value added, with most of the increase coming from including more industries with a
high proportion of partnerships.

30

well represented (with corporations and partnerships each being at least 25 percent of multiowner firms) accounted for nearly half of all capital, labor, and output. Interestingly enough,
fully 57 percent of all manufacturing corporations were located in industries where both forms
were abundant. At the industry level, the view that the two organizational forms were
complements is difficult to escape. Moreover, repeating this exercise with state-industry cells
yields very similar results.
Over the course of the twentieth century the number of corporations would rise relative to
partnerships, so that by the end of the century there were more than 2.5 corporations for every
partnership in the economy as a whole and more than 8 corporations for every partnership in the
manufacturing sector (Carter et al. 2006). Much of this change owed to tax policy during the
forty years following World War II. Corporations paid a flat tax rate on their income that ranged
from a post-World War II peak of 52 percent to a low of 46 percent on the eve of the Tax
Reform Act of 1986. Partnership income was subject to the personal income tax, and rates for
the top brackets were higher than the corporate level (often substantially) before the 1980s. In
addition, whereas the flat corporate tax rate was not affected by inflation, the progressive
personal income tax subjected individual tax payers to bracket creep, forcing marginal rates
relatively higher. These and other differences raised the burden of personal relative to corporate
taxes during this period, encouraging firms to organize as corporations (Brownlee 1996).21

21

Of course, corporate dividends were also taxed as personal income, but in closely held corporations there were
many ways to avoid double taxation. Some idea of the magnitude of the incentive can be seen from the following
comparison: In 1950 the amount of revenue raised by the corporate and personal income taxes was about the same;
by 1980 the personal income tax yielded four times the revenue of the corporate tax. Legislation during Ronald
Reagan’s presidency reversed this situation, first by reducing the top personal tax rate to 50 percent in 1981, and
then, with the Tax Reform Act of 1986, by reducing it to 28 percent (the 1986 Act also dropped the corporate rate
from 46 to 34 percent). The impact of these changes on business people’s organizational choices was to a large
extent counteracted, however, by legislation liberalizing the rules under which small corporations could claim
Subchapter S status, which essentially allowed them to be taxed as partnerships. Especially after the 1986 Act,
growing numbers of firms filed as s-corporations, but there was comparatively little shifting from the corporate back
to the partnership form. In the meantime, most states had passed legislation increasing the ability of members of

31

The uneven magnitude of the shift toward corporations across the economy (see Carter et
al. 2006, Tables Ch1-192) suggests, however, that there were also underlying economic reasons
for the relative decline of partnerships. Looking only at the manufacturing sector, corporations
accounted for 14 percent of all establishments in 1900, 53 percent of employment, and 65
percent of output. By the eve of the Great Depression, when the 1929 Census of Manufactures
was taken, the share of corporations had risen to 48 percent of establishments, 89 percent of
employment, and 92 percent of output. Much of the change can be accounted for by the rising
scale of enterprise. The average size of corporations increased very little (from 75 workers per
establishment in 1905 to 78 in 1930). Similarly, the average size of non-corporate
establishments remained essentially the same at 9 workers per establishment in 1905 and 8 in
1929. What changed was the average size of establishments in the sector as a whole, increasing
from 19 workers in 1905 to 42 in 1930.22 The rising scale of enterprise increasingly tipped the
balance toward corporations, but it did not eliminate the trade-off that made partnerships an
attractive choice for many SMEs, especially outside the manufacturing sector where the size of
establishments was not growing as rapidly.

V. The Model, the Law, and French Enterprises, 1833-1923
Two of the four assumptions that our model makes about the legal rules clearly do not fit
the French case. The Code de Commerce granted French business people more than two
organizational choices. They could form partnerships (nom collectif), limited partnerships
(commandite simple), limited partnerships with tradable shares (commandite par actions), and
close corporations to protect themselves against minority oppression. Brownlee 1996; Petska and Wilson 1994;
Petska 1996; Lamoreaux and Rosenthal 2005.

32

(after 1867) corporations (anonymes). Moreover, business people had considerable ability to
modify the basic forms to suit their contracting needs. Under the Code, firms had to file
summaries (and after 1867 the full text) of their articles of association with the local tribunal of
commerce. Because interested parties could obtain copies from the clerk of the court, contracts
that conformed to the registration requirements of the Code were fully enforceable (Lamoreaux
and Rosenthal 2005).23 Nonetheless, French businesses faced organizational tradeoffs that were
very similar to those in the U.S., albeit not quite as stark. The contractual flexibility imbedded in
the Code enabled business people to mitigate the problems associated with untimely dissolution
and private benefits of control but not to eliminate them altogether.
In France, for example, members of partnerships could write enforceable contracts that
limited who could act on behalf of the firm, whose signatures were required to borrow, and even
whether the firm could incur debts. Presumably, settling these matters in advance reduced the
likelihood of disputes compared to a situation in which all of the partners exercised full
ownership rights, but it did not eliminate it. Partnerships in France, as in the U.S., were still
effectively terminable at will—even those with specified terms (Riviere 1882; Lyon-Caen and
Renault 1924, 349). When disputes arose, commercial tribunals attempted arbitration. If the
arbiters failed to reconcile the associates, they or the tribunal ordered the partnership dissolved
(Ripert 1967, 67; Lyon Caen and Renault 1924, 349-52, 1211). Recontracting at the expiration
of a term, moreover, was just likely to lead to disputes, and thus to the untimely dissolution of
successful enterprises, as it was in the U.S.

22

U.S. Census Office, Census of Manufactures: 1900, Vol. VII, Table 7, p. 503; Census of Manufactures: 1910,
Vol. VIII, Table 1, pp. 136-153; Census of Manufactures: 1920, Vol. VII, Table 25, p. 108; Census of
Manufactures: 1930, Vol. I, Table 2, p. 95.
23
After 1832 firms were also required to publish these summaries in the tribunal’s journal. Entrepreneurs in Paris
conformed to the new legislation within weeks, but elsewhere publication was spotty. In the twentieth century, the
information held by local tribunals was centralized in the “Registre du commerce.”

33

Commandites simples brought together one or more general partners, who managed the
firm and were unlimitedly liable for its debts, and one or more silent partners, whose liabilities
were limited to their investments and who played no role in management. They were set up for
specific terms, and because the silent partners could neither intervene in the affairs of a profitable
firm nor terminate their participation before the expiration of the term, the problem of untimely
dissolution was less than in an ordinary partnership (Merle 1998; De Juglard and Ippolito 1999;
Protection des minoritaires 2001, 140). However, because silent partners could not participate
in the firm’s management, they were susceptible to exploitation by the general partners.
Moreover, relative to general partners, they had only a limited ability to monitor. As a result,
except in cases where the entrepreneur’s equity stake was a sufficient motivator, limited
partnerships were likely to bear more substantial shirking costs than ordinary partnerships.
When commandites simple are compared to partnerships, therefore, the central trade-offs
in our model between untimely dissolution and private benefits of control are preserved. They
are also preserved when commandites simple are compared to commandites par actions. The
latter had all of the trappings of commandites simples with three key additions: the shares of the
silent partners were tradable; shareholders could elect audit committees whose responsibility it
was to scrutinize the books; and shareholders could require that the managing partners secure
support (as well as the approval of major decisions) from a majority of their number at annual
meetings of the firm. Although the managing partners bore unlimited liability, it was possible to
replace them without dissolving the firm. Hence a silent partner who owned more than half the
equity could exercise a great deal of control (Lyon-Cahen and Renault 1924).
Commandites simples were more likely to suffer from untimely dissolution than
commandites par actions because the withdrawal of a general partner automatically signaled the

34

end of the former whereas in the latter case shareholders could appoint another managing
partner. By contrast, silent partners in commandites faced a lower risk of expropriation than
minority shareholders in commandites par actions—in part, ironically, because their monitoring
options were far more extensive (Riviere 1882, 150). An individual holding a small stake in a
commandite par actions would have little chance of being appointed to the audit committee.
Moreover, small shareholders could be entirely disenfranchised (firms could require, for
instance, that shareholders own a minimum number of shares in order to participate in the
general meetings). In a commandite simple, however, silent partners were empowered to
examine the books, even though they did not participate in management. That access to
information, along with the need for periodic recontracting, probably reduced the proportion of a
firm’s returns that its general partners could appropriate (Merle 1998; Protection des
minoritaires 2001, 57).
After a decade of debate, France enacted a general incorporation law in 1867. Because
incorporation required both hefty registration fees and a costly notarized contract, it was
relatively more expensive to take out a corporate charter in France than in the U.S. But French
corporations had offsetting advantages. In particular, it was much easier for their organizers to
write enforceable side contracts. For example, French corporations could adopt voting schemes
other than the one-vote-per-share, majority-rule standard. Setting supra-majority thresholds for
important decisions could reduce the likelihood that minority shareholders would be
expropriated, but it could also increase the probability of deadlock. Perhaps for this reason, it
seems to have been relatively uncommon for corporations to protect minority shareholders in this
way. To the contrary, most deviations from the standard governance rules seem to have had the
opposite purpose—to solidify the control of the majority. Instead, the most common technique

35

used to reassure minority shareholders was the stipulation of a minimum level of dividend
payments. During the mid-nineteenth century provisions mandating that minimum dividends
appeared with some frequency in the articles of association. Although these provisions could not
prevent majority shareholders from tilting the firm’s revenue stream in their direction, they did
put limits on the extent of expropriation.
Despite their greater contractual freedom, French businesses faced essentially the same
organizational tradeoffs as did firms in the United States. One should observe, therefore, a
similar persistence of alternative organizational forms long after general laws made the corporate
form readily available. As Figure 2 shows for the case of businesses organized in Paris, the main
impact of the 1867 general incorporation law was slowly but surely to eliminate the commandite
par actions. Published data for France as a whole show a similar pattern.24 Share commandites
had accounted for 6 percent of new firm registrations in France from 1840 to 1867, but they fell
to 2.5 percent over the next quarter century and then to 1.3 percent between 1894 and 1914.
Corporations and commandites par actions operated under essentially the same rules, except that
only in a corporation did all members of the firm enjoy limited liability. Hence the commandite
par action was the inferior substitute for the corporation. There was no similar decline in the
forms for which the corporation was not such a close substitute: commandites simple and
ordinary partnerships. Taken together these latter two types of organization still accounted for
85 percent or more of all firm registrations in France as late as the eve of World War I, nearly a
half century after the advent of general incorporation.
There is abundant evidence, moreover, that the major forms of business organization
served complementary purposes. Although the French industrial censuses did not report

36

information on organizational form, multi-owner firms were required to provide local
commercial courts with summaries of their governing statutes. Using the registrations filed with
the Paris Tribunal of Commerce, we have constructed a database that provides information on
the organizational choices made by individual firms in all sectors of the economy for the period
1833 to 1850.25 Because the registration requirements aimed to highlight the firm’s legal
obligations, the records contain no information about output or numbers of employees, and the
information they provide about capital is both imperfect and sporadic. Although these
deficiencies limit the kind of statistical analysis we can deploy, the registration data have some
significant advantages. They cover all multi-owner firms that registered in Paris, not simply
manufacturing enterprises, and we can link the registrations over time. The reader should bear in
mind, however, that the French data represent flows of new registrations. Given that
partnerships had relatively short life spans (because most changes in their articles of association
required firms to dissolve and re-register), these forms tend to be over represented in the data
relative to their proportions in the population as a whole.
The distribution of organizational forms by sector of economic activity is reported in
Table 9. As in the U.S. a half century later, one can find industries where one organizational
form dominated. The most obvious example is retail and wholesale trade, where multi-owner
firms were disproportionately organized as partnerships. Because the capital of these firms was
invested mostly in relatively liquid inventory, the cost of untimely dissolution was likely to be
low. Furthermore, partners tended to work in the same physical space, and so monitoring was
both valuable and relatively costless.
24

Annual issues of the Compte général de l’administration de la justice civile et commerciale. Because the
published data only begin in 1840, we put together a longer series by focusing on Paris and culling registrations
from the pages of the Gazette des tribunaux for 1833 to 1850.

37

As this example suggests, technology played an important role in determining how firms
would be organized—just as it did in the U.S. Take the case of the transportation sector.
Railroads all initially organized as commandites par actions, but their contracts stipulated that
this arrangement was only a temporary expedient until a charter of incorporation could be
obtained. From 1833 to 1850 only one railroad—a spur to the line from Paris to Brussels—
actually operated as a share commandite; all the others became corporations. Because railroads
invested most of their resources in firm specific assets (only their rolling stock was relatively
liquid), incorporation was an important way of preventing costly dissolution.26 River transport
companies also generally organized as commandites par actions (84 percent of them took this
form), but their charters did not include plans to convert to corporations. Although their
investments in capital equipment were substantial (they were adopting new steamboat
technology at this time), riverboats could be sold fairly easily. Hence firms in this subsector did
not face costs from untimely dissolution that were as severe as for railroads. By contrast, more
than half of all overland transport firms took the form of partnerships, even though at times the
number of partners amounted to a dozen or more and the partners were often also members of
other firms. Improvement in roads and the consequent growth of traffic had created new
business opportunities for carriage companies that could coordinate their schedules over long
distances. It was easy to verify whether the other partners kept to schedules and met
connections. Moreover, the cost of dissolution was trivial because each party simply reclaimed
its own rolling stock.

25

This period, of course, predates general incorporation, but because commandites par actions were close substitutes
for corporations, French businesses faced a full menu of organizational forms.
26
Beyond the governance issue, it is also possible that the scale of operations was such that no one was willing to
serve to be an unlimitedly liable partner. Moreover, the Paris bourse closed its doors to the stock and bonds of
commandites par actions. These assets could only be traded on the coulisse or ‘curb’ market.

38

Although these examples are consistent with the idea that the various organizational
forms are substitutes, they are overwhelmed by the evidence for complementarity. Partnerships
accounted for less than 25 percent of new registrations in only 12 of 122 economic subsectors,
and in only 20 did they account for more than 80 percent. Moreover, the sub-sectors in which
partnerships accounted more than four out of five new registrations represented only 12 percent
of total registrations. The most common pattern was for firms in each industry to take a variety
of organizational forms. New registrations in banking, for example, were nearly evenly divided
between each of the three main types of organization: 93 of the firms chose to organize as
commandites par actions; 85 as commandites simples; and 101 as partnerships. Although clock
and instrument makers preferred partnerships, forming 71 such firms, they also organized 7
commandites par actions and 11 commandites simples. Textile manufacturers formed 50
commandites par actions, 126 commandites simples, and 442 partnerships.
It is, of course, possible that the within industry variation we observe is just an artifact of
a poor or overly coarse classification scheme. The U.S. Census divided the manufacturing sector
into 322 industries. That breakdown by no means eliminated technological heterogeneity within
industry categories, yet we have used only 122 classifications for the entire French economy.
However, if technology (or any other industry characteristic) dictated organizational form, one
would expect businesses to keep whatever form they initially took, so long as their scale of
operation did not change too much. By contrast, our model predicts that the characteristics of the
individual owners should also matter for the choice of organizational form. That is, if our model
is correct, one should observe firms shifting organizational structure over time as the identity of
the owners or the owners’ personal characteristics changed. We have identified 1,172 instances
in our 1833-1850 database when a business was reorganized (that is, when one legal entity was

39

dissolved and replaced by another legal entity, but the business continued to operate). As Table
10 shows, some 389 of these reorganizations (31 percent) were associated with changes in
organizational form. For example, 97 partnerships became commandites simple and 62 became
commandites par actions. Similarly, 94 commandites par actions became partnerships and 38
commandites simples. Closer inspection of the data suggests, moreover, that the changes cannot
be ascribed simply to increases or decreases in the fortunes and sizes of these firms.
Take the Marret jewelry firm as an example. It first appears in our data as a partnership
formed in 1826 with three partners. In 1829 the senior partner, Claude Bernier, withdrew from
active management, and the firm was reorganized as a commandite simple called Marret Frères
that continued until 1834. The younger of the two Marret brothers then withdrew, leading to the
organization of a new commandite simple with Bernier, still the silent partner, contributing two
thirds of the firm’s 300,000 franc capital. In 1836 the commandite was dissolved, and the elder
Marret operated the business as a sole proprietorship for a decade until he teamed up with two
new partners late in 1846. The firm then had a capital of 600,000 francs, half of which was
Marret’s. The 1846 articles of association anticipated that Marret would withdraw from the firm
in 1856 and that Jarry and Gaime, the other two associates, would continue the firm for another
year and a half. Through all these shifts in ownership and organizational form, the core activities
of the business remain unchanged. Over these two decades, the firm operated at 16, rue
Vivienne, producing and retailing jewelry with the same technology, and its capital at least
doubled. Yet it was a three-person partnership in 1850 just as it had been in the 1820s. Neither
technology, nor business plan, nor size explain the evolution of this SME’s organizational form.
Rather, the associates opted for a new legal structure when they changed their membership or the
distribution of the equity.

40

Returning to Figure 2, it is clear that the pattern of organizational choice in France at the
end of the nineteenth century was similar in its broad outlines to that in the United States.
Differences in the two countries’ legal regimes do not seem to have played a very important role
in shaping businesses’ decisions. In both countries, partnerships remained popular in many
branches of economic activity long after the corporation had become widely available. In both
countries, there were systematic differences across industries in the use of partnerships relative to
other organizational forms—differences that seem to have been related to factors such as the
relative cost of untimely dissolution versus minority oppression. Moreover, in both countries
there was substantial organizational heterogeneity within industries, suggesting that individual
characteristics of the business people involved—for example, the wealth constraints highlighted
by our model—also played an important role in the choice of organizational form.

VI. Conclusion
We have argued in this paper that the story of the rise of the corporation is not the tale of
the emergence of an inherently superior organizational form. In making this case, it has not been
our aim to diminish the contribution of the corporation to the history of economic growth.
Indeed, it is difficult to imagine railroads, insurance companies, and many other large important
firms operating as partnerships. Rather our aim has been to place the contribution of the
corporation in proper perspective. Although corporations did eliminate the problem of untimely
dissolution in partnerships, they did so at the cost of facilitating significant minority oppression.
For large firms seeking to raise capital on the equity markets, the benefits of incorporation
greatly outweighed the costs. But for firms where the number of associates was small and

41

investment capital could be obtained more informally, the advantages were not so clear, and the
overwhelming majority chose to bear the costs of partnerships rather than to incorporate.
As the scale of enterprise rose during the twentieth century, relatively more firms in the
U.S. chose to organize as corporations, especially after World War II when tax and other policy
changes accelerated the trend. Elsewhere, however, corporations did not become nearly so
dominant. In France the enactment in 1925 of legislation permitting a special form of private
limited liability company (the société à responsabilité limitée or SARL) led to the demise of the
partnership but also to a significant decline in the proportion of firms taking up the corporate
form. Similar legislation passed earlier in Germany (1892) and Britain (1907) had much the
same effect. In light of the current literature touting the advantage of common-law over codebased legal regimes, it is interesting to note that in this case continental Europe played the role of
leader rather than laggard. U.S. businesses did not obtain a viable version of the SARL until late
in the twentieth century (Lamoreaux and Rosenthal 2005).
As we have emphasized in this paper, excessive reliance on very recent data can lead
economic theorists astray. But, we hasten to acknowledge, history without theory is just as likely
to run amok. Although the two different types of intellectual endeavor can certainly make odd
bedfellows, they have important complementary roles to play in the study of economic
institutions, and the potential seems to be particularly rich at the intersection of law and business.
We hope this paper has demonstrated the value of a long-run historical perspective for
understanding the economics of business people’s organizational choices. But we also hope that
current theoretical debates about corporate governance will help revitalize historical research that
all too often been predisposed towards tales of exceptionalism, be they American, British,
French, or something else.

42

References

Alchian, Armen A., and Harold Demsetz. 1972. “Production, Information Costs, and Economic
Organization.” American Economic Review, 62 (December): 777-95.
Bain, David Haward. 1999. Empire Express: Building the First Transcontinental Railroad.
New York: Viking.
Baskin, Jonathan Barron, and Paul J. Miranti, Jr. 1997. A History of Corporate Finance. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye. 2002. “Asymmetric Information and the Choice of Corporate
Arrangements.” Harvard Law School Discussion Paper #398.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, and Allen Ferrell. 1999. “Federalism and Corporate Law: The Race to
Protect Managers from Takeovers.” Columbia Law Review, 99 (June): 1168-99.
Blair, Margaret M. 2003. “Locking in Capital: What Corporate Law Achieved for Business
Organizers in the Nineteenth Century.” UCLA Law Review, 51 (December): 387-455.
Bolton, Patrick, and David Scharfstein. 1998. “Corporate Finance, the Theory of the Firm and
Organizations.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12 (Autumn): 95-114.
Bolton, Patrick, and Ernst-Ludwig Von Thadden. 1998. “Blocks, Liquidity and Corporate
Control.” Journal of Finance, 53 (February): 1-25.
Brownlee, W. Elliot. 1996. Federal Taxation in America: A Short History. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Cai, Hongbin. 2003. “A Theory of Joint Asset Ownership.” Rand Journal of Economics, 34
(Spring): 63-77.

43

Carter, Susan, et al. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Cary, William L. 1953. “How Illinois Corporations May Enjoy Partnership Advantages:
Planning for the Closely Held Firm.” Northwestern University Law Review, 48
(September-October): 427-41.
Compte général de l’administration de la Justice Civile et Commerciale. Paris: imprimerie
nationale, 1840-1933.
De Juglart, Michel, and Benjamin Ippolito. 1999. Les sociétés commerciales : cours de droit
commercial. Paris: Montchrestien.
Demsetz, Harold. 1972. “Wealth Distribution and Ownership Rights.” Journal of Legal Studies,
1 (June): 223-232.
Demsetz, Harold, and Kenneth Lehn. 1985. “The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes
and Consequences.” Journal of Political Economy, 93 (December): 1155-77.
Dunlavy, Colleen A. 2004. “From Citizens to Plutocrats: Nineteenth-Century Shareholder
Voting Rights and Theories of the Corporation.” In Constructing Corporate America:
History, Politics, Culture, ed. Kenneth Lipartito and David B. Sicilia. New York:
Oxford University Press. Pp. 66-93.
Evans, George Heberton Evans, Jr. 1948. Business Incorporations in the United States, 18001943. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Forbes, Kevin F. 1986. “Limited Liability and the Development of the Business Corporation.”
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 2 (Spring): 163-77.
Freund, Ernst. 1896. “The Legal Nature of Corporation,” Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia
University.

44

Gazur, Wayne M., and Neil M. Goff. 1991. “Assessing the Limited Liability Company.” Case
Western Reserve Law Review, 41 (2): 387-501.
Gazette des tribunaux: Journal de jurisprudence et des débats judiciares. Paris: 1832-1850.
Gower, L. C. B. 1956. “Some Contrasts Between British and American Corporation Law.”
Harvard Law Review, 69 (June): 1369-1402.
Hansmann, Henry, and Reinier Kraakman. 2000. “The Essential Role of Organizational Law.”
Yale Law Journal, 110 (December): 387-440.
Hansmann, Henry, Reinier Kraakman, and Richard Squire. 2004. “Legal Entities, Asset
Partitioning, and the Evolution of Organizations. Unpublished paper.
Hart, Oliver. 1995. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Hornstein, George D. 1950. “Stockholders’ Agreements in the Closely Held Corporation.” Yale
Law Journal, 59 (May): 1040-56.
_____. 1953. “Judicial Tolerance of the Incorporated Partnership.” Law and Contemporary
Problems, 18 (Autumn): 435-50.
Howard, Stanley E. 1934. “The Limited Partnership in New Jersey.” Journal of Business of the
University of Chicago, 7 (October): 296-317.
Hurst, James Willard. 1964. Law and Economic Growth: The Legal History of the Lumber
Industry in Wisconsin, 1836-1915. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
_____. 1970. The Legitimacy of the Business Corporation in the Law of the United States,
1780-1970. Charlottesville, Va.: University Press of Virginia.
Lamoreaux, Naomi R., and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 2005. “Legal Regime and Contractual
Flexibility: A Comparison of Business’s Organizational Choices in France and the

45

United States during the Era of Industrialization.” American Law and Economics Review,
7 (Spring): 28-61.
_____. 2006. “Corporate Governance and the Plight of Minority Shareholders in the United
States before the Great Depression.” In Corruption and Reform: Lessons from
America’s Economic History, eds. Edward Glaeser and Claudia Goldin. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. Pp. 125-52.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997.
“Legal Determinants of External Finance.” Journal of Finance, 52 (July): 1131-50.
_____. 1998. “Law and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy, 106 (December): 1113-55.
Lewis, William Draper. 1917. “The Uniform Limited Partnership Act.” University of
Pennsylvania Law Review, 65 (June): 715-31.
Lyon-Cahen, Ch., and L. Renault. 1924. Manuel de droit commercial (y compris le droit
maritime). 14th edn.; Paris: F. Pichon et Durand-Auzias.
Maier, Pauline. 1993. “The Revolutionary Origins of the American Corporation.” William and
Mary Quarterly, 50 (January): 51-84.
Merle, Philippe. 1998. Droit commercial; sociétés commerciale. 6th edn.; Paris: Dalloz.
Navin, Thomas R., and Marian V. Sears. 1955. “The Rise of a Market for Industrial Stocks,
1887-1902.” Business History Review, 29 (June): 105-38.
O’Neal, F. Hodge. 1953. “Giving Shareholders Power to Veto Corporate Decisions: Use of
Special Charter and By-Law Provisions.” Law and Contemporary Problems, 18
(Autumn): 451-72.
_____. 1958. Close Corporations: Law and Practice. Chicago: Callaghan. 2 vols.

46

_____. 1965. “Developments in the Regulation of the Close Corporation.” Cornell Law
Quarterly, 50 (Summer): 641-62.
Pagano, Marco, and Ailsa Roell. 1998. “The Choice of Stock Ownership Structure: Agency
Costs, Monitoring, and the Decision to Go Public.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113
(February): 187-225.
Petska, Thomas B. 1996. “Taxes and Organizational Choice: An Analysis of Trends, 19851992.” SOI Bulletin, 15 (Spring): 86-102.
_____, and Robert A. Wilson. 1994. “Trends in Business Structure and Activity, 1980-1990.”
SOI Bulletin, 13 (Spring): 27-72.
Pic, Paul, et Baratin, F. 1927. Des SARLs Etude critique et commentaire pratique la loi du 7
mars 1925. Paris: Lib des juris classeurs.
Protection des minoritaires: sociétés ne faisant pas appel public à l’épargne. 2001. Paris:
éditions Francis Lefebvre.
Ribstein, Larry E. 2005. “Why Corporations?” Illinois Law and Economics Working Paper No.
LE05-011.
Riviere, Hypollite Fereol. 1882. Répétitions écrites sur le code de commerce. 8th edn.; Paris:
A. Chevalier-Marescq.
Romano, Roberta. 1987. “The Political Economy of Takeover Statutes.” Virginia Law Review,
73 (February): 111-99.
Schwartz, Edward R. 1965. “The Limited Partnership Association—An Alternative to the
Corporation for the Small Business with ‘Control’ Problems?” Rutgers Law Review, 20
(Fall): 29-88.

47

Story, Joseph. 1859. Commentaries on the Law of Partnership, as a Branch of Commercial and
Maritime Jurisprudence with Occasional Illustrations from the Civil and Foreign Law.
5th edn.; Boston: Little, Brown.
Tirole, Jean. 2001. “Corporate Governance.” Econometrica, 69 (January): 1-35.
Wall, Joseph Frazier. 1970. Andrew Carnegie. New York: Oxford University Press.
Warren, Edward H. 1929. Corporate Advantages without Incorporation. New York: Baker,
Voorhis & Co.
Williamson, Oliver. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms Markets, Relational
Contracting. New York: Free Press.
Yarrow, George K. 1985. “Shareholder Protection, Compulsory Acquisition and the Efficiency
of the Takeover Process.” Journal of Industrial Economics. 34 (September): 3-16.
Zingales, Luigi. 1995. “Insider Ownership and the Decision to Go Public.” Review of
Economic Studies, 62 (July): 425-48.
Zweibel, Jeffrey. 1995. “Block Investment and Partial Benefits of Corporate Control.” Review
of Economic Studies, 62 (April): 161-85.

48

Table 1: Choice of organizational form when shirking is the only problem
Range of equity
S≤½
½<S≤Sm
S>Sm

Rc
R*-cm
R0(S)
R0(S)

=
<
=

Rp
R*-cm
R*-cm
R0(S)

Optimal form
Both
Partnership
Both

Table 2: Choice of organizational form when untimely dissolution is the only problem
Range of equity
0≤ S ≤ 1

Rc
R*

Rp
> R* [1-d]

Optimal form
Corporation

Table 3: Choice of organizational form when minority oppression is the only problem
Range of equity
S<1-Sca
1-Sca ≤S≤ Sca
S>Sca

Rc
R*
[1-β]R*
R*

=
<
=

Rp
R*
R*
R*

Optimal form
Both
Partnership
Both

49

Table 4: Choice of organizational form when d<β and all three transaction costs are present
Range of equity
S<1-Sca
1-Sca ≤S≤½
½<S≤Sm
Sm<S≤Sca
S>Sca

Rc
R*-cm
[1-β]R*-cm
[1-β]R0(S)
[1-β]R0(S)
R0(S)

Rp
[1-d]R*-cm
[1-d]R*-cm
[1-d]R*-cm
[1-d]R0(S)
[1-d]R0(S)

>
<
<
<
>

Optimal form
Corporation
Partnership
Partnership
Partnership
Corporation

Table 5: Choice of organizational form when d ≥β, [1-β]Rc0a(½) <[1-d]R*-cm
and all three transaction costs are present
Range of equity
S<1-Sca
1-Sca ≤S≤½
½<S≤S’
½<S≤S’
S’<S≤Sca
S>Sca

Rc
R*-cm
[1-β]R*-cm
[1-β]R0(S)
[1-β]R0(S)
[1-β]R0(S)
R0(S)

>
>
<
>
>
>

Rp
[1-d]R*-cm
[1-d]R*-cm
[1-d]R*-cm
[1-d]R*-cm
[1-d]R0(S)
[1-d]R0(S)

Optimal form
Corporation
Corporation
Partnership
Corporation
Corporation
Corporation

Table 6: Choice of organizational form when d ≥β, [1-β]Rc0a(½) ≥[1-d]R*-cm, and all three
transaction costs are present
Range of equity
S<1-Sca
1-Sca ≤S≤½
½<S≤Sm
Sm<S≤Sca
S>Sca

Rc
R*-cm
[1-β]R*-cm
[1-β]R0(S)
[1-β]R0(S)
R0(S)

>
>
>
>
>

Rp
[1-d]R*-cm
[1-d]R*-cm
[1-d]R*-cm
[1-d]R0(S)
[1-d]R0(S)

Optimal form
Corporation
Corporation
Corporation
Corporation
Corporation

50

Table 7: Explaining the share of partnerships among U.S. manufacturing firms in 1900

Constant
Ln Capital/ Establishment
LN Employment/ Establishment
Ln Capital/ Establishment X
Manufacturing belt dummy
State F.E.
Industry F.E.
Region F.E.
Sector FE
N
R2
adjR2
Pseudo R2

(1)
1.65*
-0.11*

(2)
0.84*
-0.10*

No
No
4924
0.35
0.35

No
No
4736
0.24
0.24

Share of partnerships
OLS Regressions
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
1.61* 1.188* 1.243* 1.386*
-0.100* -0.055* -0.064* -0.075*
-0.013* -0.029* -0.026* -0.017*
No
No
4736
0.36
0.36

No
Yes
4736
0.55
0.51

0.008*
No
Yes
4736
0.55
0.53

Tobit Regressions
(6)
(7)
(8)
1.96*
1.83*
1.83*
-0.13* -0.13* -0.13*
-0.02* -0.03* -0.03*

(9)
1.90*
-0.14*
-0.02*

0.008*
Yes
Yes
4736
0.60
0.57

No
No
4736

Yes
No
4736

No
Yes
736

Yes
Yes
4736

0.26

0.29

.29

.31

Notes: An observation is an industry in a given state. The dependent variable is the share of partnerships in multi-owner firms. The
independent variables aggregate all of the firms in the industry in a given state, including sole proprietorships.
Ln Capital/Establishment is reported capital divided by number of establishments. Ln Employment/Establishment is reported average
employment (including managers) divided by number of establishments. Manufacturing belt is a dummy variable that takes on the
value 1 if the industry is in CN, IL, IN, MA, NY, NJ, OH, PA RI.
Columns 1-5 report OLS results, and 6 and 7 report Tobit regressions for two-sided censoring. The Tobit regressions do not converge
when state and industry fixed effects are included, so region and sector fixed effects were used instead.
Source: U.S. Census of Manufacturing: 1900, Vol. VII, Table 4, pp. 66-465, and Table 9, pp. 511-580.

51

Table 8: Distribution of multi-owner establishments in U.S. Manufacturing, 1900
Fraction of Multi-owner
Establishments
that are partnerships
0.01 to 10
10.1 to 20
20.1 to 30
30.1 to 40
40.1 to 50
50.1 to 60
60.1 to 70
70.1 to 80
80.1 to 90
90.1 to 99.9
100
Total

Multi-owner
All
Establishments Establishments Capital
(%)
(%)
(%)
0.017
0.005
0.110
0.023
0.008
0.098
0.032
0.012
0.082
0.058
0.028
0.100
0.066
0.037
0.084
0.069
0.040
0.088
0.086
0.056
0.084
0.124
0.101
0.079
0.227
0.253
0.090
0.263
0.387
0.064
0.034
0.061
0.008
130861

505945

9304

Workers
(%)
0.037
0.059
0.043
0.077
0.070
0.064
0.120
0.184
0.121
0.122
0.019

Value
Added
(%)
0.067
0.089
0.069
0.090
0.089
0.075
0.077
0.099
0.129
0.121
0.017

6110

5295

Note: The data for the table come from merging the two published tables cited below. Establishments are the numbers reported.
Capital is in millions of dollars, and workers are in thousands.
Source: U.S. Census of Manufacturing: 1900, Vol. VII, Table 4, pp. 66-465, and Table 9, pp. 511-580.

52

Table 9: New multi-owner firms registered in Paris, 1833-1850, broken down by sector and organizational form

Partnership
Silent partnership
Silent partnership
with tradable shares
Corporations
Other
Total Firms
Share of
Partnerships

N
7458
2065

Artisans
353
67

Trade
3108
774

2486
26
97

30

166

2

12132
0.61

Construction
Mining
and real
and
estate
Manufacturing agriculture Services Transport
214
2715
67
765
164
42
737
23
349
43

14

104
2
11

775
5
27

243
5
17

943
9
19

202
5
7

452

4062

373

4259

355

2085

418

0.78

0.77

0.57

0.64

0.19

0.37

0.39

Note and source: The table reports the organizational forms adopted by all firms that published a summary of their organizational
charter in the Gazette des Tribunaux from January 1, 1833, to December 31, 1850.
Table 10: Transition matrix for Parisian firms that changed organizational form
Reorganized form
P
CS
CA
Other
Partnerships
518
97
62
5
Initial Commandite Simple
62
89
19
2
Form
Commandite par Actions
94
38
172
2
Other
6
1
1
4
Note and source: The table includes all firms that published a summary of their organizational charter in the Gazette des Tribunaux
from January 1, 1833, to December 31, 1850, for which we were able to trace a successor firm that was also a multi-owner firm.

53

Figure 1: Choice of Organization when Shirking is the Only Transaction Cost.

1.6

Return to the Firm

1.5

1.4

Corporations
Partneships

1.3

Critical values
1.2

1.1

1
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Entrepreneur's Share of the Equity

Note: the values on the vertical axis are purely for illustration.

54

Figure 2: Numbers of New Multiowner in Paris 1833-1823
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

Corporations (SA)
Share Commandites
Commandites
Partnerships

18
33
18
38
18
43
18
48
18
53
18
58
18
63
18
68
18
73
18
78
18
83
18
88
18
93
18
98
19
03
19
08
19
13
19
18
19
23

0%

Source: For 1833 to 1840 Gazette des Tribunaux, for 1841-1969, 1875-1913 and 1919-23 annual issues of the Compte général de l’administration de la justice
civile et commerciale, for 1914-1918 Archives de Paris, Serie U.

55

Appendix

Proposition 5: Firms with very high or very low returns have the fewest governance problems.
High returns correspond to high Π, L, or p*.
Part 1: returns are large
Denote by S~ the maximum of Spm and Sca. if Π, L, or p* is large enough then
[1- S~]R(S~)>[1+r], As a result, even if the entrepreneur invests nothing, the firm can operate as a
corporation controlled by the entrepreneur without any minority oppression and with returns
sufficiently high that it is not worthwhile to monitor.
Part 2: Returns are very low
The best the firm can earn is R*= p*Π +[1-p*]L-w. If R* is close enough to 1+r, then
R*[1-d] < (1+r), and the firm cannot operate as a partnership. Similarly, R*[1-β] <(1+r), and it
will not be able to operate as a corporation with minority oppression. If R* is small enough,
therefore, the firm will only be able to operate if it is a corporation with one associate owning at
least Sca of the firm. Obviously, if wealth constraints bind, many low-return firms will not form
because neither partner has sufficient funds to own enough of the firm to eliminate transaction
costs.

Proposition 6: Some equity stakes are never offered in equilibrium, in particular those that are
slightly larger than (1-Sca), ½, and Spm as well as those that are slightly smaller than Sca.
Begin by assuming that the efficient form is a corporation as long as the equity stake of
the entrepreneur is less than Sca, and that it is a partnership for stakes between Sca and ½. For the
investor to buy Sca his wealth must be Ŵi= [Sca [R*]-cm]/[1+r]. The entrepreneur’s return is [156

Sca]R*. If the investor’s wealth is less than Ŵi, the entrepreneur has two choices. She can
organize the firm as a partnership in which the investor’s stake would be Si=[1+r][Wi+cm]/R*(1d) and the entrepreneur’s return would be Rep(Si,Wi)=[1-Si]R*[1-d]. Or she can organize the firm
as a corporation and give the investor Sca to avoid the cost of minority oppression. Her earnings
then would be Rep(Sca,Wi)=[1-Sca]R*. If Wi is sufficiently close to [Sca [R*]-cm]/[1+r], then
Rep(Sca,Wi)> Rep(Si,Wi) and the entrepreneur prefers to ‘give’ some equity away to avoid
transaction costs. She will do so at least until Wip=[Sca R*(1-d)-cm]/[1+r]. Clearly Wip< Ŵi.
Hence we have shown that the wealth to equity stakes correspondence has a flat spot at Sca.
One can show that similar flat spots arise under other assumptions. They occur at S=1Sca, even if corporations are preferred to partnerships; at S=½ whenever corporations are
preferred from Sca < S < ½ but not for S> ½; and at S=Sca. Further, one can show for all these
cases that at the point where the flat spot ends, the correspondence between wealth and equity
stakes jumps.
Returning to the case where S = 1-Sca, the entrepreneur continues to offer the investor Sca
until Rep(Sca,Wi)= Rep(Si,Wi) or [1-Sca]R* =[1-Si]R*[1-d]. Taking differences leads to [1-Si]R*[1d]= [1-Sca]R*, or [1-Si] = [1-Sca]/[1-d]. Because [1-d]<1, [1-Si]>[1-Sca], and that implies Si<Sca.
Again, similar calculations can be performed for the other cases.

Proposition 7: As d and β increase, firms where investment stakes are relatively equal are less
likely to form.
Recall that S is increasing in We, except where the return function has jumps. If we start
from an extreme wealth distribution (say We equal to 1) and begin to increase the investor’s
wealth, investment stakes will first become more even and then less so. If Π is not too large,

57

equity stakes will follow the same U-shaped pattern. We already know that aggregate returns
follow a U-shaped pattern (higher with extreme equity stakes than with more even one). As d
increases, returns fall everywhere, but the first place for the aggregate participation constraint to
bind is at the bottom of the aggregate return curve (that is, where equity stakes are more even).
Hence the result that firms with even equity stakes are most sensitive to transactions costs is
straightforward.
Because the entrepreneur is the residual claimant, her investment stake is typically
smaller than her equity stake. If profits are small enough, however, the difference will be small,
and even equity stakes will correspond to even investment stakes. Hence as d and β increase, the
resulting fall in aggregate returns directly reduces the capacity of firms to form. It also has an
indirect effect on the formation of firms because the entrepreneur needs to surrender more equity
to secure the investor’s participation, increasing the likelihood of even equity stakes where
transactions costs are most severe.

Proposition 8: If R* and d are small enough, for two intervals of entrepreneur wealth {1, We1};
{We2, 0} the firm is organized as a corporation. For wealth between We1 and We2 the firm does
not form. As Π increases, the range where the firm does not form shrinks and ultimately
disappears and there will be a middle range of entrepreneur wealth such that the firm is
organized as a partnership. As Π increases further the lower range of wealth levels where the
firm is organized as a corporation will disappear, then the range at which is organized as a
partnership will also disappear. If Π is large enough the firm operates as a corporation under the
entrepreneur’s control whatever the initial wealth endowment.
Assume d< β.

58

•

Let R*-cm>1+r and (1-d) R*-cm<1+r.
Then the firm will form only if the equity distribution is such that the firm can operate as

a corporation without appropriation. That implies that S>Sca or S<1-Sca. The largest investment
the investor is willing to make if he receives 1-Sca is
Wi =[1-Sca]R* (Sca)/[1+r]. Hence We1= 1-[1-Sca]R*(Sca)/[1+r]. At the other extreme, the largest
investment the entrepreneur is willing to make if she receives 1-Sca is
We2=[1-Sca]R*/[1+r].
•

Now increase Π so that (1-d)R*-cm>1+r. By definition there must exist an Sm, the largest

equity stake for the entrepreneur that will elicit monitoring. Assume that (1-d)Rp0(Sm)<1+r. That
is, the absence of monitoring the firm does not form between Sm and Sca. We can also define S’
such that (1-d)Rp0(S’)=1+r. S’ is the smallest equity stake that will allow firm to operate as a
partnership without monitoring.
Then the firm will form as a corporation if We<(1-Sca)R*/[1+r] or We>1-(1Sca)R(Sca)/[1+r]. It will also form as a partnership for any We such that S<Sm. The largest
investment the entrepreneur is willing to make for a stake of Sm is We=Sm(1-d)R*/[1+r]. That
investment defines We2.
At S’ there is no monitoring. The return to the investor is [1-S’]R(S’)[1-d], and the
aggregate return is R(S’)[1-d] = 1+r. The largest investment the investor is willing to make for a
stake of 1-S’is 1-S’. Hence the firm will operate for all investment stakes between 0 and Sm(1d)R*/[1+r] and between S’ and 1. At the extremes it is a corporation. Otherwise, when it
operates, it is a partnership.
•

Now increase Π such that (1-d)Rp0(Sm)-cm>1+r. Then the investor’s participation

constraint will never bind, and the firm will operate regardless of the initial distribution of

59

wealth. What form the firm takes depends on what maximizes the return of the entrepreneur. If
1>[ScaR*-cm]/[1+r], the firm will form as a corporation until We=(1-Sca)R*/[1+r]. It then switches
to a partnership until We =1-(1-Sca)R(Sca)/[1+r]. Then it switches back to a corporation.
If 1<[ScaR*-cm]/[1+r], the investor with wealth Wi<1 can never buy enough of the firm to
operate without appropriating returns, even if he makes the whole of the required investment. If
We ≥1-(1-Sca)R(Sca)/[1+r], the firm operates as a corporation and there is no minority oppression.
If We<1-(1-Sca)R(Sca)/[1+r], then the entrepreneur cannot avoid all transactions costs. She will
operate the firm as a partnership (because d<β). Once the investor becomes rich enough, the
entrepreneur may decide to ‘give’ the investor some extra equity as we saw in proposition 6. But
that will occur only if 1-Sca>[1-[[1+r]/[1-d] R*]][1-d]. If not, the firm operates as a corporation
when the entrepreneur has a stake larger than Sca and as a partnership otherwise.
Finally, if we increase Π such that Rc0(Sca) >1+r/[1-Sca], then the entrepreneur raises all
the capital she needs while maintaining such a high equity share that the firm always operates as
a corporation with no transaction costs.
The proof of d>β is similar.

Proposition 9: The first best outcome (R=R*) cannot only be reached if wealth constraints are
fully relaxed. When the first best cannot be reached, the firm will be either a partnership or a
corporation depending on the relative intensity of the various transaction costs and the relative
wealth of the two associates. Holding one associate’s wealth constant, aggregate returns are
weakly increasing in the wealth of the other.
If We≥1, then R=R*. This is the first best outcome. In all other cases at least one
transaction cost will have to be borne. If Wi≥ScaR*/[1+r], then R=R*-cm, This is the best outcome

60

if the investor ‘owns’ the firm. If Wi<ScaR*/[1+r] or We<1-(1-Sca)R(Sca)/[1+r], then the firm will
also bear either dissolution or appropriation costs.
The second part of the proposition is trivial. Start with any wealth distribution {We Wi}.
The firm is defined by an organizational form (partnership or corporation) and a distribution of
equity. If we increase We holding Wi constant, the entrepreneur can still create the firm as it was
organized before but now has additional options (in particular she can choose to keep a larger
stake). Because the entrepreneur is the residual claimant, she will only do so if aggregate returns
increase. The argument is symmetric if we increase Wi instead.

61

