                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               OPENNESS AND INDUSTRIAL RESPONSES IN A WAL-MART
               WORLD: A CASE STUDY OF MEXICAN SOAPS, DETERGENTS
                          AND SURFACTANT PRODUCERS

                                      Beata Smarzynska Javorcik
                                           Wolfgang Keller
                                            James Tybout

                                         Working Paper 12457
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12457


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Office of the World Bank’s Chief Economist for Latin America
and the World Bank’s Research Support Budget. We also wish to thank Mexican and multinational
companies, the Mexican National Oils, Fats, Soaps and Detergents Industry Association (CANAJAD) and
the Mexican National Chamber of Manufacturing (CANACINTRA) for making this study possible by being
generous with their time. Thanks are also due to Isidro Soloaga for his invaluable help with conducting firm
interviews in Mexico and Geoff Revell for superb research assistance. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the
view of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2006 by Beata Smarzynska Javorcik, Wolfgang Keller and James Tybout. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Openness and Industrial Response in a Wal-Mart World: A Case Study of Mexican Soaps,
Detergents and Surfactant Producers
Beata Smarzynska Javorcik, Wolfgang Keller and James Tybout
NBER Working Paper No. 12457
August 2006
JEL No. F1, F23, L65, L81

                                           ABSTRACT


This paper uses a case study approach to explore the effects of NAFTA and GATT membership on
innovation and trade in the Mexican soaps, detergents and surfactants (SDS) industry. Several basic
findings emerge. First, the most fundamental effect of NAFTA and the GATT on the SDS industry
was to help induce Wal-Mart to enter Mexico. Once there, Walmex fundamentally changed the retail
sector, forcing SDS firms to cut their profit margins and/or innovate. Those unable to respond to this
new environment tended to lose market share and, in some cases, disappear altogether. Second,
partly in response to Walmex, many Mexican producers logged impressive efficiency gains during
the previous decade. These gains came both from labor-shedding and from innovation, which in turn
was fueled by innovative input suppliers and by multinationals bringing new products and processes
from their headquarters to Mexico. Finally, although Mexican detergent exports captured an
increasing share of the U.S. detergent market over the past decade, Mexican sales in the U.S. were
inhibited by a combination of excessive shipping delays at the border and artificially high input
prices (due to Mexican protection of domestic caustic soda suppliers). They were also held back by
the major re-tooling costs that Mexican producers would have had to incur in order to establish brand
recognition among non-Latin consumers, and in order to comply with zero phosphate laws in many
regions of the United States.


Beata Smarzynska Javorcik                             James R. Tybout
World Bank                                            Department of Economics
MSN MC3-303                                           Penn State University
1818 H St., NW                                        517 Kern Graduate Building
Washington, DC 20433                                  University Park, PA 16802
bjavorcik@worldbank.org                               and NBER
                                                      jtybout@psu.edu
Wolfgang Keller
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
wolfgang.keller@colorado.edu
I.     Introduction

       Between the mid 1980s and the mid 1990s, Mexico substantially reduced its trade

barriers and liberalized its foreign investment code. The initial wave of commercial

policy reforms was locked into place when Mexico joined the General Agreement on

Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1985. Further liberalization vis a vis the United States and

Canada was codified in the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) signed in

1992 and implemented on January 1, 1994. Thus by the early 1990s, Mexico had

committed itself to integration with the global economy in general, and it had opened its

markets especially relative to the United States.

       This paper uses a case study approach to explore the effects of these policies on

innovation and trade in the Mexican soaps, detergents and surfactants (SDS) industry.

Rather than simply examine the correlation of trade barriers with trade flows and FDI

barriers with FDI flows, the objective is to develop a more nuanced understanding of the

channels through which Mexico’s opening has affected industrial sector performance,

and where responses are lacking, to understand why.

       Several basic messages emerge. First, according to the SDS firms that were

interviewed, the most profound effect of NAFTA and the GATT on the SDS industry was

neither a reduction in trade costs nor an inflow of rival multinational subsidiaries.

Rather, it was a fundamental change in the relationship between these firms and their

retailers. Reductions in trade barriers made Mexico a more attractive market for Wal-

Mart, which found that it could profitably bring consumer goods into the country from

the United States. Once Walmex (Wal-Mart of Mexico) was established, it changed the

way that SDS producers and other suppliers of consumer goods interacted with retailers.




                                                                                            2
By exercising its bargaining power, it squeezed profit margins among the major brands,

offering them higher volumes in return. It also engaged the most efficient small-scale

local producers as suppliers of store brands, thereby creating for itself a residual source of

SDS products that could be used in bargaining with the major (multinational) branded

suppliers. Those local firms that were not efficient enough to meet Walmex’s terms lost

market share, and many failed. At the same time, the limited set of producers that

survived grew, and with prodding from Walmex they became more efficient and

innovative, adopting innovations first introduced into the market by their multinational

competitors. A similar transformation took place among retailers themselves in reaction

to the new business practices that Walmex brought to the country.

         The second basic message is that Mexican SDS exporters have managed to gain

market share in the U.S. since the mid-1990s, but their ability to build on this trend is

constrained by a combination of factors. The export growth that they have achieved thus

far has targeted the expanding Latino community in the United States, where their brands

are already known. If these producers are to penetrate the non-Latino U.S. market,

substantial marketing investments will be necessary. They will also need to retool for the

production of phosphate-free concentrates, which are required by law in much of the U.S.

SDS exports are further impeded by substantial delays at the U.S./Mexican border, which

have increased shipping costs by 9 to 15 percent. And the competitiveness of Mexican

SDS products abroad is compromised by the fact that one of their key inputscaustic

sodais protected in Mexico by an anti-dumping ruling, driving up marginal production

costs.




                                                                                            3
       It is possiblebut far from certainthat the cost savings associated with the

removal of border frictions and protection for caustic soda producers would be sufficient

to induce producers to invest in marketing and in re-tooling. If this were to happen, a

discrete surge in Mexican detergent exports might occur.

       The final basic message is that the SDS sector rapidly improved its value-added

per worker after the mid 1990s, and that this reflected a combination of labor-shedding

and innovative activity. The latter was facilitated by the presence of multinationals in

several respects. Most directly, SDS subsidiaries drew on the research efforts of their

headquarters abroad. But the Mexican-owned firms also benefited from multinationals,

both through imitation and through their interactions with foreign-owned suppliers, who

regularly approached them with new inputs and suggestions for new products and

processes. Additionally, large retailers, such as Walmex, provided a stimulus for small

and medium-sized suppliers to adopt innovations and improve production efficiency.



II.    Wal-Mart’s entry: a revolution in retailing

       The ascendance of Walmex

       As the Mexican economy began to open in the mid 1980s, its retail sector began a

process of profound transformation. Drawing on interviews with industry managers and

supporting data from INEGI, Chavez (2002) provides an excellent synopsis and

interpretation of the changes that occurred. This subsection summarizes his main

findings, devoting particular attention to the changes that were important for the

performance of the SDS industry.




                                                                                           4
        Mexican producers of consumer goods were heavily protected until the mid

1980s. Thus retailers based in the United Stateswhose strength was in dealing with

their home-market suppliersstayed out. But as tariffs fell over the following half-

decade, Mexican retailers began to offer more consumer goods imported from the United

States. And when NAFTA locked in place commercial policy reforms while extending

national treatment to foreign investors, the Mexican market became attractive to large

United States-based retail chains.1 This attraction was heightened by Mexico’s large

population, its growing middle class, and its increasing urbanization.

        Participation by foreign retailers in the Mexican market began when executives at

several of the major Mexican retailers approached their counterparts in Texas and

California concerning possible collaboration. And for their part, major retail chains in the

United States took increasing interest in Mexico as the NAFTA negotiations progressed.2

These events triggered a wave of joint ventures between Mexican and foreign chains. In

1991 the largest Mexican firm involved in retailing, Aurrera (part of the Mexican

commercial group CIFRA), formed a joint venture with Wal-Mart. Then, in 1992,

Comercial Mexicana entered into a joint venture with Price-Cosco. Finally, in 1994 the

Mexican supermarket chain Gigante entered into joint ventures with the French retailer

Carrefour and with Office Depot. Only one important Mexican supermarket chain,

Soriana, remained independent.



1
 Tegel (2003) also concludes that Mexico’s unilateral liberalization and signing of the GATT in 1987 were
key to the entrance of foreign retailers. Appendix 1 provides a more detailed discussion of the relevant
GATT- and NAFTA-induced policy reforms.
2
 Chavez (2000) observes that “members of the chambers and associations of retailers were invited by their
governments to take part in the negotiating commissions representing their sectors and members . . . (fn 1,
p. 505).



                                                                                                          5
        After familiarizing themselves with Mexico, and having brought their own

strengths with them, some foreign retailing firms felt that they no longer needed local

collaborators. Most importantly, Wal-Mart bought controlling interest in Aurerra in 1997

and became Wal-Mart de México (Walmex). For its part, the French retailer Carrefour

left its partnership with Gigante, but remained in the Mexican market.3

        With the influx of foreign retailers, a handful of major chains came to dominate

the market, and many of the smaller retailers were forced to shut down. By 2001, “only 4

chains dominated the market: Wal-Mart de México with almost half (45.6 percent),

Comerical Mexicana with a little over a fifth (20.6 percent), Gigante (15.5 percent) and

Soriana (14 percent)” (Chavez, 2002, p. 507). By 2002, Walmex’s total sales had grown

to $10.1 billion (Tegel, 2003), and by 2004 to $12.5 billion (Wal-Mart, 2005).



        Changes in Business Practices

        The growing dominance of Wal-Mex helped to induce two fundamental changes

in the Mexican retail sector. First, the sector modernized its warehousing, distribution,

and inventory management. Second, it changed the way it interacted with its suppliers.

The former changes partly reflected the growing availability of information technology.

But they also reflected the innovations that Walmex imported from the United States.

Walmex not only introduced the system of channeling deliveries from suppliers through

centralized warehouses, it also requires delivery trucks to have appointments and drivers




3
 “Many Mexican food retail analysts speculate that Carrefour used its relationship with Gigante to get to
know the domestic market, and then shifted its strategy to operate solo . . .” (Chavez, 2002, p. 512).



                                                                                                            6
to carry standard identification cards.4 Those that miss appointments are subject to fines.

Shipments must be on standardized palettes (rentable from Walmex), they must be

shrink-wrapped with corner protectors, and they are subject to third-party quality audits.5

Many of these innovations have diffused to the other major retail chains.

         Walmex’s hard-nosed style of negotiation with its suppliers may have been at

least as important. Famously, Wal-Mart keeps negotiations with its suppliers as stark as

possibleboth in terms of the bargaining environment and in terms of the number of

negotiable contract features. And because it controls such a large share of the retail

market, this often amounts to a take-or-leave-it offer. In the United States, the company is

exceptionally private about its business practices and its suppliers are very reluctant to

discuss details (Fishman, 2003).6 However, former suppliers are more willing to talk.

They agree that Wal-Mart’s uniquely large market share gives it extraordinary bargaining

power, and allows it drive its suppliers’ profit margins very low. For standardized

products, it demands annual price reductions, so those firms that are unable to frequently

introduce new goods—and thus avoid establishing a benchmark price—are squeezed

relatively more (Fishman, 2003). Those suppliers that balk at Wal-Mart’s demands are

simply discontinued, and new suppliers are brought in.

         Evidence on retail prices in the United States confirms that the “Wal-Mart

squeeze” (Fishman, 2003) is real, and quantitatively important. Using region-specific

4
 Tegel (2003) states that Walmex is “the only Mexican retail chain that has its own centralized distribution
system. Suppliers thus can deliver their goods just once to any of 11 Walmex depots scattered across the
country, rather than to each individual store.” Interviews for this study revealed that since the time of
Tegel’s writing, other major retailers have gone to centralized warehouses.
5
 These features of Walmex’s delivery system were mentioned by several SDS firms interviewed for the
present study.
6
 One company that helps businesses work with retailers commented “’If Wal-Mart takes something the
wrong way, it’s like Saddam Hussein. You just don’t want to p___ them off.” (Fishman, 2003)


                                                                                                           7
prices of several specific consumer goods, Basker (2005) develops an econometric model

of price adjustments when a new Wal-Mart enters a region. Controlling for serial

correlation, seasonal effects, city fixed effects, and endogenous opening dates, he finds

that the long run effect of a new Wal-Mart is to drive down retail prices by from 1

percent to 13 percent, depending upon the product. For present purposes it is worth

noting that the effect on detergent prices is relatively large—about 9 percent. This may be

due to the fact that this product is fairly standardized, and thus subject to annual demands

for price concessions.

       Basker’s (2005) findings are consistent with anecdotal evidence, which suggests

that “when Wal-Mart enters a market, its everyday low prices are anywhere from 5

percent to 25 percent lower for identical goods.” (Business Planning Solutions, 2005).

They are also consistent with more aggregated econometric analyses that link region-

specific consumer commodity-price indices to the share of Wal-Mart stores in local

retailing (Business Planning Solutions, 2005).



       Responses of Mexican SDS Producers to Wal-Mart’s Entry

       The above characterization of Wal-Mart’s effect on pricing in the United States is

completely consistent with the observations that Mexican SDS manufacturers offered

regarding Walmex during our interviews. Indeed, the appearance of Walmex was

typically cited as the most important structural change to market since 1990.

       One fundamental effect of Walmex, cited by both the major brands and the

smaller suppliers, was to change the relative bargaining position of small and large firms.

More precisely, Walmex uses roughly 25 domestically-owned small and medium-sized




                                                                                            8
producers to supply store-brand (marca blanca) detergents and cleaners, each producing

a differentiated product. These firms are efficient enough to survive at the prices Walmex

offers them, and while most had previously been fringe players, they now collectively

provide Walmex with a credible bargaining tool when it sits down with representatives of

the major brands.

         In addition to reducing suppliers’ bargaining power, small suppliers and major

brand suppliers agreed that it has increased industry-wide efficiency. One way, of course,

has been to drive high-cost suppliers out of business. But those able to survive on

Walmex’s terms have been able to reach a much larger market and thereby exploit scale

economies. Even the major brand suppliers agreed that Walmex’s distribution system had

made retailing more efficient.

         The firms visited for this study were by definition survivors, and most were

currently dealing with Walmex. So our sample under-represents the opinions of firms that

have been made worse off by its market dominance. But those small and medium

producers who addressed the issue indicated that they preferred the current business

environment to the earlier epoch in which competition was more muted, relations with

buyers were more social, and side payments for contracts were not unusual. Several

mentioned how clubby the retailers had been before Walmex arrived, and noted that

Walmex quickly withdrew from the National Association of Retailer and Department

Stores after discovering that the Association’s culture did not suit Wal-Mart’s business

model.

         In light of these observations, it is interesting to examine the value-added prices

of SDS producers, which net out the effects of materials price changes. Figure 1 shows




                                                                                               9
SDS value-added prices along with prices for other products in the chemical industry.7

The latter series is included as a benchmark because these are products that use related

technologies, but most are not consumer goods, and thus are not subject to the Walmex

effect. To provide an additional benchmark, an aggregate value-added price index for the

manufacturing sector is also included. While one can easily read too much into this

graph, it does confirm that inflation rates came down relatively rapidly in the SDS and

cosmetics sector as the structural transformation of the retail sector took shape in the late

1990s and early 2000s. (The spike in 1995 reflects the Tequila Crisis and the associated

devaluationrefer to the appendix for details.)



                 Figure 1: Annual inflation rates and value-added prices




             60.0
             50.0
             40.0                                                                SDS & C
             30.0                                                                Chemicals
             20.0                                                                Manufac

             10.0
              0.0   1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 20022003 2004




                 Source: INEGI (2005)

        Some interviewees mentioned that one of the difficulties they faced was their

inability to pass increases in material prices on to consumers, and they traced this


7
 Note that cosmetics are included with SDS products in the available series—since these are also consumer
goods sold by Walmex, this should not change the basic message.


                                                                                                      10
problem partly to their lack of bargaining power vis a vis Walmex. While it is true that

the rate of inflation in value-added prices has been below industry norms in all years

except one since 1999, this has not translated into lower gross profit margins for SDS and

cosmetics producers overall. As figure 2 demonstrates, the opposite has been the case:



                                         Figure 2

                Gross Margins: All Chemicals versus SDS and Cosmetics




          0.4
          0.3
                                                                       all chemicals
          0.2
                                                                       SDS & C
          0.1
            0
                  1999   2000     2001     2002     2003    2004


       Source: INEGI (2005)



       Rising gross margins have been possible because the industry has expanded

production without a corresponding expansion in employment. While real value-added

has expanded relatively rapidly for SDS and Cosmetics producers, employment has

actually gone down substantially since 1999 (see Figures 3 and 4). The initial decline in

employment was caused by the Tequila Crisis hit in 1994. But as output growth resumed

in 1996 and thereafter, employment did not rebound. By 2004, real value-added had

grown 50 percent and employment had shrunken more than 20 period, implying a



                                                                                           11
cumulative improvement in real value-added per worker of nearly 90 percent!

Presumably this reflected the exit of relatively inefficient producers, the exploitation of

scale economies, product and process innovation, and labor-shedding among those firms

that continued to operate.

                                           Figure 3

                                Real value-added index:
                       Total chemicals versus SDS and cosmetics

   200
   150
                                                                                        total chem.
   100
                                                                                        SDS & C
    50
     0
          1993 1994     1995   1996 1997 1998 1999 2000       2001   2002 2003   2004




                                           Figure 4

                            Employment index:
                 Total chemicals versus SDS and cosmetics

   1.2
     1
   0.8
                                                                                        total chem.
   0.6
   0.4                                                                                  SDS & C
   0.2
     0
         1993   1994    1995   1996 1997   1998   1999 2000   2001 2002   2003   2004




                                                                                                      12
III.   Patterns of innovation and knowledge diffusion

       The heightened competitive pressure that Walmex brought to Mexico created

incentives to cut waste and to innovate. We know from Figures 3 and 4 that labor

productivity improved dramatically, and that some of this gain has come from labor

shedding. But in addition, successful firms have increased their product appeal and

improved their revenues per unit input cost through a variety of innovative activities. The

interviews conducted for this study and recent papers on the SDS industry shed light on

the sources of these process and product improvements. We summarize the basic

messages below.



       Sources of innovation among multinationals

       Globally, the leading SDS producers are actively involved in product research and

development. Modern detergent formulations, jealously guarded by the global industry

leaders, are increasingly complex combinations of raw materials, formats, chemical

additives and biotechnology. This complexity, coupled with competition and liberalized

rules for international trade and investment, has pushed R&D activity to be distributed

globally, and integrated throughout the supply-chain.

       Multinational detergent firms invest heavily in research. When Unilever launched

its new concentrated powder in 1994, it had already invested £100 million in the

technology, which contained a new bleaching system, new active ingredients, a new

water softener system, used less energy and water to produce, and was more

biodegradable (Ward, 1994). Henkel employed approximately 3,600 people worldwide in

research and development activities in 1997. During the same year, the company devoted




                                                                                          13
US$ 247 million to R&D, with a further US$ 101 million being spent on technical

services. A large portion of the research activities is concentrated at the headquarters in

Düsseldorf. Product development and application engineering activities, on the other

hand, are performed on a more decentralized basis.8

          As the multinationals innovate, they often induce imitation among their

competitors, and upstream adjustments among input suppliers. For example, when

Proctor & Gamble launched a detergent with built-in fabric softener in mid-2004, it not

only sparked a race among competitors to create similar products, but it also spurred

specialty chemical companies to develop the inputs that would be needed. Thus input

suppliers sometimes serve as conduits for technology transfer to other firms, and

increasingly, they are a source of research themselves (McCoy, 2001).9

          Foreign affiliates operating in the Mexican markets benefit from the massive

R&D investment undertaken by their parent companies, and draw on the innovations

produced in the headquarters. They are the local market leaders in terms of introducing

new and innovative products. However, not all innovations are accepted by Mexican

customers. Consumer preferences for high-volume powder detergents limit the scope for

launching premium-priced compact products.




8
    http://www.monografias.com/trabajos10/ugm/ugm2.shtml#
9
  Globally, the nature of supplier research has been changing. R&D partnerships are becoming more
common, and several chemical companies are extending these alliances to include not only suppliers and
customers, but other players in the chain, such as retailers and designers (Milmo, 2002). Rhodia, a leading
specialty chemicals maker, dedicates 20 percent of its R&D budget to research partnerships. Realizing the
importance of speeding new products to market, suppliers are investing in high throughput equipment and
trying to rise above the commodity-type pricing of inputs for existing products (Schmitt et al, 2002).



                                                                                                         14
       Sources of innovation among Mexican-owned firms

       While Mexican-owned detergent producers lack global economies of scale and

thus the incentive to invest heavily in R&D, many introduce incremental improvements

to the regular powder format. They usually follow the lead of multinationals. Often they

are prompted to do so by their customers, including Walmex. As mentioned above,

product improvements help them avoid drastic price cuts demanded by Walmex. Such

innovations usually involve introducing a new fragrance or changing the appearance of

the product (by, for instance, adding blue inactive granules to the powder).

       Input suppliers, usually foreign affiliates, are the primary channel through which

Mexican-owned producers obtain access to innovations. According to the information

obtained during the interviews, small Mexican producers meet with their input suppliers

every six months to find out about the possibilities of upgrading their products. Suppliers

provide the necessary inputs and often prepare a new formula for the product based on

these inputs. To entice local producers, they can reformulate the product to substitute

standard ingredients with their cheaper form in order to offset part of the increased input

cost due to the innovative ingredients.

       Mexican-owned producers often intentionally lag in introducing new products.

For instance, from the Mexican firms’ point of view, investing in liquid detergents to

compete against large multinationals may not be a profitable strategy. Most prefer to wait

until multinationals undertake the expensive task of educating consumers about the

benefits of using liquid detergents and concentrated products. If a shift in broad

perceptions of customers takes place, they can follow with similar products at less risk.

For instance, one of the interviewed firms reported having the capacity to produce liquid




                                                                                            15
detergents and expecting to have to use it in the future, but waiting until a perceptible

shift in consumers’ views has taken place and the demand for currently produced powder

formulas has dwindled.



       Tailoring products to the local market

       Evolving consumer demand helps to induce continuous innovation, which is often

specific to a particular market. Heightened sensibilities in the U.S. about the

eutrophication of lakes and rivers prompted a reduction in phosphates, while general

environmental concerns led to a shift in perceptions about volume. Detergent buyers in

the U.S. now believe that compacts can clean as effectively as regular formulas, liquid

formats dissolve better in the wash, and that fragrance and antimicrobial features are

important. Antimicrobial characteristics have become especially important with rising

energy bills and their ability to kill germs in cold water.

       Mexican consumers have different preferences—most notably for regular

powdered detergent, with large amounts of sulfate filler to counter their relatively hard

water. Because Mexican firms operate in a different regulatory environment and cater to

these local preferences, they have not invested in the wholesale format changes that U.S.

firms have made: from regular to compact powder, from compact powder to liquid, from

regular liquid to compact liquid, or from compact liquid to tablet.

       Many of the major new developments, including inputs, manufacturing processes

and packaging, are designed for use with compact liquids that now represent the majority

of sales in mature markets. This trend effectively precludes Mexican firms from

importing several new detergent technologies unless they change their product format. In




                                                                                            16
an industry long known for secrecy, leaders such as Proctor & Gamble and Unilever are

now even secretive about whom their suppliers are in order to prevent competitors from

deducing formulations (Schmitt et al, 2002).

       However, the interest in new additives among the large detergent makers and

incentives to cut inventory costs have encouraged suppliers to develop inputs that are

compatible across multiple formulations. Recent examples include surface modification

for easy cleaning, surface adhesion for textile fabric care and time-controlled discharge of

perfumes. Up to 90 percent of perfumes are destroyed during the wash and they account

for as much as 30 percent of the input costs. Using latex, polymers and minerals such as

silica and surfactants, researchers developed a controlled release that preserves 60 percent

rather than 10 percent of perfumes (Milmo, 2002).



IV.    Constraints to export response

       After 1994, Mexican SDS exports to the United States increased and Mexican

producers captured a growing share of the U.S. import market. Figure 5 shows that

Mexico’s share in total US SDS imports rose from about 17 percent in 1994 to 27 percent

in 2000 before falling somewhat. Also, while aggregate Mexican exports grew about 57

percent over the period 1994-1998, SDS grew somewhat more rapidly (81 percent), and

continued to expand until 2001.

       What forces drove the increasing success of Mexican SDS exporters in the U.S.

market? Reductions in United States tariffs on Mexican exports of detergents to the U.S.

may have played some role. However, these tariff rates were not high to begin with.




                                                                                         17
Hence the real devaluation that accompanied the Tequila Crisis and the major

productivity gains achieved the SDS industry were probably much more important.

       Another important factor was the growing interest on the part of US supermarket

chains to cater to the Latino population by providing “nostalgia brands” or “heritage

brands.” These are modestly-priced product that have well-established brand names in

Latin American countries, and thus do not require costly promotional campaigns. Indeed,

the firms interviewed indicated that Latinos constituted the core market for Mexican

exports to the U.S. The most important firm to have tapped this market is Fabrica de

Jabon La Corona, one of the largest laundry detergent producers in Mexico. In 2002, La

Corona’s sales in the U.S. of US$15 million of powdered detergents and US$10 million

of liquid detergents amounted to a market share of one percent (Table 1). Gunnar

Hallgrimsson, manager of international sales, said “It is very simple. There are a lot of

Mexicans there. [We are] exporting to them a product they have been using all their life.”

For La Corona, South American markets have proved much less attractive than the

United States, which received eighty percent of its exports in 2003.




                                                                                            18
                                                  Figure 5

    Mexico's SDS Exports to the US: Levels and Share of Total US SDS Imports

  0.3




 0.25




  0.2




 0.15




  0.1




 0.05




   0
        1989   1990   1991   1992   1993      1994           1995     1996      1997   1998   1999   2000   2001

                                       Exports ($ Billion)     Share of US Imports




               Table 1 - U.S. Sales of Laundry Detergents 2002 ($ millions)

                                                  Powder Liquid   Total      Share
    Procter & Gamble                               802.81 1307.15   2109.96        58%
    Lever Brothers                                 126.15  470.51    596.66        16%
    Dial Corp.                                      42.18  244.37    286.55         8%
    Church & Dwight                                 77.42  116.28    193.70         5%
    USA Detergents                                  16.14  131.17    147.31         4%
    Colgate-Palmolive                               18.90  111.65    130.55         4%
    Private Label                                   35.79   66.46    102.25         3%
    Huish Detergents                                21.48   22.30     43.78         1%
    Fabrica de Jabon La Corona                      14.97   10.03     25.00         1%
    Redoc Brands                                     4.62    9.99     14.61         0%
    Total Market                                     1165    2502       3667     100%

    Notes: includes sales from supermarkets, drug stores, and mass merchandisers,
          excl. Wal-Mart
    Source: Information Resources Inc.


        Multinationals operating in the SDS sector in Mexico are not actively engaged in

exporting to the United States. Proctor & Gamble does not export detergents to the


                                                                                                                   19
United States, although some of its products are exported by wholesalers. Colgate no

longer produces detergent in Mexico, having sold its Viva brand to Henkel in 2000, but it

does export softener (Suavitel) to the United States. Henkel has been exporting Viva, its

largest-selling brand, to the U.S. market for the past three years. Like the Mexican-owned

producers, both Henkel and Colgate are concentrating on exporting familiar brands to the

expanding diaspora of Latinos.

         In sum, therefore, it appears that exporting to the United States is relatively

unprofitable for Mexican firms, except in cases where their brands are already established

in the Latino community. Similarly, the availability of relatively low-cost of Mexican

labor does not appear sufficient to induce multinationals to shift production of non-Latino

brands from the United States into Mexico and export them back to the United States.



         Transportation Costs

         Besides the costs of establishing brand recognition among non-Latinos, what

keeps the return on exporting low? Perhaps the most obvious is transport costs.

Detergents have a low value to volume (weight) ratio, so transportation costs constitute a

relatively large fraction of total revenues when they are shipped long distances.10 More

compact detergents have higher value-density, use less packaging, and therefore offer

significant cost-savings in distribution. For example, Unilever’s All Small & Mighty uses

less than half the plastic packaging and saves an estimated 10 million gallon of water per

10
   The importance of transport costs to the industry is illustrated by the fact that liberalization of the
trucking industry in the United States was a key factor driving consolidation of Proctor & Gamble
detergent production facilities in the country. Their number decreased from 14 in the late 1970s to only
four in 2005. Though the transportation cost of more centralized production facilities is higher, the
economies of scale in production offset the incremental shipping costs. There is also a cost savings
achieved by lowering the transportation cost of inputs coming into 4 instead of 14 facilities.



                                                                                                             20
year to produce compared to its 100-ounce size, substantially cutting manufacturing and

other supply chain costs. The smaller size reduces diesel fuel consumption, translating

into significant transportation savings (Walsh, 2006). But concentrated detergents have

not proved popular among Mexican consumers, so the products Mexican firms offered in

their local markets contain high levels of sulfate fillers and are particularly expensive to

ship abroad.11

           Importantly, transportation costs are increased by the regulatory environment.

Trucking is the primary shipping mode between Mexico and the United States,

representing about 85 percent of trade in terms of value (Haralambides and Londono-

Kent, 2004).12 Since NAFTA came into effect, cross-border trade by truck between the

two countries has grown significantly (Figure 6). In Chapter 12 of the NAFTA, the three

parties established parameters for cross-border trucking and in Annex I, they agreed to a

timeline for phasing-out restrictions to cross-border provision of trucking services. In

addition to allowing Mexican trucks access to the U.S. market, the agreement stipulated

allowing U.S. interests to participate in the Mexican transportation sector.

           However, the implementation of the this NAFTA provision was unilaterally

suspended by the U.S. on the safety grounds. U.S. trucking associations and unions

alleged that Mexican trucks posed a safety hazard as they were considerably older than

the U.S. fleet and were not as well maintained. The Mexican side countered with the

argument that safety should be a matter of technical inspection of individual vehicles and

should not be addressed with a blanket prohibition. Moreover, a significant upgrading of

11
  Foreign producers attempted to introduce concentrated detergents in the Mexican market but the effort
failed. The public did not appreciate the benefits of concentrated products and perceived a lower volume to
be associated with a lower value of the product.
12
     Geographic distance in the U.S. costs about a dollar a truck-mile (Boyer 1997).


                                                                                                        21
the Mexican fleet had taken place since the introduction of NAFTA (Haralambides and

Londono-Kent, 2004). Mexico challenged the blanket ban before a NAFTA arbitration

panel which in 2001 found the U.S. to be in violation of NAFTA rules. A series of events

in subsequent years paved the way for lifting the ban which, however, has not happened

yet due to the lack of political will.

         In addition to trucking restrictions, huge inefficiencies are present at the key U.S.-

Mexican border crossings. Crossing the Rio Grande river in the northbound direction

with a loaded truck involves at least three pieces of equipment (trucks and trailers) and

several drivers.13 The additional cost imposed at the border increases the cost of transport

from Monterrey to Chicago by between 9 and 16 percentsee Table 2 (Haralambides and

Londono-Kent, 2004).




13
   La Corona, the single major Mexican exporter, uses a third party logistics provider to enable less-than-
truckload (LTL), multi-vendor consolidated load, or retail-driven consolidated shipments across the border
to regional warehousing throughout the U.S.


                                                                                                         22
                                                  Figure 6

                     Value of U.S. Land Imports from Mexico by Mode
            Value ($millions)

           120,000




           100,000




            80,000




                                                                                                     Truck
            60,000
                                                                                                     Rail




            40,000




            20,000




                 0
                     1994   1995   1996   1997   1998     1999   2000    2001   2002   2003   2004

                                                          Year




   Source: http://www.bts.gov/publications/national_transportation_statistics/2005/html/table_01_54.html




             Table 2 – Costs of Crossing U.S.-Mexican Border (Northbound)

                                                          Costs (US$)                    Time (hours)
                                                        Low        High                Low        High
Mexican side
Trucking Monterrey-Border                               188             210             2.5                  3.0
Unloads and reloads as needed                           75              150             0.3                  1.0
Drayage                                                 75              150
Mexican inspection                                                                      0.0                  2.0
                        Totals Mexico                   338             510             2.8                  6.0

United States side
Congestion, waiting time                                                                1.0                   6.0
U.S. inspection                                                                         0.0                   4.0
Unloads and reloads as needed                                                           0.3                   0.5
Trucking to Chicago                                 1,338               1,343          30.0                  51.0
                           Totals US                1,338               1,343          31.3                  61.5

Total U.S. & Mexico                                 1,676               1,853          34.0                  67.5

Source: Haralambides and Londono-Kent (2004, p.178).




                                                                                                                    23
        U.S Environmental Regulations

        Another barrier to exports derives from environmental concerns in the U.S. In the

1960s a large public debate began over phosphate effluent from detergents and the

resulting eutrophication of U.S. rivers and lakes. By the late 1960s, almost 10,000 lakes

were reported to be suffering from excessive nutrient enrichment by human activities

(ReVelle and ReVelle, 1988). As early as 1985, jurisdictions which had enacted

phosphate bans included New York, Michigan, Indiana, Vermont, Minnesota, Dade

County, Florida, Akron, Ohio, and Chicago Illinois (Knud-Hansen, 1994). By 1996, more

than 19 states and counties in 15 other states were limiting the phosphorous content of

household laundry products to 0.5 percent.14 In 1999, many regions of the U.S. had

adopted phosphate limitations or bans, affecting about 40 percent of the U.S. population

(Kostick 2004). The effects of these phosphate bans on consumption are apparent in

figure 7 below.

        Zeolites (hydrated aluminosilicates of the alkaline and alkaline-earth metals) are

an environmentally friendly alternative to phosphates and are commonly used in liquid

detergents as builders.15 The introduction of phosphate-reduced (1976) and later

phosphate-free detergents (1983) marked the beginning of the era of builder systems

containing zeolites. Many U.S. suppliers are also researching the building properties of

soluble silicates. These can be used in both liquid detergents or in powders (after being

spray-dried).



14
  Source: published summary of phosphate legislation from the Soap and Detergent Association. March 20
1996. http://www.ledizolv.com/LearnAbout/LeadDustCleaning/lszsixarg.asp
15
  “Builders” serve to tie up mineral (hard water) ions, specifically magnesium and calcium, so surfactants
can work better. They emulsify oil stains, reduce the re-deposition of dirt during washing and rinsing,
provide alkalinity for cleaning and soften laundry water.


                                                                                                        24
                                                                Figure 7

                                                  U.S. Soda Ash Balance

              12,000,000



              10,000,000



               8,000,000
           Metric Tons
                                                                                                           Primary production
               6,000,000                                                                                   Exports
                                                                                                           Consumption



               4,000,000



               2,000,000



                         0
                             1950   1955   1960   1965   1970   1975    1980   1985   1990   1995   2000
                                                                 Year




   Source: USGS Historical Statistics for Mineral and Material Commodities in the United

   States 2003.



       The water in Mexico is relatively hard, making phosphates a desirable ingredient

to local consumers. According to the information obtained during firm interviews, most

detergents produced in Mexico are phosphate-based and can only be legally exported to

those U.S. states that have not enacted prohibitions. Switching production from

phosphate-based to phosphate-free detergents and vice versa cannot be done without

significant costs and producing both types of detergents at the same facility is not deemed

to be commercially viable.




                                                                                                                                25
         Intermediate input costs

         Finally, Mexican detergents are less competitive than they might be in the U.S.

market because an important intermediate input—sodium hydroxide (chemical caustic

soda)—is subject to Mexican antidumping duties (United States Trade Representative

2005). On July 2nd 2003, the Mexican National Oils, Fats, Soaps and Detergents Industry

Association (CANAJAD) requested a NAFTA panel review under Chapter 19 of the

countervailing duty (cuota compensatoria) imposed by the Secretary of the Economy on

sodium hydroxide originating in the U.S. According to CANAJAD, this countervailing

duty has effectively given monopoly power to two local producers which supply most of

the product to the Mexican market. Presumably due to the lack of political will, no ruling

has taken place yet.



V.       Conclusions

         The first message of this study is that traditional approaches to analyzing trade

agreements may miss important implications. In the case of the SDS sector, Mexico’s

GATT- and NAFTA-related commercial policy reforms mattered little in terms of their

direct effect on SDS trade and innovation. However, they helped to induce the entry of

Wal-Mart into Mexico, which in turn led to fundamental changes in the structure of the

SDS sector and in the retail sector in general. More precisely, the entry of Walmex led to:

     •   the dissemination of the latest retail techniques to other retail chains and increased

         competition in the retail sector;

     •   waste reductions in bringing goods to market;




                                                                                             26
   •   scale economy exploitation by those Mexican-owned and foreign producers that

       sold to Walmex;

   •   greater incentives for small-scale local producers to adopt innovations;

   •   movement toward marginal cost pricing, even among the major brands; and

   •    exit of some of the less efficient SDS producers.



       The second message of the paper is that the full benefits of improved market

access may not be realized in the presence of non-tariff barriers to trade. In the case of the

Mexican SDS industry, the competitiveness of local producers is severely hindered by

inputs costs being inflated due to the anti-dumping measures that protect Mexican

producers of caustic soda and by the limited competition in the trucking sector causing

delays and inflating costs.

       Neither of these barriers to trade is insurmountable, and both could be removed

with the stroke of pen. Whether they would lead to dramatic growth in Mexican exports

is difficult to predict, but the nature of the North American SDS market suggests that this

is a possibility. More precisely, Mexican producers who wish to export to non-Latinos in

the United States face two types of start-up costs: they must establish brand recognition

and trust in this market, and they must re-tool their production facilities to produce

phosphate-free liquid concentrates instead of bulky, phosphate-intensive powders. It is

possible that for a number of firms, the pay-offs in terms of future export profits are just

shy of these start-up costs, in which case a modest increase in operating profits per unit

export could trigger a significant export boom. On the other hand, it is also quite possible

that exporting to the non-Latino in the U.S. is far from profitable for Mexican firms, and



                                                                                             27
that reductions in transport costs and input prices would have little effect on trade

flows.16

        The third lesson is that innovation and adoption of innovations is very sensitive to

incentives. By giving local producers an opportunity to tap into a larger market, and by

insisting on steady price reductions for products that remain unimproved, Wal-Mart

created a powerful incentive for SDS producers to improve product quality and/or

productive efficiency. Although it is beyond the scope of this paper to isolate the effects

of this incentive on productivity in the SDS sector, value-added per worker clearly

improved rapidly as Walmex gained market share.

        Finally, industry-wide growth in value-added per worker reflected a combination

of labor shedding and innovation, and much of the innovation that took place among SDS

producers was traceabledirectly or indirectlyto multinationals. For the multinational

SDS subsidiaries, innovation was largely accomplished through the research efforts of

their headquarters abroad. For the Mexican-owned SDS firms, innovation originated

largely with their intermediate suppliers, who regularly brought them new compounds

and suggestions for new products or processes. Many of these suppliers were themselves

foreign-owned, and some of the inputs they brought to Mexican-owned firms were

developed in response to the needs of the major multinational producers.




16
  Das et al. (2006) quantify start up costs and export operating profits for several Colombian
manufacturing industries. They find that among knitted fabric producers, many were near the threshold of
probitable exports. Thus when the Colombian peso depreciated in late 1980s, large numbers began to
penetrate foreign markets. In contrast, leather product suppliers were much more heterogeneous in terms of
their payoffs from exporting, so only a few responded to the devaluation by initiating foreign sales


                                                                                                       28
                                     References

Basker, Emek (2005) “Selling a Cheaper Mousetrap: Wal-Mart’s Effect on Retail
       Prices,” Journal of Urban Economics 58, pp. 203-229.

Business Planning Solutions (2005). The Economic Impact of Wal-Mart.

Chavez, Manuel. (2002).”The Transformation of Mexican Retailing with NAFTA,”
      Development Policy Review 20(4), pp 503-13.

Cuevas, Alfredo, Miguel Messmacher, and Alejandro Werner (2005). “Foreign Direct
      Investment in Mexico since the Approval of NAFTA”, World Bank Economic
      Review Advance Access, December 6, 2005.

Das, Sanghamitra, Mark Roberts and James Tybout (2006). “Market Entry Costs,
       Producer Heterogeneity, and Export Dynamics,” Pennsylvania State University,
       Department of Economics. (Earlier version appeared as NBER working paper
       8629.)

Fishman, Charles (2003). “The Wal-Mart You Don’t Know,” Fast Company (Decmber)
      77. Downloaded February 15, 2006 from
      http://pf.fastcompany.com/magazine/77/walmart.html.

Haralambides, H.E. and Londoño-Kent, M.P. (2004) “Supply Chain Bottlenecks: Border
      Crossing Inefficiencies between Mexico and the United States,” International
      Journal of Transport Economics, 31 (2): 171-183.

INEGI (2005). La Industria Química en México. Aguas Calientes: INEGI. Downloaded
      April 8, 2006 from www.inegi.gob.mx

Kostick, Dennis S. (2004). Soda Ash. U.S. Geological Survey Minerals Yearbook. 2004.
       p.71.

Knud-Hansen, Chris (1994). “Historical Perspective of the Phosphate Detergent
      Conflict.” Natural Resources and Environmental Policy Seminar, University of
      Colorado. February.

McCoy, Michael (2001). “Soaps & Detergents: Product Report,” CENEAR, 79(3),
     pp.19-24.

Milmo, Sean (2002). “Rhodia Adopts Innovative Alliances to Foster Product
      Development.” Chemical Market Reporter, 262(15).

ReVelle, P. and C. ReVelle (1988). The Environment: Issues and Choices for Society. 3rd
      ed. Jones and Bartlett Publishers. Boston.



                                                                                     29
Schmitt, Bill, Morrison, Scott, Walsh, Kerri (2002). “Margin Woes Agitate Surfactants
       Makers,” Chemical Week.164(3).

Soap and Detergent Association (1996) Published summary of phosphate legislation.
       March 20 1996.
       http://www.ledizolv.com/LearnAbout/LeadDustCleaning/lszsixarg.asp

Tegel, Simon (2003). “Every Day Higher Sales: Mal-Mart Wunderkind Walmex shows
       them how it’s done in a down economy: The Giant 24,” Latin Trade (August).
       Downloaded February 15, 2006 from
       http://www.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0BEK/is_8_11/ai_106860473

United States Trade Representative (2005). National Trade Estimate Report.

Walsh, Kerri (2006). “Brand Extensions Clean Up.” Chemical Week.168(4).

Ward, Mike (1994). “Unilever Unveils New Generation Compact Detergent Powder.”
      Chemical Week.154(17).




                                                                                        30
                                        Appendix:

                  Major Policy Reforms and Macro Shocks: 1965-2005

       During the last four decades, Mexico’s policies towards international trade and

foreign direct investment have been characterized by a general trend towards

liberalization. At the same time, this has been punctuated by several policy reversals in

times of crisis that typically lasted only a few years. We offer a chronology of the major

episodes below.



       Import Substitution until the 1960s:

       Until the mid-1960s, Mexico’s economic policy was typical of the import

substitution paradigm that pervaded Latin America. This meant generally highly

protectionist trade and foreign direct investment (FDI) policies. During the late 1960s

and early 1970s, there were some initiatives of liberalization, both in terms of trade as

well as certain foreign direct investments. For example, the first maquiladora program

was authorized in the year 1965 (and subsequently liberalized in 1972). However, the

changes made tended to be selective, carried by an apparent belief that highly directive

government policy can guarantee good outcomes. Specifically, the general Law on

Foreign Investment, passed in 1973, remained highly restrictive with respect to foreign

ownership of firms in Mexico.



       1974 oil price shock:

       The first oil price shock in the year 1974 led to a current account deficit in

Mexico. The Mexican exchange rate stayed initially at the fixed rate of 0.0125 Pesos per




                                                                                            31
$ US, but a recession contributed to the decision to let the Peso devalue by the year 1977.

The oil price shock also triggered a pattern of policy reversal that would be typical for

Mexico over the last four decades, as the limited trade liberalization measures that were

put in place since 1970 were now reversed.



       Second oil price shock and 1982 debt crisis:

       In the late 1970s, Mexico started tapping into newly discovered oil reserves on its

territory. Thus the second oil price shock of 1979 initially benefited Mexico. With the

windfall of increased oil revenues, the country dramatically extended its international

borrowing. However, at least ex-post most of these projects turned out to have a low

long-run rate of return. Mexico’s international debts were mounting, and in the year

1982 the Mexican government declared default on its international debt obligations.



       GATT membership in 1985:

       During the mid-1980s, the Mexican exchange rate was in free-fall versus the

dollar, with an average rate of depreciation versus the dollar of around 65% per year

between 1981 and 1988. A number of measures were taken to stabilize the Mexican

economy, including structural adjustment programs agreed upon with the major

international lending organizations. The key policy change was that Mexico joined the

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in the year 1985. GATT membership

served as the anchor for the initial push of domestic and international trade reforms

during 1985-1988 that substantially liberalized the Mexican economy. From 1985 to

1990, Mexico’s average import tariff rate fell from 24 percent to 13 percent, while the




                                                                                            32
import quota coverage ratio fell from 92 percent in 1985 to 20 percent in 1990. Along

the same lines, the new Law on Foreign Investment of 1989 represented a major

relaxation relative to the 1973 law, and a number of state-owned enterprises were

privatized during the years 1989-92. Import licensing continued to decline in importance

during the early 1990s.



       NAFTA treaty in 1994:

       In June of 1990, the United States and Mexico indicated their intention to extend

the Canada-US trade agreement to include Mexico, thus forming the North American

Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). After several years of negotiations, NAFTA was

finally ratified by the US Congress in November 1993 and implemented on January 1,

1994. The far-reaching changes sought by NAFTA were

       •      the gradual elimination of tariffs

       •      the abolishment of most non-tariff barriers

       •      the opening-up of government purchases

       •      the liberalization of foreign investment

       •      the elimination of barriers for service companies

       •      the promotion of competition within countries

       •      greater protection of intellectual property rights

       •      the creation of dispute settlement mechanisms



Among the important principles laid down in the NAFTA treaty are national treatment

and most-favored nation treatment (NAFTA Article 102). National treatment for goods



                                                                                        33
means that once goods have been imported into any NAFTA member country, they will

not be subject to discrimination (including by sub-federal governments). Most-favored

nation treatment implies that the signatories of NAFTA have to extend trading benefits to

each other equal to those accorded to any--that is, the most favored--non-NAFTA

country.

       Overall, two features of the NAFTA agreement stand out as particularly

important. First, Chapter 11 investment gives private investors the means to seek

arbitration against NAFTA governments. This means that private companies need not

rely on their own government to take up their case. Second, and more generally, by

signing the NAFTA treatment Mexico has further committed itself to the trade and FDI

liberalization policies it began in the mid-1980s. This “tying-one’s-own-hand” aspect of

NAFTA may be its single most important aspect, since it lowers the risk of policy

reversals, and is associated with less policy uncertainty more generally.



       1994 ‘Tequila’ Crisis and aftermath:

       In December of 1994, lax banking laws and a record fiscal deficit combined to

trigger the so-called ‘Tequila Crisis.’ As the exchange rate regime collapsed, the Peso

depreciated 123 percent vis a vis the dollar and GDP contracted by about 6 percent,

leaving Mexico in its worst recession since the 1930s. However, in contrast to earlier

crises, there was no major policy reversal in terms of Mexico’s trade and investment

policies—retrenchment essentially amounted to a moderate increase in import tariffs.

This was partly due to the NAFTA commitments, and partly because Mexico became a

member of the OECD in 1994 and a member of the new World Trade Organization in




                                                                                          34
1995. Mexico’s relatively steady policy course was also facilitated by a $50 billion aid

package from the United States.

       In 1996, the Mexican government further liberalized foreign direct investment by

opening areas for FDI that before were reserved for the Mexican government, such as

railways. In 1999, following the Asian financial crisis, some import tariffs were again

slightly raised, but compared to earlier protectionist responses to crises, the general scale

of these policies was fairly minor.




                                                                                           35
