                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              DEMOCRACY AND GLOBALIZATION

                                            Barry Eichengreen
                                             David Leblang

                                          Working Paper 12450
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12450


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Barry Eichengreen and David Leblang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Democracy and Globalization
Barry Eichengreen and David Leblang
NBER Working Paper No. 12450
August 2006
JEL No. F0, F00

                                           ABSTRACT


The connections between globalization and democracy are a classic question in international political
economy and a topic much debated in foreign policy circles. While the analytical literature is
extensive, few previous studies have acknowledged the possibility of bidirectional causality or
developed an instrumental variables strategy suitable for addressing it. We do so in this paper and
apply our approach to an extensive historical data set. The results suggest the existence of positive
relationships running both ways between globalization and democracy, though exceptions obtain at
particular times (during the Bretton Woods era) and places (in labor scarce economies).


Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.berkeley.edu

David Leblang
Department of Political Science
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO
leblang@colorado.edu
                                  Democracy and Globalization1
                                Barry Eichengreen and David Leblang
                                             July 2006


1. Introduction

         Democracy and globalization go hand in hand. So say those impressed by the

opening to the world economy of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe following

the demise of Soviet-led authoritarianism. And so say those impressed by the outward

orientation of Latin America since the wave of democratization that began in 1978.2

Insofar as free international transactions benefit society as a whole, democracy that

renders leaders more accountable to the citizenry should be conducive to the removal of

restrictions on such transactions.3 The democracy-globalization nexus is further

reinforced by positive feedback from economic and financial globalization to political

democratization. The exchange of goods and services is a conduit for the exchange of

ideas, and a more diverse stock of ideas encourages political competition.4 In financially

open economies, the government and central bank must be transparent in order to retain

the confidence of the markets, and transparency spells doom for autocratic regimes. So

say those impressed by how the difficulties of managing financial globalization spurred

the transition to a more open and competitive democratic system in Indonesia. As we



1
  University of California, Berkeley and University of Colorado, Boulder, respectively. We thank Charles
Boix, Ernesto Lopez-Cordoba, Chris Meissner, Kevin O’Rourke and Alan Taylor for help with data,
Sudarat Ananchotikul and Zane Kelly for excellent research assistance, and Marc Flandreau, Harold James,
and Helen Milner for comments.
2
  See for example Munoz (1994).
3
  See Garrett (2000) or Milner and Kubota (2005). This of course assumes the feasibility of side payments
to special interests that might be adversely affected; we return to this below.
4
  In the words of Dailami (2000, p.9), this is the idea that “countries more open to international capital
flows are also more open to offering political rights and civil liberties to their citizens.” American political
leaders are fond of making this point; Lopez-Cordova and Meissner (2005) provide some illustrative
quotations from statements by recent U.S. presidents. But the point has an esteemed political lineage, from
Kant (1795) to Huntington (1991) to Przeworski et al. (1996).


                                                       1
document in Figure 1, there have been upward trends in globalization and

democratization.5 Between 1975 and 2002, there was a quadrupling in the number of

democratic countries. Over the same period, global trade as a share of GDP rose from

7.7 to 19.5 per cent. The share of countries open to international capital flows, as

measured by the International Monetary Fund, rose from 25 to 38 per cent. Evidently

there is a powerful dynamic at work.

         Of course, every causal statement in the preceding paragraph could be

exaggerated or simply wrong. While one can point to cases like Central Europe where

economic opening was encouraged by political democratization, one can equally point to

cases like Bolivia and Peru where democratization has fueled a popular backlash against

opening to the rest of the world. Studies like that by Yu (2005) not only reject the

hypothesis that democratization leads to openness but in fact conclude in favor of the

opposite. Yu rationalizes his finding by observing that concentrated interests may be

better able to secure the imposition of protectionist policies in democratic political

systems where they are better represented. O’Rourke and Taylor (2005) argue similarly

on the basis of the Stolper-Samuelson theorem: in countries where labor is the scarce

factor of production, democratic reforms that raise labor’s leverage over policy will

encourage protectionism rather than opening to the rest of the world.6 Others suggest that

democratization will not result in working class support for globalization where domestic

distortions prevent the benefits of opening from trickling down to the poor. These



5
 The data underlying this figure are described below.
6
 Still others explain cases like Bolivia and Peru, where the working class appears disenchanted with
globalization, on the grounds that these economies are natural-resource rather than labor abundant and that
natural resources are more complementary with capital than labor (Perry and Olarreaga 2006). We will
provide some evidence relevant to this hypothesis below.


                                                     2
perspectives suggest that the relationship running from democracy to globalization is at

best ambiguous.

       The same point can be made about the relationship running from openness to

democratization. While it is possible to point to cases like Indonesia where economic

and financial opening and the difficulties of autocratic regimes in managing it helped to

precipitate a shift to democratization, again one can point to cases – here China is a case

in point – where economic and financial opening have not obviously undermined

autocratic control. Again some empirical work is consistent with this skepticism:

econometric studies by Bussmann (2002), Li and Reuveny (2003) and Rigobon and

Rodrik (2004) find either no impact of trade openness on democracy or even a negative

relationship. Authors like Dailami (2000) caution that capital account liberalization may

limit the ability of governments to deploy redistributive taxation, regulation, and risk-

sharing policies, thereby weakening support for democratic forms of governance. That

there have been parallel trends in the direction of political democratization and economic

globalization in the last quarter century is undeniable. But this does not mean that the

relationship is stable or general. And correlation does not mean causation.

       Still, for many people the idea that there are causal connections between

globalization and democracy is intuitively appealing. Many social scientists appear to

harbor the feeling that such relationships exist. Maybe the data just require additional

analysis. There are many more country cases than the examples in our lead paragraph;

this suggests teasing out the causal connections using a treatment-effects approach to

compare cases where there were changes in openness and changes in democratization

with cases where there were not. The preceding argument suggesting the existence of a




                                              3
bi-directional relationship between globalization and democracy points to the need for an

empirical strategy that accounts for the possibility of two-way causality. And there have

been previous waves of democratization and globalization; looking over a longer period

may be useful for uncovering the underlying relationship and establishing the generality –

or otherwise – of the process.

       In reality, there has been a great deal of work on these topics, including not a few

classics. The idea that globalization promotes the diffusion of democratic ideas goes

back to Kant (1795). Authors such as Schumpeter (1950), Lipset (1959) and Hayek

(1960) argued that free trade and capital flows, by enhancing the efficiency of resource

allocation, raise incomes and lead to the economic development that fosters demands for

democracy. Within modern political science, the connections between economic and

political liberalization is one of the foundational topics of the subfield of international

political economy.

       Still, none of this previous work has satisfactorily addressed the substantive and

methodological issues we raise above. Most studies look only at one of the two causal

connections, from democracy to globalization or vice versa. Since they are not

concerned with two-way causality, sometimes they do not even acknowledge the

existence of an endogeneity problem, much less develop an appropriate instrumental

variables strategy for dealing with it. They rarely acknowledge that democratization has

different dimensions and that economic globalization entails both the globalization of




                                               4
trade and the globalization of finance.7 Few studies take advantage of the fact that there

have been prior waves of globalization and democratization.

        These observations provide the point of departure for our own analysis of

democracy and globalization. We consider two dimensions of globalization, analyzing

the determinants and effects of both trade liberalization and capital account liberalization.

We similarly consider several dimensions of democratization, both as cause and effect.

We estimate these relationships using an instrumental variables (IV) strategy that we

think is a step forward relative to previous work.

        To anticipate, the findings support the hypothesis of a positive two-way

relationship between democracy and globalization. Not unlike the assertions of our

opening paragraph, it does in fact appear that the two variables positively influence one

another, with reinforcement running in both directions. However, these effects are not

uniform across time and space; in particular, the impact of democracy on globalization

varies with resource endowments and global economic conditions. General conclusions,

not surprisingly, remain elusive. But the evidence here is a start.



2. Literature

        Appendix Table 1 summarizes the recent literature on the impact of democracy on

globalization. In a relatively early contribution, Grofman and Gray (2000) examined the

impact on trade openness (imports plus exports as a share of GDP) of the number of years

a country was under authoritarian rule. They report a negative effect of authoritarianism

on trade. Giavazzi and Tabellini (2005), in comparison, consider a larger country sample

7
  It should of course include the globalization of labor, although in the most recent wave governments and
their constituents have been reluctant to accommodate the pressures of globalization that arise in this
domain.


                                                     5
and a different measure of democracy, drawn from the Polity data set, but report the same

positive effect of democracy on trade liberalization.8 However, the study by Yu (2005)

noted above shows that substituting a still larger country sample and minor changes in

specification can reverse this result. Finally, O’Rourke and Taylor (2005) utilize

historical data from the pre-1913 wave of globalization.9 They argue that

democratization that broadens the extent of the franchise should encourage trade

openness in labor-abundant countries, since labor, which now votes, benefits from trade

liberalization, but discourage it in labor-scarce countries, following standard Stolpher-

Samuelson logic. Including a democracy variable and its interaction with a measure of

the land/labor ratio produces ordinary least squares regression results consistent with this

supposition.

         Importantly from the present point of view, none of these studies employs an

instrumental variables strategy. From this point of view the recent study by Milner and

Kubota (2005) is a step forward. The authors measure trade openness in a number of

ways, including the unweighted average statutory tariff rate and the Sachs-Warner index

of economic openness.10 They similarly measure democracy in a number of ways: the

now-standard Polity index, Geddes’ (1999) data on autocracy, and Przeworksi et al.’s

(2000) dichotomous index of democratic regimes. While most of their estimates are by

ordinary least squares (they argue on a priori grounds that reverse causality running from

trade openness to the political regime is unlikely to be important), they also report some


8
  Precise procedures followed in studies utilizing information from the Polity data set vary, but typically
they follow Gurr et al. (1990) in combining information on the competitiveness of the process for selecting
the chief executive, the openness of that process, institutional constrains on the chief executive’s decision
making power, the competitiveness of political participation, and the existence of binding rules on political
participation.
9
  Which limits their analysis to three dozen countries.
10
   As constructed originally by Sachs and Warner (1995) and updated by Wacziarg and Horn Welch (2003).


                                                     6
instrumental variables estimates. The average age of the party system and the level of

secondary school completion are used as instruments for democracy. While only one

regression is reported (tariff rates regressed on the Polity-based measure of democracy),

the previously-reported positive effect continues to hold.

         A parallel strand of work looks at the impact of democracy on financial openness.

Quinn (2000), using democracy and autocracy indicators from the Polity data set and his

own measure of capital account openness, finds that democracies are more likely to

remove capital controls. Brune and Guisinger (2003), using an alternative measure of the

dependent variable in conjunction with the democracy indicator of Przeworski et al.

(2000), similarly report a positive impact of democratic openness on financial openness,

especially when the democratic government in power is “capital friendly” and “right

leaning.” Again, however, neither study acknowledges the possibility of endogeneity.11

         Appendix Table 2 summarizes recent empirical research on the effect of

economic and financial globalization on democracy. Bussmann (2001), Li and Reuveny

(2003), Rigobon and Rodrik (2004), and Giavazzi and Tabellini (2005) all consider the

impact of trade openness on a Polity-based measure of democratization. Li and Reuveny

report a negative impact, but questions can be raised about the adequacy of their method

of dealing with the endogeneity of trade, which is by lagging the independent variable.

Rigobon and Rodrik (2004), invoking identification through heteroskedasticity, similarly

find a negative impact. Bussmann and Giavazzi-Tabellini, in contrast, find no impact of

trade openness on democracy. Giavazzi and Tabellini rely on a difference in differences

methodology; they compare countries where there were transitions to or from greater


11
   This despite the fact that Quinn acknowledges the possibility of reserve causality from international
financial liberalization to subsequent democratic reversals.


                                                      7
openness with countries where the regime remained unchanged instead of attempting to

control explicitly for endogeneity. Bussmann instruments her trade openness variable,

but questions can be raised about whether her instruments -- GDP per capita, investment

and government consumption – satisfy the exogeneity and exclusion restrictions.12 Rudra

(2005) argues that the effect of trade openness on democratization is positive but

contingent – that one finds a positive impact only in countries with high or rising levels

of social spending (where there exists a social safety net).13 Papaioannou and Siourounis

(2005) limit their sample to initially non-democratic countries and conclude that trade

openness plays a significant role in driving transitions to democracy.

         A relatively sophisticated study in this vein is Lopez-Cordova and Meissner

(2005), who use the gravity model to obtain instruments for trade. They regress

democracy on fitted values of trade where trade is a function of population and the

distance between trading partners. They also use historical data starting in 1870. In

contrast to most of the studies just described, they find a positive impact of trade

openness on democratization. This positive relationship is not limited to particular

“waves” of democratization. Yu (2005) estimates similar relationships over a shorter

period and obtains similar results.

         We are aware of only two studies touching on the impact of international financial

openness on democratization. Relying on timing for identification, Quinn (2001) finds

that financial openness increases the probability of transitions away from democracy.



12
   For example, there is a large literature in which it is argued that income levels (GDP per capita, in other
words) is affected by democratization.
13
   We find this result a bit perplexing. The positive conditioning effect of the existence of a social safety
net would be easier to understand in a regression of trade openness on political variables (rather than the
opposite of what we describe here), on Rodrik (1998) grounds (that, in more open economies, societies
demand better-developed social safety nets).


                                                       8
Rudra (2005) finds the opposite: a positive relationship but one that is again contingent

on rising levels of social spending (paralleling her argument about the contingent effects

of trade openness).

        In sum, a number of studies find evidence of a positive relationship running from

democracy to globalization, although this conclusion is not unanimous and questions can

be raised about methodology and therefore about the robustness of findings. As for the

impact of trade openness on democracy, early studies generally reported no significant

relationship, while more recent work finds in favor of a positive link. Work on the

impact of financial openness on democracy is too scanty to support firm conclusions.



3. Identification

        Research on the connections between democracy and economic openness is only

as convincing as its identification strategy. We therefore start with a discussion of the

instrumental variables used in our analysis.

        Studies of the impact of trade openness on democracy have utilized the gravity

model to identify the exogenous component of trade. The gravity model looks to country

size on the grounds that smaller countries produce a narrower range of inputs and outputs

and hence benefit from exchanging these with the rest of the world, and to distance from

a country’s trading partners as a measure of transport costs. If it has shown nothing else,

the resulting literature has shown that size and distance are robustly related to trade. Both

variables are plausibly exogenous over the annual horizon that is the focus of our

analysis.14


14
  Alesina and Spolaore (2003) suggest reasons why trade may feed back to country size in the intermediate
and long run.


                                                   9
         A question is whether they also satisfy the exclusion restriction for valid

instruments. We are not aware of arguments linking country size to democratization.

Casual empiricism does not point in one direction or the other.15 Similarly, it is not

obvious why a country’s distance from the world’s major markets should affect its

political regime. Once again there are examples pointing in both directions.16 All this is

consistent with the idea that the basic arguments of the gravity model are plausible

instruments for identifying the exogenous component of trade.17

         One strand of literature on the political economy of capital controls argues by way

of analogy with merchandise trade: small countries have the greatest difficulty in

producing a diversified portfolio of financial assets and hence the greatest incentive to

engage in financial trade.18 Another appeals to theories of optimal taxation, arguing that

where the inflation tax is higher and fiscal imbalances are more severe the authorities will

have a greater tendency to tax capital imports.19 We are not aware of convincing

evidence that democracies have lower (or higher) inflation rates or smaller (or larger)

budget deficits; we take this as suggesting that inflation and budget deficits plausibly

satisfy the exogeneity condition. Similarly, we have not identified a literature in which

these variables independently affect the political regime and hence violate the exclusion

criterion. A final strand of literature considers global determinants of countries’ choice
15
   For every United States there is a China, and for every El Salvador there is a Togo.
16
   For every New Zealand there is a Turkmenistan.
17
   One may worry about the possibility that who a country trades with is a function of its political regime.
Hence if the distance variable is taken as a weighted average of the distance to a country’s principal trading
partners, the resulting measure will have an endogenous component. We therefore compute this variable as
the distance from a country to the world’s other markets (weighting distance to each individual country by
the latter’s share in world trade rather than by its share in the subject country’s trade). One may also worry
that country size is endogenous with respect to the political regime (democracy comes to Czechoslovakia
and the country splits into two). The response would be that such changes in country size are heavily
dictated by historical factors and in the short run are few and far between.
18
   See Martin and Rey (2005) and Driessen and Laeven (2005). The second pair of authors emphasizes the
advantages of financial trade not just for small countries but for small developing countries in particular.
19
   See e.g. Grilli (1995).


                                                     10
of international financial regime, pointing to peer effects (capital account openness is

more likely when many other countries have opened in previous periods) and systemic-

stability effects (capital account openness is less likely when there have been a large

number of currency crises in previous periods).20 Both timing and the small country

assumption, which is appropriate for most of our observations, support the maintained

hypothesis of the exogeneity of these instruments. And it is not clear why these variables

should affect the political regime other than via policies toward the capital account (in

other words, they plausibly satisfy the exclusion restriction).

         We make use of all of these literatures to identify instruments for capital account

policies. Our consolidated list of candidates for instrumental variables thus includes

country size, inflation, the budget deficit, the number of other countries with capital

controls, and the number of other countries experiencing currency crises.21

         The literature on democratization provides potential instruments for the political

regime. A long line of authors have argued that democratic political institutions arise in

an environment where a relatively affluent and homogeneous populace has experience

with or exposure to participatory politics. This observation points to the connection

between democracy and the general level of economic and social development, as

proxied by, inter alia, per capita wealth or income.22 But we cannot use wealth or per

capital income as instruments for democracy as they do not satisfy the exclusion

restriction – that is, they almost certainly has an independent impact on the propensity to

engage in commercial and financial trade. Recent studies of democratization do however

20
   See the work by Simmons and Elkins (2004).
21
   All lagged, as they typically are in empirical studies of the incidence and determinants of capital controls.
22
   This relationship has attracted an enormous amount of attention over the years – to the extent that it has
its own name, “modernization theory” – and is in resurgence thanks, in part, to the contributions of
Acemoglu and Robinson (2005). Precursors range from Lipset (1959) to Dahl (1989) to Huntington (1991).


                                                      11
point to other factors playing a causal role in the emergence of democracy. Sachs and

Warner (2001) and Ross (2001) have focused on countries’ natural resource endowments,

arguing that greater reliance on mineral exports leads to concentrated power, reducing the

probability that dictatorships will become democratic. But again there may be reasons to

worry about the exclusion restriction; countries specializing in the production of natural

resources may be more inclined to trade, insofar as they depend and/or can afford to

import a range of other goods.

         Other approaches may be more promising. For example, Przeworski et al. (2000)

argue that transitions to democracy are more likely in former British colonies, where

citizens or their forbearers had positive experience with democratic practice, and when

there an increasing number of other countries in the international system are also

democratic. They also argue that democratic transitions are less likely in countries with a

history of frequent transitions between democracy and dictatorship, where experience

with democracy has been less satisfactory.23 This variable is also likely to satisfy the

exclusion restriction for a valid instrument in an equation explaining economic and

financial openness; we know of no study that has demonstrated a link running from

regime transitions, constitutional age or systematic democratization to globalization. 24

These variables are also plausibly exogenous with respect to economic and financial

openness: only with effort can one can construct an argument relating trade or capital

23
   Country studies point in the same direction; see McLean (2006). While cast in terms of government
quality, La Porta, et al (1999) also find a positive relationship between British colonial heritage and
democracy; conversely, they find a negative relationship between socialist legal heritage and democracy.
In addition to the findings of Przeworski, et al, evidence supporting the hypothesis that political stability is
conducive to the emergence of democracy is provided by Boix and Stokes (2003) and Epstein, et al (2006),
although the former measure stability in terms of the age of the country’s constitution and the latter
conceive of stability in terms of the country’s prior transitions to dictatorship.
24
   The literature studying the “democratic peace” finds that democracies trade more with one another; this,
however, is not the same as suggesting that a system comprised of more democracies will have an ever
larger volume of international trade.


                                                      12
market liberalization today to prior experiences with dictatorship, constitutional age, or

colonial experience.

        Again, we draw on all these studies in what follows. Our instrument list for

democracy is comprised of the number of other democracies in the international system,

the number of prior transitions to dictatorship, the country’s constitutional age, and

British colonial heritage.



4. Data

        We examine the relationship between democracy and globalization in as large a

sample as possible using the longest historical time series available. We use data on trade,

capital controls, democracy and the requisite instruments annually for the period 1870-

2000. Our sample broadens over time as a result of the existence of a growing number of

independent states and greater data availability. The sample of countries for which

comparable data on international trade exist begins with 14 in 1870, doubles by the end

of World War I (to 28), doubles again by the end of World War II (to 56), and reaches a

maximum of 156 by 1998. Our sample for capital controls expands in analogous fashion.

        We measure trade openness as imports plus exports as a percentage of gross

domestic product.25 As a robustness check we also employ the dichotomous measure of

trade liberalization constructed by Sachs and Warner (1995) and extended by Wacziarg

and Welch (2004). Sachs and Warner classify a country as closed if non-tariff barriers

cover 40 per cent or more of trade, average tariff rates are 40 per cent or more, the black


25
  Our primary sources for import and export data are the compilations published by Mitchell (various
dates) and Banks (various dates). Gross domestic product data comes primarily from Maddison (2001),
supplemented by Mitchell (various dates) and Banks (various dates). Specifics regarding the creation of
the trade openness and GDP series are contained in the appendix.


                                                   13
market exchange rate depreciated by 20 per cent or more relative to the official exchange

rate, or a socialist economy existed. This measure is available from 1950-2000 and

covers 150 plus countries.26

        Capital controls are measured in the manner of the International Monetary Fund’s

Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (EAER),

supplemented with historical sources. EAER seeks to capture whether there are explicit

legal restrictions on capital transitions. The IMF is the source for this variable from

1950; for the period 1870-1950 we rely on the coding of Eichengreen and Bordo (2003).

        For democracy we employ the dichotomous measure proposed by Przeworski et

al. (1990), who argue that a country should be regarded as democratic if governments are

chosen in contested elections. This means that a country is coded as democratic if it has

elections where more than one party competes and it is not the case that the same party

always wins. The authors provide data for 150 countries covering 1950-1990; Boix and

Rosato (2001) extend these data backward to 1800 while Cheibub and Ghandi (2005)

update them through 2000.

        An alternative is the age or maturity of the political regime. The dichotomous

measure would code, say, Britain and Croatia as equally democratic (both would be

coded “1”), notwithstanding the fact that the two countries are fundamentally different in

terms of their cumulated experience with open political competition. One way of

quantifying these differences is by constructing a measure of the length of time a country

has been a democracy. Our measure, “Age of Democracy,” counts for each country i at

time t the number of uninterrupted year up to time t that country i has been democratic.

26
  We are aware of the critique that the Sachs-Warner measure is dominated by the black-market-premium
component. As such, it is probably best interpreted as capturing a combination of trade and exchange
restrictions (in which case it is, however, still relevant to our questions).


                                                 14
         We also employ data from the POLITY project, which codes countries’ level of

democracy as a function of institutional rules. It is less concerned with turnover per se

than Przeworski et al. For sake of comparison we construct a dummy variable coded one

if the POLITY score is strictly positive and zero otherwise. We also use the POLITY

data set to create a measure of age of democracy in a manner similar to that described

above.

         POLITY is also the source of information on constitutional age. POLITY defines

constitutional change as occurring either when there is a political transition or when the

absolute value of the score changes by at least three points. This allows for constitutional

changes in both democracies and dictatorships.



5. Methods

         Estimation of instrumental variables models on a large sample of countries

observed over more than a century raises the prospect of heteroscedasticity and serially

correlated errors. Heteroscedasticity renders standard errors generated via textbook IV

inconsistent.27 A framework for dealing with heteroscedasticity of unknown form is

provided by the Generalized Methods of Moments (GMM). We therefore estimate our

IV models by GMM and report Newey-West standard errors, which are robust to

heteroscedastic and serially correlated residuals.28


27
   Which would prevent us from drawing valid inferences. Utilizing robust (or heteroscedasticity-
consistent) standard errors only partially solves the problem as IV estimates generated by OLS are
inefficient (Baum, Schaffer and Stillman 2003).
28
   The GMM estimator is more efficient in the face of heteroscedasticity and serial correlation than standard
IV estimation and, if the errors are neither heteroscedastic nor serially correlated, it fares no worse. A
detailed discussion of the implementation of the Generalized Methods of Moments estimator is contained
in Hayashi (2000) who develops the IV estimator within the context of GMM. In addition, several key
tests important for identification within the context of instrumental variables estimation can be
implemented within the context of GMM estimation, again as described by Hayashi.


                                                     15
        While we utilize the literatures in economics and political science to identity our

lists of candidate instrumental variables, as described above in Section 3, we use

statistical tests to verify their relevance (strength) and exogeneity (that they satisfy the

exclusion restriction). Consider first the question of relevance and a simple regression

model of the form:

        Y = α + βX + ε                                                       (1)

where Y is the dependent variable (for example, trade) and X is the independent variable

of interest that is thought to be endogenously determined (for example, democracy). An

instrument for X—a variable Z (for example, colonial heritage)—is relevant if the

correlation between X and Z is non-zero. (In our present example, Przeworski et al. 2000

suggest that colonial heritage should be correlated with democracy.) But if the

correlation between X and Z is small, then Z is a weak instrument and inferences based

on IV estimation are likely biased. We rely on two tests to evaluate the relevance (or

strength) of our instruments. First, we calculate an F-test for the exclusion of the

instrument(s) based on the first stage regression and consider our instrument(s) valid if

the F-statistic exceeds ten (the threshold suggested by Staiger and Stock 1997). Second,

we use the Cragg-Donald test of the null that the model is underidentified—that Z does

not sufficiently identify X. Only if the instrument(s) satisfy both tests do we proceed.

        One approach to “solving” the instrument-relevance problem would be to utilize

all of the variables identified in Section 3 as potential instruments for democracy. Then

we would surely obtain a strong correlation between X and these Z’s. But this kitchen-

sink approach might well violate the assumption that the instruments Z are orthogonal—

that is, uncorrelated—with the error term ε. The more instruments we use, the more




                                              16
likely that some of them will have an independent impact on the dependent variable. If Z

is not orthogonal to ε then the model is overidentified. Hansen (1982) has developed a

test of overidentifying restrictions in a GMM context—Hansen’s J statistic—which we

use to test the null hypothesis that the model is not overidentified.

        Satisfying the requirements of instrument relevance and exogeneity is especially

challenging in the context of this paper, as we are seek instruments that not only are valid

over time and across country but that are also robust across various definitions of

openness and democracy. Our approach is to start with a comprehensive set of

instruments—those identified as theoretically relevant in the literature discussed in

Section 3. Predictably, these lists generally satisfy the instrument relevance requirement

but fail the test for overidentification. Using the discussion in Section 3, which points to

some potential instruments as more plausibly exogenous than others, we then move to a

reduced set of instruments and reexamine the relevant test statistics. The results reported

below are based on these more parsimonious instrument lists.29

        Two of our dependent variables – one measure of democracy and our measure of

capital controls—are dichotomous. The standard approach in this instance, that of

estimating a logit or probit model, is not appropriate; at least we are unaware of an IV

estimator for a dichotomous dependent variable when the error term is serially correlated

and heteroscedastic.30 Instead, we therefore estimate linear probability models. This




29
   These procedures did not produce a magic instrument list; that is, we found that different Z variables
served as valid instruments depending on the definitions of globalization and democracy used and the time
period examined. This is not surprising: globalization and democratization were plausibly determined by
different factors during 1870-1913, for example, as compared with the period 1970-2000.
30
   Similarly, statistical tests for instrument relevance and exogeneity analogous to those discussed above
have yet to be developed in the context of logit or probit models.


                                                    17
means that parameter estimates cannot be interpreted in terms of probabilities and

predicted values may fall outside the zero-one interval.31

         Finally, we include period fixed effects in all our specifications, in the form of

dummy variables for the interwar, Bretton Woods, and post-Bretton Woods periods (the

gold standard period being the omitted alternative).32 Period dummies pick up the

possibility that there may be “waves” of democratization (or trade opening, or capital

account liberalization) occurring simultaneously, at particular points in time in multiple

countries, for reasons beyond those for which we can control.33 Our decision to specify

the period fixed effects in this way reflects our reading of the historical literatures on

globalization and democracy, much of which adopts this periodization.



6. Results

         Table 1 reports results for the impact of the dichotomous measure of democracy

on trade openness. Controlling for other determinants of trade highlighted by the gravity

model, the results suggest that democracies trade more than dictatorships.34 This holds

for the entire 1870-2000 period as well as for the gold standard era, the interwar period,




31
   Note that the statistics we report for instrument relevance and exogeneity are heteroscedasticity robust so
the use of GMM in the context of a discrete dependent variable does not adversely affect these important
statistical tests.
32
   When we consider the Sachs-Warner measure of trade openness, since exists only from 1950, we
distinguish only the Bretton Woods and post-Bretton Woods periods.
33
   Another way of thinking about these period fixed effects are that they correct for the possibility of
changes in the structural relationship over time.
34
   Note also that the control variables are well determined and enter with plausible signs. Greater distance
from the principal markets leads to less trade; larger countries trade, more but with an elasticity closer to
zero than one; more populous countries trade more; richer countries trade a smaller share of GDP, other
things equal, reflecting the presence of a larger service sector.


                                                     18
the Bretton Woods years, and the Post Bretton Woods period alike. The effect of

democracy across each of these periods is positive and statistically significant.35

         When we instead measure the political regime by the age of democracy, as in

Table 2, we find a similar pattern: more mature democracies are more open to trade. We

obtain this result in the full sample and for each subperiod.36 Note that this is a

generalization of the result found previously by O’Rourke and Taylor (2006) for the gold

standard era using ordinary least squares.

         Tables 3 and 4 report analogous estimates for financial openness, where the

dependent variable equals one in the presence of capital controls. These results again

support the idea of a positive relationship running from democracy to globalization: that

is, democracies are more likely to remove capital controls. We find this for the full

sample and each subperiod regardless of the measure of democracy employed, with one

exception. Under Bretton Woods, democracies were more likely than dictatorships to

implement capital controls. (This positive impact is statistically significant using the

dichotomous measure of democracy, as in Table 3, but not when using the age of

democracy, as in Table 4.37) This finding would appear to reflect the tendency for

advanced democracies that were part of the Bretton Woods system of pegged exchange

rates to use capital controls to free up monetary policy to serve constituent demands, the

idea at the time being that there was a stable tradeoff between inflation and

35
   As discussed above, to properly identify the effect of democracy we had to rely on different sets of
instruments in different equations. In some cases, like that of post Bretton Woods period, when we used
the complete set of instruments we were unable to reject the null of overidentification at the 0.05 percent
level. Dropping instruments—either total number of other democracies or former British Colony—from
this model did allow us to reject the null of overidentification but resulted in weak instruments (a F statistic
below 10).
36
   These models are better identified from a statistical point of view: the specification for each subperiod
passes tests for instrument relevance and exogeneity.
37
   This result should, however, be interpreted with caution, since the models in question fails the test for
overidentification.


                                                      19
unemployment that could be exploited by national monetary authorities. When

democracies allowed their exchange rates to float following the breakdown Bretton

Woods, controls were not longer required for monetary policy autonomy.38

         Tables 5 through 8 complete the picture, with evidence on the impact of trade and

financial openness on democracy. Consider first the results for the impact of trade

openness on democracy (Tables 5 and 6). With a single exception—the effect of trade on

the continuous measure of democracy in the Bretton Woods era—we find that trade

openness promotes democracy.39 The results (in Tables 7 and 8) for the impact of

financial openness on democracy are not as strong but still point in the same direction.

Using the dichotomous measure of democracy, we find that capital controls made

democracy less likely during both the interwar and post-Bretton Woods periods, although

we do not find a statistically significant effect when we pool all years. When we use the

age of democracy (Table 8) we find that capital controls have a statistically significant

and negative effect for all periods except Bretton Woods.40

         In Table 9 we include proxies for these two dimensions of globalization at the

same time. Both retain their expected signs but they display different patterns in terms of

individual statistical significance depending on how democracy is measure. Given that

both are instrumented using a common set of exogenous variables the lack of individual

38
   In addition, the idea that central banks could affect the equilibrium level of unemployment fell out of
fashion as a result of accumulated experience and the growing intellectual sway of the Phelps-Friedman
expectations-augmented Phillips Curve, which presumably reduced the value that some central banks
attached to policy autonomy.
39
   With one exception we use a single instrument for trade in each specification. We do this because the
inclusion of any of the other gravity-motivated variables (population, area, economic size) fails the
overidentification test. The Bretton Woods sample in Table 6 includes both distance and area because
distance by itself resulted in a situation where the model failed the test for instrument relevance (the F-
statistic was 5.35 using just distance).
40
   Again, however, caution is in order as our instruments for the sample as a whole (1870-2000) fall below
the cut-off of 10 (F=8.38) yet the Cragg-Donald test allows us to reject the null hypothesis that the model is
underidentified.


                                                     20
significance is not surprising; a chi-squared test for their joint significant (at the bottom

of Table 9) shows that they are jointly significant at the 0.05 level. This evidence is

supportive of the idea that both aspects of globalization matter for democracy.41

        In sum, we find evidence of positive relationships running in both directions

between globalization and democracy.



7. Robustness

        It is important to establish the robustness of such findings. We study robustness

in several ways: we consider alternative measures of our dependent and independent

variables; we use alternative econometric set-ups; and, perhaps most importantly, we

consider alternative instruments.42

        Alternative measures. Given the existence of alternative codings of political

regimes, we substituted the POLITY measure of democracy for that of Przeworski et al.

We construct a dummy variable coded one if the POLITY score is strictly positive and

zero otherwise. Using these data we also construct an alternative measure of the age of

democracy.43




41
   When we examine this relationship across subperiods we find a similar pattern for the interwar period
and the post-Bretton Wood period. We found no statistically significant effect of trade and capital
openness on democracy during the Bretton Woods period (and could not identify instruments that satisfied
both relevance and exogeneity concerns). We did not estimate a similar model for the gold standard
because no country had capital controls during that period.
42
   To avoid a proliferation of tables, we describe but do not print the tables associated with all of the
following robustness tests. The additional results are available from the authors on request.
43
   The dichotomous measures of democracy from Przeworski and POLITY agree 88 per cent of the time;
the major disagreements arise when countries have competitive electoral systems yet do not yet meet the
suffrage requirement that is part of the Przeworski, et al definition. The correlation between the age of
democracy measures is 81 per cent.


                                                   21
         When we substitute the POLITY measure for the Przeworski et al measure, we

obtain results substantively and statistically similar to those reported in Section 5.44 This

is true when we use democracy both as an independent and a dependent variable.

         Similarly, when we substitute the Sachs-Warner measure of openness for the trade

share, we continue to find that democracy has a positive impact on trade openness. This

is true for both the continuous and dichotomous measures of democracy and both with

and without geographical instruments (Table 10). Since the Sachs-Warner measure is

only available since 1950, this test also entailed limiting the analysis to the second half of

the 20th century. We also therefore reestimated the relationship using the export-plus-

import share on this shorter period; again the results carry over.

         Alternative econometric specifications. As a further robustness check we

included a set of n-1 country dummy variables in the trade and age-of-democracy models

estimated over the 1870-2000 period.45 With the exception of the impact of capital

controls on the age of democracy model (Table 8), our results are unchanged, although

some of the point estimates are now smaller than before.46

         We also estimated the models using standard instrumental variables, OLS, and

probit-based specifications. Results using these techniques suggested the same patterns as

reported above and even higher levels of statistical significance than above. For example,




44
   There is an exception: when we use the dichotomous measure of democracy based on the POLITY score
we no longer find a statistically significant impact of capital controls on the probability of democracy (the
parallel regression is column 2 of table 3). These results are available upon request.
45
   Adding country dummies meant that we had to drop the British colonial origin instrument.
46
   We did not include country fixed effects in the capital controls or dichotomous democracy models
because there are a number of countries where the dependent variable of interest (democracy or capital
controls) does not change over time. In those cases the inclusion of country dummies would result in a
large number of cases being “perfectly explained.”


                                                     22
we found a statistically significant and negative relationship between capital controls and

democracy using instrumental variables probit.47

         Another robustness check was to focus on transitions to and from democracy

rather than on the political regime at a point in time. We estimated a Markov transition

model of the impact of globalization on democratization. This allows us to ask the

question: conditional on a country being a democracy at time t-1, does globalization

increase (or decrease) the probability of a transition to dictatorship? It allows us to

analyze within a single empirical model both the probability that a country will undergo a

political transition and the probability that the existing regime will remain stable.

         Denote democracy for country i at time t as Dit and the indicator of globalization

in country I at time t as Git.48 We can write the Markov transition model as a probit:

         P( Dit ) = Φ{α 0 + α1Git −1 + β 0 Dit −1 + β1 Dit −1Git −1}

where P(Dit) is the probability that the country will be democratic, and                     is the

cumulative normal distribution. When a country is a dictatorship at time t-1 (Dit-1=1), the

impact of globalization on the probability of democracy at time t is given by                     1.   A

statistically significant positive (negative) value of            1    is interpreted as evidence that

globalization increases (decreases) the probability of a transition to democracy. Likewise,

if a country is democratic at time t-1, a positive (negative) sum                 1+   1   suggests that

globalization raises (reduces) democratic stability – that a country that is democratic at

time t-1 will remain so at time at t. Hence each model of Markov results have two

columns. The first one (denoted ) contains the coefficients when democracy at t-1 is

equal to zero and can be interpreted in terms of transitions to/from democracy. The
47
   This is largely due to the fact that those models do not allow for standard errors that are auto-correlation
consistent.
48
   For the ease of exposition we ignore other independent variables that may influence democracy.


                                                       23
second (denoted + ) reports the coefficients when democracy at t-1 is equal to one and

can be interpreted in terms of democratic stability.49

        The results, in Table 11, are consistent with earlier results. For trade openness,

we find that autocracies that are more open to trade are likely to remain autocracies (the

negative coefficient under        in column 1) and that democracies that are open to trade are

likely to remain democracies (the positive coefficient under              +   in column 1). For

financial openness (the second set of columns in table 11), we find no impact of capital

controls on democracy but find that democracies that are closed to capital flows are likely

to become autocracies.50 When we include both measures of globalization, in the third

set of columns, the results become weaker.51 These results there do not suggest

consistent impact on the probability of a transition to democracy, but they do point to the

conclusion that economically and financially open economies are more likely to remain

democratic.



8. Contingent Effects

        The literature suggests a number of directions in which one might want to extend

these results. For example, O’Rourke and Taylor (2005) suggest that the impact of

democratization on openness should be contingent a country’s factor endowment:

democratization increases the likelihood that policy reflects the interests of workers, who

now vote, and workers will prefer trade openness in labor abundant countries. It is


49
   The standard errors in the + column are based on a Wald test of the joint significance of the two terms.
A complication in estimating the Markov model is that we have two endogenous variables: the measure of
globalization and its interaction with lagged democracy. As the value of the interaction term is a function
of the endogenous globalization variable, we treat both the globalization variable and its interaction with
lagged democracy as endogenous and instrument both of them.
50
   Again, the language here is stretched as we are estimating linear probability models.
51
   Due to collinearity resulting from a common set of instruments.


                                                    24
assumed that the impact of opening on relative returns to factors of production can be

predicted from the Stolper-Samuelson theorem, and that factor owners vote their interests.

It is further assumed that prior to democratization, which enfranchises labor, decision

making is controlled by large landowners and wealthy capitalists.52

        Following O’Rourke and Taylor, we therefore interact democracy with the

land/labor ratio.53 Again we use the fitted value of democracy from the first-stage

regression and include democracy by itself as well as the interaction term in the second

stage. Results are in Table 12.54 While we continue to get a positive coefficient for the

impact of democracy on trade, we also get negative coefficient on the interaction of

democracy with the land/labor ratio. The Stolper-Samuelson interpretation, with two

factors and two sectors, would be that where labor is the relatively scarce factor, it is

landowners who benefit from opening, both relatively and absolutely, and labor when

enfranchised is better able to vote its pocketbook. We find this pattern for the full period

1870-2000. We find it also for the 1870-1913 period on which O’Rourke and Taylor

focus (although their estimates, unlike ours, are by ordinary least squares) and for the

other subperiods as well. The individual coefficients are not always significant; again,

this is a consequence of using an identical set of instruments to identify both of these
                              2
endogenous variables; a           test shows them to be jointly significant.55



52
   Verdier (1994) uses this framework to examine historical trade policy in Britain, France and the United
States. Dutt and Mishra (2002) also employ a similar model and apply it trade policy across a broad cross-
section of countries.
53
   We follow O’Rourke and Taylor and standardize the land/labor ratio to mean zero. We obtained data for
the land-labor ratio from O’Rourke and Taylor for the period prior to 1939 and from the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators for the period after 1960.
54
   Note that in this model and those that follow we treat both democracy and the interaction of democracy
with the land-labor ratio (and the capital-labor ratio, below) as endogenous.
55
   That the endogenous variables are correlated with one another by construction adds to the problem of
having sufficient independent variation.


                                                   25
        In Table 13 we add the capital/labor-democracy interaction.56 Capital stocks,

even more historical capital stocks, tend to be measured with error; it is thus not

surprising that individual significance levels are now lower. But for the full period,

democracy continues to display its positive association with trade openness. Its

interaction with the land/labor ratio is again negative, while its interaction with the

capital/labor ratio is positive.57 The three variables are jointly significant at conventional

confidence levels.58 This begins to look like a specific-factors model in which land and

labor are used in one sector (“agriculture”) while capital and labor are used in the other

(“industry”). Landowners and capitalists have opposing preferences. With which one

labor sides depends on its consumption basket, and how effectively it makes its

preferences felt depends on the extent of democratization.59 We obtain the same results

for the interwar period and the Bretton Woods years (but not for the post-Bretton Woods

period, when democracy is insignificant and its interaction with the land/labor ratio is

positive, not negative).

        Where capital is the relatively abundant factor it should prefer the removal of

capital controls, which opens up opportunities for investing abroad, while where it is the

relatively scarce factor it should prefer a closed capital account in order to avoid having

its rate of return bid down by capital inflows. In a Heckscher-Ohlin framework, this idea

builds on the well-known isomorphism between trade flows and factor flows (Mundell


56
   The models in Table 13 (and Table 14 below) include three endogenous variables: democracy and its
interaction with the land/labor and capital/labor ratios.
57
   In other words, that the capital stock was not included in the previous table doesn’t appear to have
affected anything there.
58
   See the 2-tests at the bottom of the table.
59
   In general it is not possible to make reliable predictions about how factor proportions will map into
preferences about trade policy in a three-factor, two-good model, as noted by O’Rourke and Taylor (2005)
and shown by Thompson (1985, 1986). One must make further assumptions, like those required to obtain
the specific-factors model, in order to derive unambiguous implications.


                                                   26
1957). We therefore estimated the same equations, with interaction terms, for the

determinants of capital account policies. Results are in Table 14. Reassuringly, for the

full period 1870-2000 (first column) the pattern of coefficients is consistent with what we

found in Table 13 for trade flows. (Recall that the dependent variable in Table 14 is

capital controls, so we consistency means obtaining the opposite signs on democracy and

on its interaction with the factor proportions ratios.) Democracy enters with a negative

coefficient – it makes capital controls less likely. This effect is stronger in countries with

high capital/labor ratios and weaker in those with high land/labor ratios. The coefficients

on two of the three terms (democracy and its interaction with the capital/labor ratio) are

individually significant, and the three terms (democracy and the two interactions) are

jointly significant. We find the same thing for the post-1960 period (column 3). For the

interwar period, in contrast, none of the effects is significant. These were years –

especially the 1930s – when capital controls were almost universal; they were imposed in

response to the economic crisis and the breakdown of international financial markets. It

is not surprising, then, that we observe the same tendency to apply them in democracies

and autocracies and in countries with very different factor proportions.



9. Conclusions and Extensions

        In this paper we have presented a battery of evidence suggesting positive

relationships running both ways between globalization and democracy, though exceptions

to this generalization appear to obtain at particular times (during the Bretton Woods

period) and places (in labor-scarce countries). As in any case where positive feedbacks

are present, there is the possibility of dynamic instability – that is, a positive or negative




                                              27
shock may send the system off in the positive or negative direction without limit. Here

we offer a few speculations about this possibility.

        Our inferences about dynamics are just suggestive, given the basically static

system that we have estimated.60 But such speculations are intriguing. If the system is

dynamically unstable, then we can perhaps understand how in the 1930s negative shocks

to trade and democracy could send the system down toward progressively lower values of

both variables, seemingly without limit (at least until the system was shocked again after

World War II). Analogously, dynamic instability implies that we may now be witnessing

positively reinforcing increases in globalization and democracy that will similarly

continue without limit (absent, of course, a large negative shock that sends the system off

in the other direction). But if the system is stable – despite the existence of positive two-

way relationships between democracy and globalization – then we perhaps have a way of

understanding how the “third wave” of democratization after 1978 lent some

encouragement to globalization, but not without limit. We have a way of understanding

how the decline in transport costs due to containerization encouraged trade and also lent

impetus to democratization, but again only within limits. In this stable case, both

democracy and globalization eventually settle down at levels higher than prior to the

shock, because there is resistance to allowing them to rise further. Some might say that

this is a plausible characterization of what we have seen in recent years.

        When the bivariate relationships between two variables are both positive,

undergraduates are taught to gauge stability by comparing the own effects to the cross

effects. In the present context the question is whether the globalization-as-a-function-of-


60
 There is, of course, a lagged dependent variable in our determinants-of-democracy Markov equations,
which gives the system a modestly dynamic flavor, but it does not have important implications for our story.


                                                    28
democracy curve is steeper than the democracy-as-a-function of globalization curve when

plotted with democracy on the horizontal axis and globalization on the vertical axis.61

For illustrative purposes, we calculated the relative slopes of the two loci for the case of

trade.62 The estimated configuration is in Figure 2.63

         This is the stable case. Imagine a “third wave” whose effect is to increase the

level of democracy associated with any level of trade. The relatively steep “predicted

democracy” schedule shifts to the right (since we expect a higher level of democracy for

any level of trade). The system is now off the “predicted trade” schedule, so the level of

trade rises until the system is back on that curve. The higher level of trade implies a

higher level of democracy, so the system now moves to the right until it is back on the

“predicted democracy” schedule. But each time a variable increases again, that increase

is smaller than before. Eventually the system converges on two stable, now higher, levels

of democracy and trade. One could play the same game by positing instead a decline in

transport costs due to the advent of containerization that causes the relatively flat

predicted-trade schedule to shift up.64

         Taken literally, this suggests that the bivariate relationship between globalization

and democracy, while positive in both directions, has limits. Whether this is good or bad



61
   And other variables are, naturally, held constant at their respective means.
62
    Using the estimates for trade from the first column of Table 1 and the estimates for democracy from the
first column of Table 5. It turns out that the results are again the same when we consider our basic
estimates for the impact of financial openness on democracy and of democracy on financial openness
(results available from the authors on request).
63
   In the case of the democracy-as-a-function-of-globalization schedule, this is the short-run effect. When
we instead plot the long-run effect, the democracy-as-a-function-of-globalization schedule becomes steep
(the effect of an increase in globalization is larger since the partial effect associated with the lagged
dependent variable is between zero and one). The shift in the values of both variables due to a shock to
either of one becomes larger in the long run, but the stability analysis remains the same, since the
democracy-as-a-function-of-globalization schedule was the steeper one before, and it is even steeper now.
64
   These results are for the entire 1870-2000 period. We obtain similar patterns—albeit with different
slopes—when we examine the interwar, Bretton Woods and post Bretton Woods periods separately.


                                                    29
news, assuming that one prefers high values of both variables, depends on the nature of

the shocks.




                                           30
References

Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson (2005), Economic Origins of Dictatorship and
Democracy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Alesina, Alberto and Enrico Spolaore (2003), The Size of Nations, Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.

Allison, Paul (1984). Event History Analysis: Regression for Longitudinal Event Data.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.

Baum, Christopher, Mark Schaffer and Steven Stillman (2003), “Instrumental Variables
and GMM: Estimation and Testing,” Working Paper #545, Boston College: Department
of Economics.

Boix, Carles and Susan Stokes (2003), “Endogenous Democratization,” World Politics 55,
pp.517-549.

Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad Martinez-
Peria (2001), “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic Policy 32,
pp.51-82.

Brune, Nancy and Alexandra Guisinger (2003), “The Diffusion of Capital Account
Liberalization in Developing Countries,” unpublished manuscript, UCLA and University
of Notre Dame.

Bussmann, Margit (2001), “Examining Causality Among Conflict, Democracy, Openness,
and Economic Growth,” unpublished manuscript, University of Alabama.

Dahl, Robert A. (1989), Democracy and its Critics, New Haven: Yale University Press.

Dailami, Mansoor (2000), “Financial Openness, Democracy, and Redistributive Policy,”
Policy Research paper no. 2372, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

Driessen, Joost and Luc Laeven (2005), “International Portfolio Diversification Benefits:
Cross-Country Evidence from a Local Perspective,” unpublished manuscript, University
of Amsterdam and World Bank.

Dutt, Pushan and Devashish Mitra (2002), “Endogenous Trade Policy through Majority
Voting: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of International Economics, 58, pp.107-33.

Eichengreen, Barry and Michael Bordo (2003), “Crises Now and Then: What Lessons
from the Last Era of Financial Globalization?” in Paul Mizen (ed.), Monetary History,
Exchange Rates and Financial Markets: Essays in Honor of Charles Goodhart,
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, vol. 2, pp.52-91.




                                           31
Epstein, David, Robert Bates, Jack Goldstone, Ida Kristensen, and Sharyn O’Halloran
(2006), “Democratic Transitions,” American Journal of Political Science, Volume 50,
forthcoming July.

Fidrmuc, Jan (2001), “Economic Reform, Democracy and Growth during Post-
Communist Transition,” unpublished manuscript, Center for European Integration
Studies, University of Bonn.

Garrett, Geoffrey (2000), “The Causes of Globalization,” Comparative Political Studies
33, pp.341-391.

Geddes, Barbara (1999), “The Effect of Regime Type on Authoritarian Breakdown: The
Empirical Test of a Game-Theoretic Argument,” paper presented to the 95th Conference
of the American Political Science Association (August).

Ghosh, Atish, Anne-Marie Gulde, and Holger Wolf (2002), Exchange Rate Regimes:
Choices and Consequences, Cambridge: MIT Press.

Giavazzi, Francesco and Guido Tabellini (2005), “Economic and Political
Liberalizations,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, pp.1297-1330.

Grilli, Vittorio (1995), “Economic Effects and Structural Determinants of Capital
Controls,” Working Paper 95/31, Washington, D.C.: IMF.

Grofman, Bernard and Mark Gray (2000), “Geopolitical Influences on Trade Openness in
Thirty-One Long-Term Democracies, 1960-1995,” unpublished manuscript, University of
California, Irvine.

Gurr, Ted Robert, Keith Jaggers and Will H. Moore (1990), Polity II: Political Structure
and Regime Change, Ann Arbor: Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social
Research.

Hahn, J and J. Hausman (2002), “A New Specification Test for the Validity of
Instrumental Variables,” Econometrica 70, pp.163-89.

Hansen, L. (1982), “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments
Estimators,” Econometrica 20, pp.1029-1054.

Hayashi, Fumio (2000), Econometrics, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Hayek, Friedrich A. (1960), The Constitution of Liberty, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Huntington, Samuel (1991), The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth
Century, Norman: University of Oklaholma Press.




                                           32
Kant, Immanuel (1795), Perpetual Peace and Other Essays on Politics, History and
Morals.

La Porta, Rafael , Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny
(1999), "The Quality of Government," Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 15,
pp. 222-79.

Li, Quan and Rafael Reuveny (2003), “Economic Globalization and Democracy: An
Empirical Analysis,” unpublished manuscript, Penn State and Indiana University.

Lipset, Seymour Martin (1959), “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic
Development and Political Legitimacy,” American Political Science Review 53, pp.69-
105.

Lopez-Cordova, Ernesto and Christopher Meissner (2005), “The Globalization of Trade
and Democracy, 1870-2000,” NBER Working Paper no. 11117 (February).

Maddison, Angus (2001), The World Economy: Historical Statistics, Paris: OECD.

Martin, Philippe and Helene Rey (2004), “Financial Super-Markets: Size Matters for
Asset Trade,” Journal of International Economics 64, pp.335-361.

McLean, Ian (2006), “Might Australia Have Failed? Endowments, Institutions and
Contingency,” unpublished manuscript, University of Adelaide and University of
California, Berkeley.

Milner, Helen and Keiko Kubota (2005), “Why the Move to Free Trade? Democracy and
Trade Policy in the Developing Countries,” International Organization 59, pp.157-93.

Mundell, Robert (1957), “International Trade and Factor Mobility,” American Economic
Review 47, pp.321-235.

Munoz, Oscar (1994), “Toward Trade Opening,” in Joan Nelson (ed.), Intricate Links:
Democratizatio and Market Reforms in Latin America and Eastern Europe,” New
Brunswick: Transaction publishers, pp.61-104.

Newey, Whitney K. 1987. "Efficient Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models
with Endogenous Explanatory Variables." The Journal of Econometrics, 36, pp.231-250.

O’Rourke, Kevin and Alan Taylor (2005), “Democracy and Protectionism in the
Nineteenth Century,” unpublished manuscript, Trinity College, Dubin and University of
California, Davis (September).

Perry, Guillermo and Marcelo Olarreaga (2006), “Trade Liberalization, Inequality and
Poverty Reduction in Latin America,” unpublished manuscript, the World Bank (January).




                                          33
Papaioannou, Elias and Gregorios Siourounis (2005), “Economic and Social Factors
Driving the Third Wave of Democratization,” unpublished manuscript, London Business
School.

Przeworski, Adam, M. Alvarez, J.A. Cheibub and F. Limongi (1996), “What Makes
Democracies Endure?” Journal of Democracy 7, pp.39-55

Przeworski, Adam, M. Alvarez, J.A. Cheibub and F. Limongi (2000), Democracy and
Development: Political Institutions and Well-Being in the World, 1950-1990, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Quinn, Dennis (2001), “Democracy and International Financial Liberalization,”
unpublished manuscript, Georgetown University.

Rigobon, Roberto and Dani Rodrik (2004), “Rule of Law, Democracy, Openness and
Income: Estimating the Interrelationships,” NBER Working Paper no. 10750 (September).

Rodrik, Dani (1998), “Why Do Democracies Have Bigger Governments?” Journal of
Political Economy 106, pp.997-1032.

Ross, Michael (2001) "Does Oil Hinder Democracy?" World Politics 53, pp.325-361.

Rudra, Nita (2005), “Globalization and the Strengthening of Democracy in the
Developing World,” American Journal of Political Science 49, pp.704-730.

Sachs, Jeffrey and Andrew Warner (2001) “The Curse of Natural Resources." European
Economic Review 45, pp.827-838.

Sachs, Jeffrey and Andrew Warner (1995), “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp.1-118.

Schumpter, Joseph (1950), Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, New York: Harper &
Row.

Simmons, Beth and Zachary Elkins (2003), “Globalization and Policy Diffusion:
Explaining Three Decades of Liberalization,” in Miles Kahler and David Lake (eds),
Governance in a Global Economy, Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp.275-304.

Simmons, Beth and Zachary Elkins (2004), “The Globalization of Liberalization: Policy
Diffusion in the International Political Economy,” American Political Science Review 98,
pp.171-189.

Thompson, Henry (1985), “Complementarity in a Simple General Equilibrium
Production Model,” Canadian Journal of Economics 18, pp.616-621.




                                          34
Thompson, Henry (1986), “Free Trade and Factor-Price Polarization,” European
Economic Review 30, pp.419-425.

Verdier, Daniel (1994), Democracy and International Trade: Britain, France, and the
United States, 1860-1990. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Wacziarg, Romain and Karen Horn Welch (2004), “Trade Liberalization and Growth:
New Evidence,” NBER Working Paper no.10152 (December).

Yamaguchi, Kazuo (1991) Event History Analysis. Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Publications.

Yu, Miaojie (2005), “Trade Globalization and Political Liberalization: A Gravity
Approach,” unpublished manuscript, University of California, Davis.




                                           35
                                                APPENDIX TABLE 1: STUDIES OF THE EFFECT OF DEMOCRACY ON GLOBALIZATION
                                                                      Measure of Political                                                                                      Instrumental
Author(s)/Year   Countries    Period      Dependent Variable                                        Political Control Variables          Economic Control Variables
                                                                              Regime                                                                                              Variables
                                                                     Number of years              • Proportional representation
Grofman and      31           1960-    Trade Openness (imports                                                                        • GDP
                                                                     country has been             • Presidential system
Gray (2000)      countries    1995     plus experts over GNP)                                                                         • Population
                                                                     authoritarian                • Number of districts
                                       Liberalization index          Lagged Democracy
                 25                    (internal and external        index (measuring
Fidrmuc                       1990-
                 transition            market liberalization and     political rights and                                             Lagged liberalization index
(2001)                        1998
                 countries             privatization, De Melo et     civil liberties, the
                                       al., 1996)                    Freedom House)
                                                                                                                                      • Level of dependent variable:
                                                                                                                                        Capital (or current) account
                 80                    Measures of financial                                                                            openness of leading economies
                 developed             openness:                                                  • Vote share of 23 Communist        • Change and level of GDP
Quinn (2000      and          1995-    • Change in capital account   Polity index (change           parties
                                                                                                                                      • Change and level of investment
and 2002))       emerging     1997       openness (Quinn, 1997)      and level)                   • Number of revolutions, coups,
                                                                                                                                      • Population growth
                 markets               • Change in current account                                  guerrilla wars (Banks, 2001)
                 countries                                                                                                            • Change and level of trade openness
                                         openness (Quinn, 1997)
                                                                                                                                      • Change and level of oil price
                                                                                                                                      • Year and country dummies
                                                                     Measures of                  Internal factors:
                                                                     democracy:                                                                                              • Average age of the
                                       Measures of trade policy:                                  • Economic crisis dummy
                                                                     • Polity index                                                   Internal factors:                        party system (Beck
                                       • Average statutory tariff                                 • Balance of payment crisis
                                                                     • Dictator index                                                 • Log of population                      et al., 2001)
                                         rate                                                       dummy
                 100                                                   (Geddes, 1999)                                                 • Real GDP per capita                  • Level of secondary
Milner and                    1970-    • Economic liberalization                                  • Number of years a government
                 Developing                                          • Binary variable                                                External factors:                        school completion
Kubota (2005)                 1999       indicator (Sachs and                                       has been in the office
                 Countries                                             coding "democratic"                                            • Average tariff level for all LDCs      among population
                                         Warner, 1995, updated by                                 External factors:
                                                                       regime (Alvarez et                                             • Average level of openness (Sachs       over fifteen years
                                         Horn, Welch and                                          • IMF agreement dummy
                                                                       al., 1996, and                                                   and Warner, 1995)                      (Barro and Lee,
                                         Wacziarg, 2003                                           • US exports and imports
                                                                       Przeworski et al.,                                                                                      2000)
                                                                       2000)                      • GATT/WTO membership
                                       Economic liberalization
Giavazzi and                           indicator (Sachs and                                       • A dummy for socialist legal
                 140          1960-                                                                                                   • Country fixed effects
Tabellini                              Warner, 1995, updated by      Polity index                   origin interacted with the main
                 countries    2000                                                                                                    • Year fixed effects
(2005)                                 Horn, Welch and Wacziarg,                                    independent variable
                                       2003)
                                                                                                                                      • Log GDP
                                                                                                  • WTO membership indicator                                                 • Judicial
                                                                                                                                      • Log GDP per capita
                 157 IMF      1962-    Log real bilateral exports                                 • Regional trade agreement                                                   independence
Yu (2005)                                                            Polity index                                                     • Emission level of carbon dioxide
                 members      1998     from country i to country j                                  dummy (FTA, GSP, NAFTA,                                                  • Death penalty
                                                                                                                                        (proxy for environmental quality)
                                                                                                    ASEAN, etc.)                                                               abolition
                                                                                                                                      • Geographical controls




                                                                                             36
                                                 APPENDIX TABLE 2: STUDIES OF THE EFFECT OF GLOBALIZATION ON DEMOCRACY
                                            Dependent                                                                                  Economic Control
Author(s)/Year   Countries     Period                            Measure of Globalization          Political Control Variables                                     Instrumental Variables
                                             Variable                                                                                     Variables
                                                                                                                                                              Instruments for Openness,
                                                                                                                                                              Dispute, and Growth:
                                                                                                                                                              • Log of population
                                                                                                                                                              • Real GDP per capita
                                                                                                                                  • Log real GDP per capita   • Investment
                                                                                              • British colony dummy (the
                                                                                                                                  • Human capital (Barro-
Bussman          65            1950-                                                            Correlates of War (COW) data                                  • Government consumption
                                        Polity index            Trade Openness                                                      Lee, 1994)
(2001)           countries     1992                                                             set)                                                          • Terms of trade
                                                                                                                                  • Growth of real GDP per
                                                                                              • Militarized interstate disputes                               • Capability ratio
                                                                                                                                    capita
                                                                                                                                                              • Alliance index
                                                                                                                                                              • Major powers dummies
                                                                                                                                                              • Openness, Growth and
                                                                                                                                                                Conflict in PRIE
                                                                • Trade Openness
                                                                                                                                  •   Inflation
Li and                                                          • Financial openness (Net
                 127           1970-                                                                                              •   Log GDP per capita
Reuveny                                 Polity index              inflows of FDI to GDP and   Lagged dependent variable
                 countries     1996                                                                                               •   Real GDP growth
(2003)                                                            Portfolio investment/GDP)
                                                                                                                                  •   Year dummies
                                                                • Democracies in the region
                                                                                              • Lagged Polity index
Lopez-                                                                                                                                                        •   Log distance
                                                                                              • Log land area
Cordova and      115           1870-                                                                                              • Log population            •   Common border dummy
                                        Polity index            Trade Openness                • Landlockedness
Meissner         countries     2000                                                                                               • Time dummies              •   Island dummy
(2005)                                                                                        • Common borders
                                                                                                                                                              •   Common language dummy
                                                                                              • Common language
                 59 LDCs                                        • Trade Openness              • Regional Democracy
                                        • Polity index                                                                            •   GDP per capita
                 (excluding                                     • Financial openness (Gross   • World Democracy
                               1972-    • Political and civil                                                                     •   GDP growth              Higher moments of
Rudra (2005)     Eastern                                          capital flows to GDP, FDI   • Social spending to total
                               1997       liberties (the                                                                          •   Urbanization            independent variables
                 and Central                                      to GDP, and Portfolio         government spending
                                          Freedom House)                                                                          •   Inflation
                 Europe)                                          flows to GDP)               • Potential Labor Power
                                                                • Trade Openness
                                                                                                                                  • Log GDP
                 92                                             • Trade openness policy       • Years since independence
                                        Democratization                                                                           • GDP per capita growth
                 countries                                        indicator (Wacziarg and     • Armed conflict ending (Armed
Papaioannou                             indicator (based on                                                                       • Currency crisis dummy
                 that were     1960-                              Welch, 2003)                  Conflict Dataset, 2003, and
and Siourounis                          both Polity index                                                                           (Kraay, 2003)
                 non-          2000                             • Permanent trade               International Peace Research
(2005)                                  and the Freedom of                                                                        • Banking crisis dummy
                 democratic                                       liberalization indicator      Institute, Oslo)
                                        House)                                                                                      (Caprio and Klingebiel,
                 in 1960                                          (Wacziarg and Welch,        • Religious fragmentation
                                                                                                                                    2003)
                                                                  2003)
Giavazzi and                                                                                                                                                  Argue that difference-in-
                 140           1960-                            Sachs-Warner economic         • Proportional representation       • Country fixed effects
Tabellini                               Polity index                                                                                                          differences methodology
                 countries     2000                             openness indicator            • Parliamentary system              • Year fixed effects
(2005)                                                                                                                                                        controls for endogeneity
                 157 IMF       1962-                                                                                                                          • WTO members
Yu (2005)                               Polity index            Trade Openness                Death penalty abolition             CO2 emissions
                 members       1998                                                                                                                           • Gravity Variables



                                                                                              37
                                    Data Appendix


GDP: The majority of data comes from Maddison (2001) and is augmented with series
from Banks (various years) and Mitchell (various years). To obtain a consistent series
the data were converted to PPP. The converted series from Maddison where then
extrapolated backwards or forwards using the growth rate from Banks or Mitchell.
Where an entire series was missing in Maddison we used the series from Banks or
Mitchell.

Trade Openness: Data on imports and exports come from Mitchell and Banks and were
converted to PPP and then divided by GDP to obtain the ratio (imports+exports)/gdp

Capital Controls: Data prior to 1970 are from Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel and
Martinez-Peria (2001). From 1970-2000 the data comes from Ghosh, Gulde and Wolf
(2002).

Population: The primary source for population is Banks (various years) augmented by
data from the Penn World Table 6.1 and the World Bank’s World Development
Indicators.

Population Density: The primary source for population is Banks (various years)
augmented by data from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

Area: The primary source for population is Banks (various years) augmented by data
from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

Urban Population: The primary source for population is Banks (various years)
augmented by data from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

Inflation: Data prior to 1970 are from Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel and Martinez-
Peria (2001). From 1970-2000 the data comes from Ghosh, Gulde and Wolf (2002).

Government Balance: Data prior to 1970 are from Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel and
Martinez-Peria (2001). From 1970-2000 the data comes from Ghosh, Gulde and Wolf
(2002).

Democracy: We use the dichotomous measure developed by Przeworski et al. (1990)
who calculate it from 1950-1990. We use the coding from Boix and Rosato (2001) for
the period 1800-1949 and from Cheibub and Ghandi (2005) for the period 1991-2000.

Land/Labor and Capital/Labor Ratios: We used the data from O’Rourke and Taylor
(2005) for the period prior to 1960 World Bank’s World Development Indicators for the
period after 1960.




                                           38
                                              Table 1
                         Effect of Democracy on Trade Openness 1870-2000:
                                 Dichotomous Measure of Democracy
                                         Full            Gold           Interwar         Bretton            Post
                                        Sample         Standard          Period          Woods            Bretton
                                                                                                          Woods
Democracy(t-1)                         4.106***       1.616***         2.095***           3.929***       4.021***
                                        (0.633)        (0.283)           (0.239)           (0.459)        (0.601)
Log(Total GDP PPP(t-1))               -0.919***      -0.758***         -0.791***         -0.963***      -0.853***
                                        (0.086)        (0.068)           (0.054)           (0.065)        (0.079)
Log(Distance(t-1))                    -0.783***         -0.025         1.244***          -1.364***      -1.022***
                                        (0.245)        (0.290)           (0.340)           (0.230)        (0.321)
Log(Country Size(t-1))                   0.002       -0.188***         -0.240***            0.064          0.013
                                        (0.035)        (0.049)           (0.047)           (0.044)        (0.031)
Log(Total Population(t-1))             0.486***       0.294***         0.706***           0.457***       0.452***
                                        (0.078)        (0.081)           (0.091)           (0.055)        (0.076)
Interwar Period                          -0.258
                                        (0.223)
Bretton Woods Period                   0.893***
                                        (0.202)
Post Bretton Woods Period              2.781***
                                        (0.267)
Constant                               5.527***         1.898         -12.251***         11.599***       9.988***
                                        (1.963)        (2.596)           (3.104)           (1.881)        (2.533)
Observations                              7362           763               712              2079            3792
F                                        62.705        59.612           103.816           107.769          80.816
  p-value                                0.000          0.000             0.000             0.000          0.000
First Stage F                            22.14          79.97            113.41             32.03          30.52
  p-value                                0.000          0.000             0.000             0.000          0.000
Cragg-Donald Under-ID Test              331.746       171.794           290.379           129.479         182.062
  p-value                                0.000          0.000             0.000             0.000          0.000
Hansen J Statistic                       5.926          0.026             2.088             0.004          8.166
  p-value                                0.052          0.873             0.352             0.952          0.017
Instruments                            Tot Dem        Tot Dem           Tot Dem                          Tot Dem
                                       Pop Den                        Urban Pop           Pop Den         Pop Den
                                        Brit Col      Brit Col          Brit Col          Brit Col        Brit Col
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments used in the first stage
model (Tot Dem=Number of Democracies in the Systemt-2 Pop Den=Population Densityt-2 Urban
Pop=Urban Populationt-2 Brit Col=Former British Colony). The F-test refers to the F-test for the second
stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation robust F-test for testing the
exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald Under-ID tests the null hypothesis that the
first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the null that the first stage is over-identified. .
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                        39
                                             Table 2
                         Effect of Democracy on Trade Openness 1870-2000
                          Political Regime Measured by Age of Democracy
                                       Full            Gold          Interwar         Bretton           Post
                                      Sample         Standard         Period          Woods           Bretton
                                                                                                      Woods
Log(Age of Democracy(t-1))             0.891***        0.335***       0.529***       1.068***        0.899***
                                        (0.095)         (0.055)        (0.067)        (0.115)         (0.113)
Log(Total GDP PPP(t-1))               -0.855***       -0.645***      -0.778***      -1.039***       -0.808***
                                        (0.054)         (0.053)        (0.054)        (0.068)         (0.061)
Log(Distance(t-1))                    -0.753***          -0.123       1.028***      -0.839***       -1.499***
                                        (0.170)         (0.280)        (0.345)        (0.198)         (0.196)
Log(Country Size(t-1))                  -0.043*       -0.215***      -0.264***         0.061           -0.017
                                        (0.026)         (0.051)        (0.046)        (0.037)         (0.026)
Log(Total Population(t-1))             0.376***        0.203***       0.649***       0.537***        0.375***
                                        (0.047)         (0.069)        (0.090)        (0.055)         (0.052)
Interwar Period                          -0.225
                                        (0.192)
Bretton Woods Period                   0.876***
                                        (0.168)
Post Bretton Woods Period              2.698***
                                        (0.204)
Constant                               6.586***         3.137        -9.705***       7.333***      14.968***
                                        (1.443)        (2.468)         (3.121)        (1.681)        (1.673)
Observations                              6985           763             712           2079            3351
F                                       81.692         65.462         110.367        112.940          98.572
  p-value                                0.000          0.000           0.000          0.000          0.000
First Stage F                            82.45         189.47           50.21          38.90          88.78
  p-value                                0.000          0.000           0.000          0.000          0.000
Cragg-Donald Under-ID Test             806.351        423.095         326.647        172.323         301.549
  p-value                                0.000          0.000           0.000          0.000          0.000
Hansen J Statistic                       0.210          0.025           8.171          0.304          8.967
  p-value                                0.647          0.875           0.017          0.581          0.003
Instruments                           Const Age       Tot Dem         Tot Dem        Pop Den       Const Age
                                                                        Urban
                                           Brit Col    Brit Col       Brit Col       Brit Col        Brit Col
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments used in the first stage
model (Const Age= Log(Age of the Constitution)t-2, Tot Dem=Number of Democracies in the Systemt-2
Pop Den=Population Densityt-2 Urban Pop=Urban Populationt-2 Brit Col=Former British Colony). The F-
test refers to the F-test for the second stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and auto-
correlation robust F-test for testing the exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald
Under-ID tests the null hypothesis that the first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the
null that the first stage is over-identified.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                      40
                                             Table 3
                        Effect of Democracy on Capital Controls 1870-2000:
                                Dichotomous Measure of Democracy
                                                   Full          Interwar          Bretton        Post Bretton
                                                 Sample           Period           Woods             Woods
Democracy(t-1)                                 -0.768***        -0.782***         0.505***         -0.730***
                                                 (0.204)          (0.300)          (0.166)           (0.148)
Interwar Period                                 0.455***
                                                 (0.066)
Bretton Woods Period                            0.917***
                                                 (0.053)
Post Bretton Woods Period                       0.638***
                                                 (0.057)
Log(Total GDP PPP(t-1))                           0.004         -0.085***            0.004          0.013**
                                                 (0.007)          (0.023)           (0.010)         (0.006)
Log(GDP Per Capita PPP(t-1))                      0.053           0.544**         -0.353***          0.005
                                                 (0.054)          (0.241)           (0.082)         (0.035)
Systemic Crises(t-1)                             0.004*          0.069***            -0.018          0.003
                                                 (0.002)          (0.010)           (0.012)         (0.002)
Inflation(t-1)                                  0.000***           0.003          -0.006***        0.000***
                                                 (0.000)          (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.000)
Government Balance(t-1)                        -0.006***           -0.009            0.001        -0.006***
                                                 (0.002)          (0.006)           (0.002)         (0.002)
Constant                                          -0.064          -2.949*          3.501***        0.868***
                                                 (0.320)          (1.616)           (0.563)         (0.229)
Observations                                       5440             316               650            3919
F                                                78.858           14.891             6.276          49.884
  p-value                                         0.000            0.000             0.000           0.000
First Stage F                                     19.35             8.38             18.21           35.57
  p-value                                         0.000            0.000             0.000           0.000
Cragg-Donald                                    160.432           19.223            77.295         139.355
  p-value                                         0.000            0.000             0.000           0.000
Hansen J Statistic                                0.025            0.430            10.394           0.392
  p-value                                         0.875            0.512             0.015           0.531
Instruments                                     Tot Dem         Const Age          Tot Dem         Tot Dem
                                                Brit Col         Brit Col          Pop Den         Brit Col
                                                                                     Urban
                                                                                  Const Age
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments used in the first stage
model (Const Age= Log(Age of the Constitution)t-2, Tot Dem=Number of Democracies in the Systemt-2
Pop Den=Population Densityt-2 Urban Pop=Urban Populationt-2 Brit Col=Former British Colony). The F-
test refers to the F-test for the second stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and auto-
correlation robust F-test for testing the exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald
Under-ID tests the null hypothesis that the first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the
null that the first stage is over-identified.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                      41
                                             Table 4
                        Effect of Democracy on Capital Controls 1870-2000:
                         Political Regime Measured by Age of Democracy
                                                   Full           Interwar         Bretton       Post Bretton
                                                Sample             Period          Woods            Woods
Log(Age of Democracy(t-1))                       -0.092***          -0.116***         -0.004      -0.260***
                                                   (0.030)            (0.035)        (0.072)        (0.062)
Interwar Period                                   0.403***
                                                   (0.052)
Bretton Woods Period                              0.916***
                                                   (0.037)
Post Bretton Woods Period                         0.692***
                                                   (0.039)
Log(Total GDP PPP(t-1))                             0.007           -0.058***         -0.004       0.028***
                                                   (0.007)            (0.016)        (0.013)        (0.007)
Log(GDP Per Capita PPP(t-1))                       -0.054*            0.327**         -0.129         0.067
                                                   (0.032)            (0.138)        (0.158)        (0.056)
Systemic Crises(t-1)                               0.004**           0.071***         -0.009         0.002
                                                   (0.002)            (0.007)        (0.012)        (0.002)
Inflation(t-1)                                    0.000***             0.002          -0.001       0.000***
                                                   (0.000)            (0.002)        (0.001)        (0.000)
Government Balance(t-1)                           -0.003**             -0.002          0.002      -0.006***
                                                   (0.001)            (0.005)        (0.002)        (0.002)
Constant                                           0.500**            -1.680*        1.967*          0.260
                                                   (0.215)            (0.984)        (1.113)        (0.413)
Observations                                        4935                316             701          3919
F                                                  224.128            34.859           5.690        50.756
  p-value                                           0.000              0.000           0.000         0.000
First Stage F                                       53.71              59.32           26.27         21.83
  p-value                                           0.000              0.000           0.000         0.000
Cragg-Donald Under-ID Test                         391.748           150.483         42.985         91.291
  p-value                                           0.000              0.000           0.000         0.000
Hansen J Statistic                                  1.060              0.131        Exactly          8.121
  p-value                                           0.303              0.717       identified        0.004
Instruments                                      Const Age          Const Age       Tot Dem        Tot Dem
                                                   Brit Col          Brit Col                      Brit Col
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments used in the first stage
model (Const Age= Log(Age of the Constitution)t-2, Tot Dem=Number of Democracies in the Systemt-2
Pop Den=Population Densityt-2 Urban Pop=Urban Populationt-2 Brit Col=Former British Colony). The F-
test refers to the F-test for the second stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and auto-
correlation robust F-test for testing the exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald
Under-ID tests the null hypothesis that the first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the
null that the first stage is over-identified.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                      42
                                                Table 5
                               Effect of Trade on Democracy 1870-2000:
                                 Dichotomous Measure of Democracy
                                           Full           Gold      Interwar     Bretton        Post
                                          Sample        Standard     Period      Woods        Bretton
                                                                                              Woods
Log(Trade Openness(t-1))                  0.174***       0.404***   0.208***      0.127**    0.189***
                                           (0.059)        (0.070)    (0.044)      (0.055)     (0.066)
Prior Transitions To Dictatorship(t-1)    0.127***       0.191***     0.022      0.135***    0.114***
                                           (0.014)        (0.057)    (0.038)      (0.018)     (0.014)
Log(Constitutional Age(t-1))              -0.039**      -0.211***   0.036**        -0.003   -0.051***
                                           (0.017)        (0.056)    (0.017)      (0.018)     (0.016)
# of Democracies in System(t-1)             0.001          0.008      -0.002    -0.018***      0.001
                                           (0.001)        (0.010)    (0.006)      (0.004)     (0.001)
Interwar Period                             0.059
                                           (0.046)
Bretton Woods Period                        -0.056
                                           (0.061)
Post Bretton Woods Period                -0.325***
                                           (0.104)
Natural Resource Exporter                   0.072       2.640***     0.948***     0.129*       -0.057
                                           (0.060)       (0.502)      (0.224)     (0.069)     (0.047)
Socialist Legal Origin                   -0.466***                  -0.532***   -0.610***   -0.298***
                                           (0.043)                    (0.048)     (0.046)     (0.067)
Latin America                            -0.207***      -0.353**    -0.655***    -0.114**      -0.100
                                           (0.044)       (0.142)      (0.087)     (0.052)     (0.074)
Middle East                              -0.656***                              -0.483***   -0.571***
                                           (0.057)                                (0.057)     (0.061)
Africa                                   -0.517***                              -0.362***   -0.448***
                                           (0.052)                                (0.058)     (0.079)
Asia                                        -0.135                  0.727***       0.011       -0.149
                                           (0.094)                   (0.278)      (0.085)     (0.118)
British Colonial Heritage                 0.166***      0.831***    -0.170**     0.147***    0.109***
                                           (0.036)       (0.132)     (0.076)      (0.044)     (0.034)
French Colonial Heritage                    0.058                                  -0.024     0.074*
                                           (0.039)                                (0.051)     (0.039)
Spanish Colonial Heritage                   0.028       -0.240***      0.070       -0.029     0.092*
                                           (0.040)        (0.090)     (0.067)     (0.048)     (0.048)
Log(GDP Per Capita PPP(t-1))              0.156***       0.228***    0.156***    0.135***    0.161***
                                           (0.035)        (0.027)     (0.028)     (0.035)     (0.042)
Growth Rate(t-1)                            0.035          -0.228      0.019       -0.117      0.044
                                           (0.104)        (0.486)     (0.165)     (0.179)     (0.134)
Urban Population (t-1)                      -0.081       0.901**     0.985***      0.106     -0.213**
                                           (0.109)        (0.458)     (0.254)     (0.151)     (0.089)
Population Density (t-1)                    -0.000         -0.000   -0.002***      0.000       0.000
                                           (0.000)        (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.000)
Constant                                    -0.025         0.250       0.178     0.518***     -0.354*
                                           (0.059)        (0.263)     (0.179)     (0.123)     (0.196)
Observations                                 6837           741         727         2010        3371
F                                          79.606         38.408     297.287     110.162     120.391
 p-value                                    0.000          0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000
First Stage F                               17.63          23.07       27.73       13.04       23.07
 p-value                                    0.000          0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000
Cragg-Donald Under-ID Test                 63.927         19.440      10.576      23.739      32.829
 p-value                                    0.000          0.000       0.001       0.000       0.000



                                                   43
Hansen J Statistic                          Exactly        Exactly      Exactly       Exactly       Exactly
 p-value                                   identified     identified   identified   identified     identified
Instruments                                   Dist           Dist         Dist         Dist           Dist
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments used in the first stage
model (Dist=Log(Average Distance from the Rest of the World)t-2). The F-test refers to the F-test for the
second stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation robust F-test for testing
the exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald Under-ID tests the null hypothesis that
the first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the null that the first stage is over-
identified.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                     44
                                             Table 6
                            Effect of Trade on Democracy 1870-2000:
                   Political Regime Measured by Age of Democracy Measure
                                           Full           Gold      Interwar     Bretton       Post
                                          Sample        Standard     Period      Woods       Bretton
                                                                                             Woods
                                              b/se          b/se       b/se        b/se        b/se
Log(Trade Openness(t-1))                 0.692***        1.537***    0.378**      0.101     0.773***
                                           (0.206)        (0.295)    (0.149)     (0.093)     (0.221)
Prior Transitions To Dictatorship(t-1)   0.211***          0.353     -0.155*      0.064     0.204***
                                           (0.045)        (0.218)    (0.084)     (0.050)     (0.047)
Log(Constitutional Age(t-1))                 0.071      -0.644***   0.416***    0.180***      0.065
                                           (0.059)        (0.227)    (0.055)     (0.037)     (0.054)
# of Democracies in System(t-1)             -0.003         0.032     -0.026*    -0.036***     -0.005
                                           (0.004)        (0.039)    (0.015)     (0.010)     (0.004)
Interwar Period                          0.612***
                                           (0.169)
Bretton Woods Period                         0.282
                                           (0.229)
Post Bretton Woods Period                  -0.693*
                                           (0.377)
Natural Resource Exporter                    0.274      10.091***    1.726**        0.060      -0.225
                                           (0.225)       (2.041)     (0.778)      (0.123)     (0.170)
Socialist Legal Origin                   -1.790***                  -1.735***   -1.899***   -1.336***
                                           (0.137)                   (0.113)      (0.129)     (0.213)
Latin America                            -1.123***      -1.356**    -2.274***   -1.186***   -0.691***
                                           (0.147)       (0.548)     (0.233)      (0.168)     (0.243)
Middle East                              -2.574***                              -2.262***   -2.247***
                                           (0.199)                                (0.162)     (0.212)
Africa                                   -2.049***                              -1.729***   -1.646***
                                           (0.188)                                (0.166)     (0.266)
Asia                                      -0.670**                     0.799    -0.858***      -0.588
                                           (0.340)                   (0.898)      (0.193)     (0.404)
British Colonial Heritage                0.514***       3.749***      -0.023    0.508***      0.307**
                                           (0.138)       (0.529)     (0.216)      (0.131)     (0.127)
French Colonial Heritage                   0.334**                                  0.108    0.388***
                                           (0.144)                                (0.113)     (0.143)
Spanish Colonial Heritage                    0.148      -1.154***   0.515***       -0.055    0.481***
                                           (0.133)        (0.320)    (0.179)      (0.144)     (0.154)
Log(GDP Per Capita PPP(t-1))             0.609***        0.647***   0.305***    0.257***     0.685***
                                           (0.123)        (0.107)    (0.098)      (0.065)     (0.138)
Growth Rate(t-1)                            -0.060         -0.731     0.072      -1.044**      -0.034
                                           (0.346)        (1.881)    (0.429)      (0.472)     (0.430)
Urban Population (t-1)                      -0.313        3.055*    3.036***    1.060***     -0.794**
                                           (0.398)        (1.713)    (0.725)      (0.396)     (0.336)
Population Density (t-1)                    -0.000         -0.002   -0.004***   0.002***      0.001*
                                           (0.001)        (0.003)    (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.000)
Constant                                 -0.828***         1.402     0.838**    1.516***    -2.059***
                                           (0.210)        (1.041)    (0.426)      (0.405)     (0.645)
Observations                                 6837           741         727         2010        3371
F                                          90.953         22.317     188.483     136.517     122.069
 p-value                                     0.000         0.000       0.000        0.000      0.000
First Stage F                                17.63         23.07       27.73        26.07      23.97
 p-value                                     0.000         0.000       0.000        0.000      0.000
Cragg-Donald Under-ID Test                 63.927         19.440      10.576      72.571      32.829



                                                   45
 p-value                                      0.000          0.000         0.001         0.000         0.000
Hansen J Statistic                           Exactly        Exactly       Exactly        1.765        Exactly
 p-value                                    identified     identified    identified      0.184       identified
Instruments                                    Dist           Dist          Dist           Dist         Dist
                                                                                          Area
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments used in the first stage
model (Dist=Log(Average Distance from the Rest of the World)t-2, Area=Log(Country Area (sq miles)t-2).
The F-test refers to the F-test for the second stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and
auto-correlation robust F-test for testing the exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald
Under-ID tests the null hypothesis that the first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the
null that the first stage is over-identified.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                      46
                                               Table 7
                         Effect of Capital Controls on Democracy 1870-2000:
                                 Dichotomous Measure of Democracy
                                                   Full     Interwar     Bretton   Post Bretton
                                                 Sample      Period      Woods       Woods
                                                   b/se        b/se        b/se        b/se
Capital Controls(t-1)                             0.134     -0.345**      0.872      -0.292*
                                                 (0.164)     (0.153)     (0.800)     (0.154)
Prior Transitions To Dictatorship(t-1)          0.080***     0.088*       0.035     0.101***
                                                 (0.014)     (0.049)     (0.067)     (0.011)
Log(Constitutional Age(t-1))                      -0.004    0.100***      0.071       -0.011
                                                 (0.012)     (0.021)     (0.096)     (0.009)
# of Democracies in System(t-1)                 0.004***      -0.017      -0.014    0.003***
                                                 (0.001)     (0.018)     (0.010)     (0.000)
Interwar Period                                   0.010
                                                 (0.089)
Bretton Woods Period                              -0.092
                                                 (0.164)
Post Bretton Woods Period                         -0.212
                                                 (0.158)
Natural Resource Exporter                         -0.018                              -0.022
                                                 (0.041)                             (0.031)
Socialist Legal Origin                         -0.427***                           -0.381***
                                                 (0.065)                             (0.049)
Latin America                                  -0.219***    -0.544***     0.531    -0.227***
                                                 (0.047)     (0.112)     (0.488)     (0.044)
Middle East                                    -0.705***                 -0.894*   -0.697***
                                                 (0.064)                 (0.479)     (0.048)
Africa                                         -0.618***                           -0.587***
                                                 (0.060)                             (0.044)
Asia                                           -0.389***                           -0.420***
                                                 (0.050)                             (0.040)
British Colonial Heritage                       0.187***    -0.213**      0.439     0.166***
                                                 (0.032)     (0.099)     (0.505)     (0.027)
French Colonial Heritage                          0.025                              0.053*
                                                 (0.038)                             (0.028)
Spanish Colonial Heritage                        0.074*      0.317***    -0.229*      0.011
                                                 (0.044)      (0.081)    (0.121)     (0.047)
Log(GDP Per Capita PPP(t-1))                    0.057***     0.045**     0.083**    0.023***
                                                 (0.008)      (0.019)    (0.033)     (0.008)
Growth Rate(t-1)                                  0.007        0.382      -0.668      0.081
                                                 (0.117)      (0.302)    (0.692)     (0.103)
Urban Population (t-1)                            -0.043      0.769*      -0.895    -0.167**
                                                 (0.087)      (0.402)    (0.684)     (0.071)
Population Density (t-1)                        0.000***    -0.002***    0.002**    0.000***
                                                 (0.000)      (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.000)
Constant                                          0.119        0.621      -0.274    0.536***
                                                 (0.076)      (0.518)    (0.961)     (0.194)
Observations                                       4783         382        597         3472
F                                               128.107       16.898     68.469     192.239
 p-value                                          0.000        0.000      0.000       0.000
First Stage F                                     16.08       198.77       1.18       14.13
 p-value                                          0.000        0.000     0.3182       0.000
Cragg-Donald Under-ID Test                       74.809      142.674      8.081      71.832
 p-value                                          0.000        0.000      0.152       0.000



                                                47
Hansen J Statistic                                      2.250           Exactly         5.481           3.073
 p-value                                                0.325          identified       0.241           0.215
Instruments                                            Tot Cr            Tot Cr        Ec Size         Tot Cr
                                                         Inf                           Tot Cr         Tot Cap
                                                       Gov Bal                         Tot Cap
                                                                                         Inf
                                                                                      Gov Bal
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments used in the first stage
model (Tot Cr=Total Number of Global Crisest-2, Inf=Inflationt-2, Gov Bal=Government Surplus/Deficitt-2,
Ec Size=log(GDPt-2), Tot Cap=Total Number of Countries with Capital Controlst-2). The F-test refers to
the F-test for the second stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation robust
F-test for testing the exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald Under-ID tests the null
hypothesis that the first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the null that the first stage
is over-identified.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                       48
                                               Table 8
                         Effect of Capital Controls on Democracy 1870-2000:
                          Political Regime Measured by Age of Democracy
                                                  Full      Interwar    Bretton    Post Bretton
                                                Sample        Period    Woods        Woods
                                                  b/se         b/se       b/se         b/se
Capital Controls(t-1)                          -1.406**     -1.406**     5.969       -1.113*
                                                (0.683)      (0.683)    (4.310)      (0.656)
Prior Transitions To Dictatorship(t-1)         0.136***     0.136***     -0.140     0.135***
                                                (0.044)      (0.044)    (0.203)      (0.031)
Log(Constitutional Age(t-1))                   0.220***     0.220***    0.958**     0.231***
                                                (0.038)      (0.038)    (0.467)      (0.027)
# of Democracies in System(t-1)                 0.005**      0.005**     -0.051     0.007***
                                                (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.046)      (0.002)
Interwar Period                                1.074***     1.074***
                                                (0.303)      (0.303)
Bretton Woods Period                           2.067***     2.067***
                                                (0.635)      (0.635)
Post Bretton Woods Period                       1.647**      1.647**
                                                (0.641)      (0.641)
Natural Resource Exporter                        -0.155       -0.155      2.735        -0.077
                                                (0.145)      (0.145)     (1.712)      (0.096)
Socialist Legal Origin                        -1.531***    -1.531***   -2.681***    -1.738***
                                                (0.202)      (0.202)     (1.006)      (0.174)
Latin America                                 -1.072***    -1.072***      1.814     -1.194***
                                                (0.144)      (0.144)     (1.949)      (0.135)
Middle East                                   -2.678***    -2.678***     -2.376*    -2.672***
                                                (0.230)      (0.230)     (1.369)      (0.161)
Africa                                        -2.053***    -2.053***    -3.197**    -2.223***
                                                (0.185)      (0.185)     (1.578)      (0.145)
Asia                                          -1.691***    -1.691***     -1.205*    -1.795***
                                                (0.173)      (0.173)     (0.729)      (0.126)
British Colonial Heritage                      0.659***     0.659***      0.979      0.430***
                                                (0.123)      (0.123)     (1.093)      (0.088)
French Colonial Heritage                        0.262**      0.262**      2.020       0.159*
                                                (0.124)      (0.124)     (2.220)      (0.094)
Spanish Colonial Heritage                        0.062        0.062       -0.040       0.073
                                                (0.156)      (0.156)     (0.622)      (0.143)
Log(GDP Per Capita PPP(t-1))                   0.163***     0.163***      0.125      0.125***
                                                (0.029)      (0.029)     (0.173)      (0.032)
Growth Rate(t-1)                                 0.346        0.346       -0.626       0.291
                                                (0.280)      (0.280)     (2.161)      (0.262)
Urban Population (t-1)                          -0.532*      -0.532*      -0.334     -0.631**
                                                (0.302)      (0.302)     (1.593)      (0.247)
Population Density (t-1)                       0.002***     0.002***     0.005**     0.002***
                                                (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.002)      (0.000)
Constant                                         -0.250       -0.250      -4.367      1.514*
                                                (0.272)      (0.272)     (4.705)      (0.825)
Observations                                      5341         5341        839          3472
F                                              120.951      120.951      18.445      288.049
 p-value                                         0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000
First Stage F                                     8.38       221.47        1.48        11.09
 p-value                                         0.000        0.000       0.219        0.000
Cragg-Donald Under-ID Test                      53.847       53.847      10.260       26.390
 p-value                                         0.000        0.000       0.016        0.000



                                                49
Hansen J Statistic                                    2.926           2.926            1.678            0.396
 p-value                                              0.232           0.232            0.432            0.529
Instruments                                          Tot Cr           Tot Cr          Tot Cr           Tot Cr
                                                     Tot Cap                          Tot Cap         Tot Cap
                                                     Ec Size                          Ec Size
                                                                                        Inf
                                                                                      Gov Bal
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments used in the first stage
model (Tot Cr=Total Number of Global Crisest-2, Inf=Inflationt-2, Gov Bal=Government Surplus/Deficitt-2,
Ec Size=log(GDPt-2), Tot Cap=Total Number of Countries with Capital Controlst-2). The F-test refers to
the F-test for the second stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation robust
F-test for testing the exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald Under-ID tests the null
hypothesis that the first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the null that the first stage
is over-identified.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                       50
                                             Table 9
                  Effect of Trade and Capital Controls on Democracy 1870-2000:

                                                             Age of          Dichotomous
                                                            Democracy         Measure of
                                                                              Democracy
Log(Trade Openness(t-1))                                        0.097          0.074***
                                                              (0.064)           (0.019)
Capital Controls(t-1)                                         -1.200*            -0.123
                                                              (0.632)           (0.201)
Prior Transitions To Dictatorship(t-1)                       0.139***          0.109***
                                                              (0.044)           (0.014)
Log(Constitutional Age(t-1))                                 0.207***           -0.024*
                                                              (0.040)           (0.012)
# of Democracies in System(t-1)                                 0.004           0.002**
                                                              (0.003)           (0.001)
Interwar Period                                              1.044***            0.122
                                                              (0.294)           (0.089)
Bretton Woods Period                                         1.846***            0.145
                                                              (0.590)           (0.184)
Post Bretton Woods Period                                     1.298**            -0.073
                                                              (0.612)           (0.190)
Natural Resource Exporter                                      -0.112            -0.017
                                                              (0.149)           (0.051)
Socialist Legal Origin                                       -1.659***        -0.393***
                                                              (0.185)           (0.065)
Latin America                                                -1.063***        -0.182***
                                                              (0.139)           (0.042)
Middle East                                                  -2.631***        -0.692***
                                                              (0.225)           (0.065)
Africa                                                       -2.031***        -0.523***
                                                              (0.188)           (0.059)
Asia                                                         -1.595***        -0.334***
                                                              (0.181)           (0.057)
British Colonial Heritage                                    0.649***          0.211***
                                                              (0.120)           (0.032)
French Colonial Heritage                                      0.267**           0.086**
                                                              (0.121)           (0.037)
Spanish Colonial Heritage                                       0.102            0.057
                                                              (0.149)           (0.047)
Log(GDP Per Capita PPP(t-1))                                 0.237***          0.098***
                                                              (0.051)           (0.015)
Growth Rate(t-1)                                                0.168            0.063
                                                              (0.301)           (0.110)
Urban Population (t-1)                                        -0.548*            -0.136
                                                              (0.301)           (0.093)
Population Density (t-1)                                     0.002***          0.000**
                                                              (0.000)           (0.000)
Constant                                                      -0.414*            0.040
                                                              (0.249)           (0.076)
Observations                                                    5127              5127
F                                                             136.481          115.754
 p-value                                                        0.000            0.000
First Stage F: Trade                                           131.12           131.12
 p-value                                                        0.000            0.000



                                              51
First Stage F: Capital Controls                                             12.79                  12.79
 p-value                                                                    0.000                  0.000
Cragg-Donald Under-ID Test                                                 45.514                 45.514
p-value                                                                     0.000                  0.000
Hansen J Statistic                                                         Exactly                Exactly
p-value                                                                   Identified             Identified
Instruments                                                                 Tot Cr                 Tot Cr
                                                                           Ec Size                Ec Size
χ2-test for joint significance of trade and capital control terms in column 1: 7.00 (p<0.0302)
χ2-test for joint significance of trade and capital control terms in column 2: 16.56 (p<0.0000)
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments used in the first stage
model (Tot Cr=Total Number of Global Crisest-2, Ec Size=log(GDPt-2)). The F-test refers to the F-test for
the second stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation robust F-test for
testing the exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald Under-ID tests the null
hypothesis that the first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the null that the first stage
is over-identified.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                       52
                                            Table 10
                       Effect of Democracy on Trade Openness 1950-2000:
                        Alternative (Sachs-Warner) Measure of Openness
                                                                       Dichotomous      Age of Democracy
                                                                        Measure of
                                                                        Democracy
Democracy(t-1)                                                            0.094***             0.023*
                                                                           (0.036)             (0.013)
Years Closed                                                              0.002***            0.002***
                                                                           (0.000)             (0.000)
Log(Distance(t-1))                                                          -0.036              -0.021
                                                                           (0.024)             (0.023)
Log(Country Size(t-1))                                                      -0.003              -0.002
                                                                           (0.002)             (0.002)
Log(Total Population(t-1))                                                  -0.001              -0.000
                                                                           (0.003)             (0.003)
Log(Total GDP PPP(t-1))                                                     -0.001              -0.000
                                                                           (0.003)             (0.004)
Post Bretton Woods Period                                                -0.023***           -0.028***
                                                                           (0.009)             (0.008)
Constant                                                                 -4.056***           -4.219***
                                                                           (0.842)             (0.829)
Observations                                                                 3096                3096
F                                                                           5.780               5.444
  p-value                                                                   0.000               0.000
First Stage F                                                               18.70               18.04
  p-value                                                                   0.000               0.000
Cragg-Donald Under-ID Test                                                 190.297            212.152
  p-value                                                                   0.000               0.000
Hansen J Statistic                                                          0.183               4.104
  p-value                                                                   0.912               0.128
Instruments                                                               Pop Den             Pop Den
                                                                         Const Age           Const Age
                                                                            Urban               Urban
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments used in the first stage
model (Const Age= Log(Age of the Constitution)t-2, Pop Den=Population Densityt-2 ,Urban Pop=Urban
Populationt-2 The F-test refers to the F-test for the second stage model. The First Stage F is the
heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation robust F-test for testing the exclusion of the instruments from the
first stage; Cragg-Donald Under-ID tests the null hypothesis that the first stage is under-identified and the
Hansen J Statistic tests the null that the first stage is over-identified.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                    53
                                          Table 11
           Effect of Trade and Capital Account Policies on Democracy, 1870-2000:
                                      Markov Models
                                         Trade           Capital Controls       Trade & Cap Cont
                                    α          α+β        α         α+β           α          α+β
Log(Trade Openness(t-1))        -0.022**    0.029***                           -0.041      0.050**
                                 (0.009)     (0.007)                          (0.027)      (0.023)
Capital Controls(t-1)                                   0.014      -0.122*     0.064        -0.10
                                                       (0.039)      (0.07)    (0.049)      (0.079)
Log(GDP Per Capita PPP(t-        0.000      0.018***   -0.003      0.004**    -0.004      0.033***
1))
                                 (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.002)     (0.006)    (0.011)
Growth Rate(t-1)                -0.089**    0.318***   -0.128**   0.322***   -0.153***   0.343***
                                 (0.035)     (0.083)    (0.053)    (0.098)    (0.057)     (0.118)
Urban Population (t-1)          0.118***    0.057**      0.042      -0.031    0.114**      0.079
                                 (0.041)     (0.023)    (0.031)    (0.024)    (0.053)     (0.058)
Population Density (t-1)         0.000**      0.000      0.000      -0.000      0.000      -0.000
                                 (0.000)     (0.001)    (0.000)    (0.001)    (0.000)     (0.001)
Prior Transitions To              -0.002                -0.004                 -0.003
Dictatorship(t-1)
                                 (0.003)                (0.003)               (0.004)
Log(Constitutional Age(t-1))        -                      -                 -0.020***
                                0.008***               0.016***
                                 (0.002)                (0.004)               (0.005)
# of Democracies in System(t-     0.000                  0.000                 -0.000
1)
                                 (0.000)               (0.000)                (0.000)
Interwar Period                      -                  -0.026               -0.058***
                                0.023***
                                 (0.008)                (0.016)               (0.019)
Bretton Woods Period            -0.019**                 0.046                 -0.024
                                 (0.008)                (0.045)               (0.049)
Post Bretton Woods Period       -0.022**                 0.038                 -0.061
                                 (0.010)                (0.042)               (0.048)
Natural Resource Exporter        -0.015*                 -0.013                0.018
                                 (0.008)                (0.009)               (0.018)
Socialist Legal Origin            -0.007                 -0.019                0.007
                                 (0.011)                (0.014)               (0.026)
Latin America                     0.004                  -0.012                0.036
                                 (0.010)                (0.010)               (0.023)
Middle East                          -                      -                  -0.028
                                0.057***               0.050***
                                 (0.009)                (0.016)               (0.018)
Africa                            -0.006                    -                  0.021
                                                       0.051***
                                 (0.019)                (0.014)               (0.047)
Asia                             -0.020*                 -0.015                0.055
                                 (0.012)                (0.017)               (0.038)
British Colonial Heritage       0.028***                 -0.004                0.022
                                 (0.008)                (0.011)               (0.019)
French Colonial Heritage          -0.011                 -0.017              -0.034**
                                 (0.007)                (0.012)               (0.015)
Spanish Colonial Heritage         0.003                  -0.009                -0.014
                                 (0.008)                (0.012)               (0.014)
Constant                          0.012     0.889***   0.057***    1.05***    0.039*     0.930***



                                                 54
                                    (0.014)      (0.022)      (0.018)       (0.043)       (0.021)       (0.062)
Observations                         6837                      4804                        4468
F                                  7632.449                  5218.815                    2812.100
 p-value                             0.000                     0.000                       0.000
First Stage F: Trade                627.76                                                204.44
 p-value                             0.000                                                 0.000
First Stage F:                      289.19                                                114.10
Trade*Democracy
 p-value                             0.000                                                 0.000
First Stage F: Capital Controls                                15.72                       15.43
 p-value                                                       0.000                       0.000
First Stage F: Capital                                         13.68                       12.25
Con*Demo
 p-value                                                       0.000                      0.000
Cragg-Donald Under-ID Test          88.790                    19.071                     10.081
 p-value                             0.000                     0.000                      0.006
Hansen J Statistic                   0.306                     0.002                      0.258
 p-value                             0.858                     0.966                      0.611
Instruments                           Dist                      Inf                        Dist
                                     Area                     Gov Bal                     Area
                                      Pop                     Ec Size                    Ec Size
                                    Ec Size                                                Inf
                                                                                        Gov Def
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments used in the first stage
model (Dist=log(Average Distance)t-2, Inf=Inflationt-2, Gov Bal=Government Surplus/Deficitt-2, Ec
Size=log(GDPt-2), Pop=Log(Population)t-2) Area=Log(Country Size)t-2. The F-test refers to the F-test for
the second stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation robust F-test for
testing the exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald Under-ID tests the null
hypothesis that the first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the null that the first stage
is over-identified. .
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                       55
                                          Table 12
                       Democracy, Land-Labor Ratios and Trade Openness
                                                   Whole             Gold         Interwar       1960-2000
                                                   Sample         Standard         Period
Democracy(t-1)                                     1.146*         1.281***          1.403         1.822***
                                                   (0.670)         (0.485)         (7.563)         (0.516)
Democracy*Land-Labor Ratio(t-1)                   -1.054**          -0.222          -0.051          -0.519
                                                   (0.515)         (0.252)         (5.119)         (0.401)
Log(Distance(t-1))                                -0.605**          -0.071          0.714        -1.324***
                                                   (0.252)         (0.365)         (4.001)         (0.222)
Log(Country Size(t-1))                              -0.035         0.079*           -0.084        -0.053**
                                                   (0.027)         (0.045)         (0.656)         (0.025)
Log(Total Population(t-1))                        0.227***        0.174***          0.327         0.314***
                                                   (0.068)         (0.067)         (0.207)         (0.049)
Log(Total GDP PPP(t-1))                          -0.556***       -0.740***       -0.682***       -0.639***
                                                   (0.085)         (0.056)         (0.075)         (0.054)
Interwar Period                                     0.141
                                                   (0.280)
Bretton Woods Period                                0.449
                                                   (0.313)
Post Bretton Woods Period                         1.513***                                        1.223***
                                                   (0.455)                                         (0.123)
Constant                                          5.439***         1.728           -5.767        11.757***
                                                   (1.925)        (3.185)         (37.681)         (1.826)
Observations                                         5676           621             506             4502
F                                                  68.114         74.516           42.580          92.958
p-value                                             0.000          0.000           0.000            0.000
Joint χ2 test: Democracy, LLR &                     41.40          18.76           17.62            58.52
Interaction
p-value                                            0.000           0.000           0.000            0.000
First Stage F: Democracy                           85.28           96.27           47.20           117.79
p-value                                            0.000           0.000           0.000            0.000
First Stage F: Democracy*LLR                       86.30           398.68          40.74           115.03
                                                   0.000           0.000           0.000            0.000
Cragg-Donald Underid Test                         122.966         257.183          1.184          243.674
p-value                                            0.000           0.000           0.277            0.000
Hansen J Statistic                                Exactly         Exactly         Exactly         Exactly
p-value                                          Identified      Identified     Identified       Identified
Instruments                                       Pop Den       Sum Trans        Tot Dem          Pop Den
                                                  Brit Col        Brit Col       Brit Col         Brit Col
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Both Democracyt-1 and Democracy*Land-Labor Ratiot-1 are considered
endogenous variables. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments used in the first stage model
(Pop Den=Population Densityt-2, Brit Col=Former British Colony). The F-test refers to the F-test for the
second stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation robust F-test for testing
the exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald Under-ID tests the null hypothesis that
the first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the null that the first stage is over-
identified.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                     56
                                           Table 13
                       Democracy, Capital-Labor Ratios, Land-Labor Ratios
                                     and Trade Openness
                                                  Whole            Gold        Interwar      1960-2000
                                                 Sample         Standard        Period
Democracy(t-1)                                  8.522***       7.416***       2.487***           2.791
                                                 (3.140)         (2.075)        (0.956)        (5.997)
Democracy*Land-Labor Ratio(t-1)                   -1.086       -7.883***         -1.078          7.826
                                                 (1.206)         (2.638)        (0.668)       (10.714)
Democracy*Capital-Labor Ratio(t-10)               1.938*       22.840**           0.782      3.600***
                                                 (1.051)         (9.088)        (1.052)        (0.886)
Log(Distance(t-1))                               -1.368*       4.313***       1.711***          -0.589
                                                 (0.757)         (1.623)        (0.641)        (1.069)
Log(Country Size(t-1))                             0.120          -0.185         -0.033         -0.247
                                                 (0.133)         (0.163)        (0.152)        (0.218)
Log(Total Population(t-1))                      0.983***          -0.396      0.314***       0.749***
                                                 (0.242)         (0.327)        (0.108)        (0.201)
Log(Total GDP PPP(t-1))                         -1.797***      -0.777***      -0.743***      -1.184***
                                                 (0.357)         (0.146)        (0.064)        (0.355)
Interwar Period                                   -0.050
                                                 (0.480)
Bretton Woods Period                              1.253*                                        -2.040
                                                 (0.656)                                       (1.283)
Post Bretton Woods Period                       3.762***
                                                 (1.016)
Constant                                          9.779*       -27.607**      -13.968**         9.043
                                                 (5.787)        (11.481)       (5.738)        (11.184)
Observations                                       5106            543            467           3941
F                                                  9.150          8.516         50.177          9.425
p-value                                            0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000
First Stage F: Democracy                            5.02          64.42         109.80          86.19
p-value                                            0.002          0.000          0.000          0.000
First Stage F: Democracy*KL Ratio                  32.17          24.37          41.41          54.26
p-value                                            0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000
First Stage F: Democracy*LL ratio                  23.57         249.90         138.93          45.31
p-value                                            0.000          0.000         0.000           0.000
Joint χ2 test: Democracy, Ratios &                 19.62          13.55         29.12           28.12
Interactions
 p-value                                          0.0002          0.004          0.000          0.000
Joint χ2 test: Democracy, KL Ratio &              19.24           13.08          9.70           3.12
Interaction
 p-value                                           0.000          0.001          0.008          0.210
Joint χ2 test: Democracy, LL Ratio &               7.40           13.45          7.83           28.81
Interaction
 p-value                                           0.025          0.001            0.020         0.000
Cragg-Donald Underid Test                         46.228         17.232           49.638         1.696
p-value                                            0.000          0.000           0.000          0.193
Hansen J Statistic                                Exactly        Exactly         Exactly        Exactly
p-value                                          Identified     Identified      Identified     Identified
Instruments                                      Tot Dem       Sum Trans        Sum Trans     Sum Trans
                                                Const Age      Const Age        Const Age     Const Age
                                                  Brit Col       Brit Col        Brit Col       Brit Col
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Democracyt-1, Democracy*Capital-Labor Ratiot-1 and Democracy*Land-
Labor Ratiot-1 are considered endogenous variables. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments



                                                   57
used in the first stage model (Const Age=log(Constitutional Age)t-2, Sum Trans=Total Number of
Transitions to Autocracy for Country it-2, Urban=Urbanization-t-2, Brit Col=Former British Colony). The
F-test refers to the F-test for the second stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and auto-
correlation robust F-test for testing the exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald
Under-ID tests the null hypothesis that the first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the
null that the first stage is over-identified.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                      58
                                        Table 14
                  Democracy, Capital-Labor Ratios, Land-Labor Ratios and
                                     Capital Controls
                                                          Whole         Interwar        1960-2000
                                                         Sample          Period
Democracy(t-1)                                         -0.811***          -7.753         -0.542**
                                                         (0.299)       (127.240)          (0.227)
Democracy*Land-Labor Ratio(t-1)                           0.187           -0.535           0.135
                                                         (0.153)        (11.516)          (0.234)
Democracy*Capital-Labor Ratio(t-1)                     -0.649***          4.522         -0.525***
                                                         (0.200)        (82.739)          (0.157)
Interwar Period                                         0.328***
                                                         (0.076)
Bretton Woods Period                                    0.686***
                                                         (0.146)
Post Bretton Woods Period                                0.395**                          -0.147*
                                                         (0.201)                          (0.076)
Log(Total GDP PPP(t-1))                                   0.011           -0.490           0.014
                                                         (0.014)         (7.341)          (0.011)
Log(GDP Per Capita PPP(t-1))                            0.375***          4.345           0.242**
                                                         (0.137)        (70.991)          (0.103)
Systemic Crises(t-1)                                      0.005           0.146           0.005**
                                                         (0.003)         (2.000)          (0.002)
Systemic Capital Controls(t-1)                           0.004*           -0.087           -0.001
                                                         (0.002)         (2.220)          (0.002)
Inflation(t-1)                                          0.000***          0.054          0.000***
                                                         (0.000)         (0.879)          (0.000)
Government Balance(t-1)                                 -0.010**          -0.083         -0.009**
                                                         (0.004)         (1.355)          (0.004)
Constant                                               -2.617***        -26.203            -0.702
                                                         (0.990)       (434.670)          (0.837)
Observations                                              4045             241              3317
F                                                        54.220           0.364           24.276
p-value                                                   0.000           0.951            0.000
First Stage F: Democracy                                  11.39            4.15            14.45
p-value                                                   0.000           0.007            0.000
First Stage F: Democracy*KL Ratio                         23.75           50.61            28.16
p-value                                                   0.000           0.000            0.000
First Stage F: Democracy*LL Ratio                         20.95          255.25            10.62
p-value                                                   0.000           0.000            0.000
Joint χ2 test: Democracy, Ratios & Interactions           15.03            0.05            15.11
 p-value                                                   0.00          0.9972            0.002
Joint χ2 test: Democracy, KL Ratio & Interaction          15.03            0.04            13.75
 p-value                                                  0.001           0.979            0.018
Joint χ2 test: Democracy, LL Ratio & Interaction           7.46            0.02             8.18
 p-value                                                  0.024           0.987            0.017
Cragg-Donald Underid Test                                64.029           0.006           42.833
p-value                                                   0.000           0.940            0.000
Hansen J Statistic                                       Exactly         Exactly          Exactly
p-value                                                Identified      Identified       Identified
Instruments                                             Tot Dem         Tot Dem          Tot Dem
                                                       Const Age       Const Age        Const Age
                                                        Brit Col        Brit Col         Brit Col
Instrumental variables regression estimated via GMM; heteroscedastic and auto-correlation consistent
standard errors in parentheses. Democracyt-1, Democracy*Capital-Labor Ratiot-1 and Democracy*Land-



                                                59
Labor Ratiot-1 are considered endogenous variables. Instruments refer to the set of exogenous instruments
used in the first stage model (Const Tot Dem=Total Number of Democracies in the Systemt-2, Pop
Den=Population Densityt-2, Urban=Urbanization-2, Brit Col=Former British Colony). The F-test refers to
the F-test for the second stage model. The First Stage F is the heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation robust
F-test for testing the exclusion of the instruments from the first stage; Cragg-Donald Under-ID tests the null
hypothesis that the first stage is under-identified and the Hansen J Statistic tests the null that the first stage
is over-identified.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                       60
                Figure 1
Evolution of Globalization and Democracy




                  61
                                     Figure 2
              Estimated Relationships Between Trade and Democracy
             (Democracy is on the horizontal axis, trade on the vertical)




Note: to generate these relationships we took the estimate impact of democracy on trade
(Table 1) and obtained the predicted values holding all other variables at their means.
We then took the exponent and standardized these values so that they run between 0 and
1. Similarly, we took the estimated the impact of trade on democracy (Table 5) and
obtained the predicted probability of democracy. (We standardized the actual values of
trade openness so that it ranges between 0 and 1.)




                                           62
