                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FRATERNITY MEMBERSHIP AND BINGE DRINKING

                                              Jeff DeSimone

                                          Working Paper 12468
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12468


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Jeff DeSimone. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fraternity Membership and Binge Drinking
Jeff DeSimone
NBER Working Paper No. 12468
August 2006
JEL No. I12

                                           ABSTRACT


This paper examines the relationship between membership in social fraternities and sororities and
binge drinking among 18–24 year old full-time four-year college students who participated in the
1995 National College Health Risk Behavior Survey. To deal with unobserved heterogeneity in
binge drinking incidence and frequency regressions, I enter as explanatory variables various
measures of situational and overall alcohol use. When these are added, the fraternity membership
coefficient is substantially reduced in size, but remains large and highly significant. This suggests
that fraternity membership increases binge drinking. If not, it identifies a very specific mechanism
underlying the decision to join a fraternity: members drink more intensely than non-members even
while doing so in similar frequencies and situations and for similar lengths of time. Particularly
notable is that behavior by underage students appears to drive the relationship.


Jeffrey S. DeSimone
Department of Economics
College of Business Administration
University of South Florida
4202 East Fowler Avenue, BSN 3403
Tampa, FL 33620-5500
and NBER
jdesimon@coba.usf.edu
1. Introduction

           Social fraternities and sororities play a prominent role in the lives of students at many

colleges and universities. Over 18 percent of 18–24 year old full-time, four year college students

sampled by the 1995 National College Health Risk Behavior Survey (NCHRBS) were fraternity

members, while slightly more than 12 percent of 17–25 year old four year college students

surveyed by the 2001 Harvard College Alcohol Study reported fraternity membership.1

Although fraternities serve a variety of functions, the predominant activity with which they are

associated is the consumption of alcohol.

           Fraternities often connote a culture of heavy drinking, as famously portrayed in the movie

Animal House. Anecdotal evidence of problematic drinking at fraternity events abounds.

Objective data confirm that fraternity members drink more heavily than do non-members. In the

NCHRBS, for instance, the rate of binge drinking, i.e. consuming at least five alcoholic

beverages within a few hours, at least once in the past month was 69 percent among fraternity

members and 42 percent among non-members. Academic studies using data from the Harvard

College Alcohol Study (Chaloupka and Wechsler, 1996) and the Core Alcohol and Drug Survey

(Alva, 1998 and Cashin et al., 1998) have documented that fraternity and sorority members drink

more frequently and heavily than their non-member peers.

           It is tempting to conclude from this descriptive evidence that fraternity membership itself

is the reason that fraternity members drink more excessively than do non-members. But does

fraternity membership truly cause heavy drinking? More specifically, would the incidence or

frequency of drunkenness among students who join fraternities decline in the absence of

fraternities? That is the question on which this study seeks to provide information.



1
    Throughout the paper, the term “fraternity” is meant to apply more generally to sororities as well as fraternities.


                                                             1
       It is probable that students who join fraternities do so at least in part because they like to

drink heavily and perceive that fraternity membership will facilitate such behavior by grouping

them with other students who share these preferences. For example, Sacerdote (2001) found that

among the Dartmouth College senior classes of 1997 and 1998, students who drank in high

school were more likely to join a fraternity than those who did not. Baer et al. (1995), Schall et

al. (1992) and Wechsler et al. (1996) obtain similar evidence, and also report that among students

who drank in high school, those who joined fraternities were more likely to have been heavy

drinkers than moderate drinkers.

       In the extreme, imagine that self-selection of heavy drinkers into fraternities is the sole

mechanism underlying the correlation between drinking and fraternity membership, and that

heavy-drinking students would ultimately socialize together even if fraternities did not exist.

Under this scenario, heavier drinking among fraternity members could not be attributed to

membership, i.e. eliminating fraternities would not reduce heavy drinking among students who

would have otherwise joined fraternities.

       Contradicting this hypothesis, Borsari and Carey (1999) outline three ways in which

fraternity membership might directly increase heavy drinking. One is by providing social

pressure to drink heavily in order to gain acceptance and avoid social ostracism among fellow

members who are observed to engage in heavy drinking. Another is by elevating perceptions of

peer drinking norms, which already tend to be overestimated by the typical college student. The

third is by providing a physical environment that is conducive to heaving drinking because of the

ready availability of alcohol and insulation from students who are less tolerant of excessive

drinking.




                                                  2
       Some evidence suggests that fraternity membership does indeed directly increase heavy

drinking. Lo and Globetti (1995) find that students who do not binge drink upon college entry

are three times more likely to start binge drinking if they join a fraternity. Also, Sher et al.

(2001) estimate that fraternity members drank more heavily than non-members during college,

even controlling for previous alcohol use, but that drinking behavior no longer differed across

membership status three years after college.

       This study addresses the question of whether fraternity membership causes binge

drinking using a fairly straightforward and non-technical proxy variable approach. Specifically,

it includes a set of potentially endogenous variables as explanatory factors to control for

unmeasured determinants of binge drinking that might be correlated with fraternity membership.

The unique aspect of the paper is that the main proxy variables are measures of alcohol use,

including but not constrained to binge drinking, during the current period. The analysis thus

identifies the effect of fraternity membership on binge drinking using differences between

members and non-members who consume alcohol, not categorized with respect to intensity, in

identical frequencies and situations.

       Because it is impossible to determine if proxy variables completely control for the

spurious correlation linking two endogenous variables, it would be overly ambitious to state the

goal of the study as providing a precise estimate of the causal effect of fraternity membership on

binge drinking. In this case, however, the current alcohol use measures specified as proxies

explicitly control for the exact type of unobserved heterogeneity that is expected to contaminate

the relationship of interest. Moreover, this approach attributes a sizable portion of the observed

variation in binge drinking to non-binge alcohol use rather than fraternity membership, even

though the latter might directly influence non-binge as well as binge drinking.




                                                  3
       Thus, the analysis prospectively provides a conservative estimate of the causal effect of

fraternity membership on binge drinking. At the very least, it isolates a component of the

correlation between fraternity membership and binge drinking that is arguably non-causal, and

outlines the selection mechanisms that would have to prevail to invalidate the interpretation of

the remaining correlation as a causal effect. Namely, for the identified effect to not be causal,

two conditions must hold: fraternity membership must not directly influence non-binge alcohol

consumption, and students who join fraternities must do so because they binge drink more often

than other students who otherwise consume alcohol with the same frequency, in the same

situations and over the same period of time.

       The concern about binge drinking among college students is the many potential harmful

effects it can have on others. These include physical and psychological damage from drunken

driving, physical violence, vandalism, and forced or risky sexual activity. Even reduced

educational attainment or academic performance is a legitimate concern, if we believe that the

knowledge obtained from schooling conveys a positive social benefit. The efforts that will most

effectively limit external effects of college student binge drinking depend in part on whether

fraternities play a causal role in such drinking.



2. Data and Empirical Strategy

       This analysis aims to estimate the effect of social fraternity and sorority membership on

binge drinking among college students. The main econometric issue that must be surmounted is

the expected presence of unobserved factors that simultaneously determine fraternity

membership and binge drinking. In particular, fraternity members likely engage in binge

drinking with greater likelihood or frequency than non-members at least in part precisely because




                                                    4
their preferences for binge drinking led them to join a fraternity. If so, some of the excess

drinking among fraternity members relative to non-members would still be observed even in the

absence of fraternities. The goal of the analysis is to address this omitted variable problem, upon

which it can be established how much of the initial correlation between fraternity membership

and binge drinking remains and whether this remaining correlation is statistically and

economically significant.2

         The empirical strategy is to include proxies for the specific type of unobserved

heterogeneity that is expected to bias the estimated relationship between binge drinking and

fraternity membership. Ideally, controls for binge drinking preferences could be included to

break the spurious correlation between fraternity membership and binge drinking that exists

separately from any causal relationship running from membership to drinking. The approach

pursued here is to include observable factors that closely approximate the omitted preference

measures.

         What makes this analysis distinctive is the use of several measures of current alcohol use

to reflect unobserved tastes for drinking that might influence both fraternity membership status

and current binge drinking. Current drinking, defined without regard to categorization as

binging, i.e. that includes both binge and non-binge drinking episodes, is clearly related to the

same underlying preferences that determine binge drinking. Simply controlling for current

drinking status, however, leaves open the possibility that the remaining correlation between

fraternity membership and binge drinking simply represents a scenario in which members gain



2
 I consider the endogeneity problem to be solely due to omitted variables. One could conceivably also admit the
possibility of reverse causation, i.e. that binge drinking causes fraternity membership. I dismiss this mechanism
because it implies that variations in current binge drinking directly lead to changes in fraternity membership status.
The latter rarely changes for a student except for when the student joins a fraternity, and binge drinking clearly
depends on unobserved preferences. A complete accounting for unobserved heterogeneity, therefore, would seem to
eliminate the potential for reverse causation.


                                                          5
more utility from binge drinking than do non-members who are also drinkers. To address this

concern, measures of drinking frequency and duration as well as the incidence of drinking in

various circumstances that are particularly risky are included. Any self-selection that persists

would have to be quite specific, in that it would involve binge drinking differences between

members and non-members who shared the same frequencies and durations of drinking as well

as propensities to drink in several extreme situations. Moreover, this strategy could yield

conservative estimates of fraternity membership effects on binge drinking, because non-binge

alcohol consumption could also be a function of fraternity membership.

       These drinking preference proxies are included on top of a baseline model that controls

for many standard individual characteristics and are ultimately accompanied by other proxies for

omitted factors that are not directly related to alcohol use. The vector of controls can therefore

be divided into four groups: an indicator for fraternity membership (F), a set of variables that are

plausibly exogenous with respect to unobserved determinants of binge drinking (X), a set of

alcohol use measures intended to represent omitted factors that influence both fraternity

membership and binge drinking (A), and a set of additional non-drinking covariates that are

included for the same reason as the alcohol use measures (U). A regression equation that

summarizes this empirical approach is

                            B=   0   +   1F   +X   2   +A   3   +U   4   + ,                         (1)
                                                   2
where B represents binge drinking, ~ N(0,              ) includes unobserved determinants of binge

drinking, and the   are the regression parameters.

       Variants of equation (1) are estimated using data from the National College Health Risk

Behavior Survey (NCHRBS), which was developed by the Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention (CDC) and administered during the first half of 1995. As described in CDC (1997),




                                                        6
the purpose of the NCHRBS was to monitor a broad range of health-risk behaviors among

college students. A two-stage cluster sample design was used to produce a nationally

representative sample of undergraduate students aged 18 and over. In the first stage, 74 four-

year institutions and 74 two-year institutions were selected, with probability proportional to

undergraduate enrollment size, from 16 strata formed based on the relative percentage of black

and Hispanic students. The second stage consisted of a random sample of undergraduates in the

136 participating institutions, with targets of 56 students from four-year schools and 72 students

from two-year schools. Of the 8,810 students selected, 7,442 were deemed eligible and 4,838

completed the questionnaire, which was sent by mail to students for self-administration.

Responses were voluntary and confidential.

       The sample for this analysis is restricted to undergraduate students who were 18–24 years

old when their interviews occurred. As of the survey period, 57 percent of the 12 million

students enrolled in U.S. colleges and universities were ages 18–24, and one quarter of U.S.

residents in this age range were full- or part-time college students. The analysis sample also

includes only full-time students from four-year schools. These restrictions are made because the

excluded group of students who are older, part-time or at two-year schools contains very few

fraternity members. Sensitivity analyses, however, are conducted to verify that these sample

exclusion criteria do not drive the estimation results.

       The two dependent variables in the regressions are constructed from information on the

number of days in the past 30 days on which the respondent engaged in binge drinking, i.e.

consumed at least five alcoholic beverages in the span of a few hours. One is an indicator that

any binge drinking occurred, regressions of which are estimated using a probit model. Rather




                                                  7
than probit coefficients, the tables report the average marginal effect for sample respondents, as

opposed to the marginal effect at the average explanatory variable values.

        The other dependent variable is a measure of binge drinking days. The survey reports

only categorical information, with choices of 0, 1, 2, 3–5, 6–9, 10–19, and 20 or more.

Consequently, this variable is analyzed using an interval regression model. This method handles

the lower bound of zero, and top interval upper bound of 30, identically to a Tobit model. The

interval model departs from the Tobit, however, by recognizing that while values of 1 and 2

represent exact numbers of days, all that is known about observations with values in the

remaining three categories are the lowest and highest possible number of days that the value

could represent.

        Like the probit and Tobit models, the interval model is estimated using maximum

likelihood. Rewriting equation (1) as B = Z + , the likelihood function is

                                                             2                                                       2
                                 Z        1        1− Z                                      1           2−Z
     L =            log Φ −             −                        + log 2πσ             2
                                                                                           −                             + log 2πσ 2
             B =0                 σ       2 B =1     σ                                       2 B=2           σ
                                       5−Z           3− Z                                          9−Z               6−Z
             +                log Φ             −Φ                   +                 log Φ                 −Φ                        , (2)
                 B∈[ 3, 5 ]             σ                σ               B∈[ 6 , 9 ]                 σ                    σ
                                       19 − Z            10 − Z                                              20 − Z
             +                 log Φ               −Φ                       +                    log 1 − Φ
                 B∈[10 ,19 ]                σ                σ                   B∈[ 20 , 30 ]                   σ

where    () is the standard cumulative normal distribution. In lieu of coefficients, which represent

marginal effects on the underlying B* which in principle can be negative or larger than 30, the

tables report marginal effects on the observed B. These are calculated by multiplying the

                                                                                       20 − Z                    Z
coefficients by the probability that 0 < B < 20, i.e. by Φ                                           −Φ −                . This adjusts the
                                                                                           σ                     σ

coefficient downward in magnitude because the lower and upper bounds, i.e. zero and 30 days,

are true corner solutions. Again, these marginal effects are averages across sample respondents.



                                                                 8
       The key explanatory variable in the regressions, F, indicates whether or not the student

reports being a member of a social fraternity or sorority. This does not incorporate information

on whether the student resides in a fraternity or sorority house. Only 58 of the 260 fraternity

members in the analysis sample, i.e. 22 percent, also live in a fraternity house.

       The vector X of exogenous drinking determinants includes a set of indicators that control

for gender, age, grade level, race, marital status, parental education and school. An indicator is

included for females, each age from 19–24 (age 18 omitted), the sophomore, junior and senior

classes (freshmen omitted), non-Hispanic blacks, Hispanics, Asians and other non-white, non-

Hispanics (non-Hispanic whites omitted), married and separated, divorced or widowed (never

married omitted), each parent not finishing high school, graduating from high school, having

some college and graduating from college (“not sure” omitted), and for each institution

represented except one. The school fixed effects are not strictly exogenous, but are potentially

important to include as controls for student selection into schools on the basis of drinking

prevalence and fraternity presence.

       As described above, the vector A consists of five alcohol use measures that are intended

to proxy for unobserved tastes for alcohol that might simultaneously influence fraternity

membership and binge drinking. Three of these correspond to the past 30 day period, including

the number of days alcohol was consumed and the number of times alcohol was consumed

before driving and in combination with illegal drugs. All three measures are collapsed from

categorical responses by assigning midpoints and top-codes. Possible choices were zero, 1–2, 3–

5, 6–9, 10–19, 20–29, and 30 for drinking days, zero, 1, 2–3, 4–5, and 6 or more for drunk

driving, and 0, 1–2, 3–9, 10–19, 20–39, and 40 or more for use with drugs. Top-codes of 6.4 for

drunk driving (three percent of the sample) and 40 (0.1 percent) are specified, assuming that




                                                 9
positive values have an approximate normal distribution (as is done for all top-codes) and

rounding to the nearest tenth.

       The other two alcohol use proxies are an indicator of whether alcohol or drugs were used

before the most recent episode of sexual intercourse, and the number of years since alcohol was

first consumed. The latter is formed by subtracting from respondent age the response to a

question asking the age at which the respondent first had a drink of alcohol other than a few sips.

Choices for the latter question were never, 12 or younger, 13–14, 15–16, 17–18, 19–20, and 21–

24. This was converted to a single variable equaling respondent age for those who had never

consumed alcohol (forcing the resulting years variable to equal zero), 19 year olds reporting 19–

20, and 21 year olds reporting 21–24; 12 for those reporting the youngest category (12 percent of

the sample); interval midpoints for all reporting 13–14, 15–16 and 17–18, 20 year olds reporting

19–20 and 24 year olds reporting 21–24; 21.5 for 22 year olds reporting 21–24; and 22 for 23

year olds reporting 21–24. The latter two assignments represent the midpoint between the lower

bound age of 21 and the age of the respondent.

       Alcohol consumption frequency and duration are intended to directly reflect preferences

for drinking. The drinking before sex variable is motivated by the finding in Cashin et al. (1998)

that fraternity members are more likely than non-members to view drinking as a vehicle for

sexual opportunity. Cashin et al. (1998) also show that fraternity members are more likely than

non-members to experience negative consequences from the use of alcohol and other drugs,

while Williams et al. (2004) find that alcohol and marijuana are economic complements among

college students. Meanwhile, if fraternities are primarily non-residential and serve as a location

at which members are likely to consume alcohol, fraternity members might have more

opportunities to drink and drive regardless of any effect that membership has on binge drinking.




                                                 10
       To reiterate, the central assertion of the study is that these five alcohol use variables

control for much of the unobserved heterogeneity that might contaminate the estimated effect of

fraternity membership on binge drinking. With these alcohol consumption measures included,

the effect of fraternity membership is identified by comparing members and non-members who

have consumed alcohol for the same length of time and, in the past 30 days, drank on

approximately the same number of days, drove and used an illegal drug while drinking about the

same number of times, and had the same drinking status the last time they had sex. If this effect

is not entirely causal, self-selection into fraternities must occur on the basis of very specific

tastes for binge drinking relative to more moderate drinking. One could alternatively argue that

the regressions over-control for drinking that might truly be caused by fraternity membership, so

that the estimated effect on binging is conservative.

       Finally, the vector U includes several other covariates that can potentially control for

unobserved heterogeneity in the relationship between fraternity membership and binge drinking.

To separate the effect of the fraternity environment from that specifically attributable to

membership, a set of indicators reflect whether respondents live in a residence hall, fraternity or

sorority house, other institutional housing, off-campus residence, or parent or guardian’s home,

with “other” as the omitted category. Because working might have both substitution and income

effects on fraternity activity and drinking, a variable representing the number of weekly hours

the respondent works for pay is constructed from choices of zero, 1–9, 10–19, 20–29, 30–39, 40,

and more than 40, using interval midpoints and a top code of 45. The number of sports teams on

which the respondent played (intra- or extramural), with a top-code of 3.3 assigned for the “3 or

more” category, and height each might proxy for popularity (Persico et al., 2004), which could




                                                  11
influence both membership and drinking. The same is true for bodyweight, which also helps

determine the amount of alcohol necessary to cause inebriation.

        Two additional controls are included in the U vector. The number of cigarettes smoked

in the past 30 days, formed by multiplying days smoked and the number smoked per day, proxies

for time preference (Fersterer and Winter-Ebmer, 2003). The days variable is analogous to that

for alcohol, while midpoints and a top-code of 21 are assigned for cigarettes per day categories

of zero, less than one, one, 2–5, 6–10, 11–20, and more than 20. Finally, the number of times

marijuana was used in the past 30 days accounts for the potential interrelationship between

alcohol and marijuana for college students, as cited above (Williams et al., 2004). This is

recoded, using a top-code of 41, from a variable with the same categories as the alcohol and drug

combination variable.

        The sample size for the analysis is 1,404, from 66 different schools representing between

four to 48 respondents. This includes only respondents for whom all variables listed above are

observed. Regressions are estimated using NCHRBS sampling weights. To verify robustness,

however, models that also include additional respondents for whom the only missing information

pertains to a U variable and that are unweighted are also estimated. Standard errors are adjusted

to be robust to arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity.3

        Weighted sample means are provided in table 1. Column 1 shows unconditional means,

while columns 2 and 3 show means, respectively, for fraternity members, who comprise 18

percent of the sample, and non-members. Nearly half of respondents binge drank at least once in

the past 30 days. Combined with the binge days mean of 2.5, this implies that students who

binge drank did so an average of more than five of the past 30 days. As expected, binge drinking


3
 The precise notation for equation (2), therefore, would have each term multiplied by a weight variable, and add a
subscript to 2 signifying that it can vary across observations.


                                                        12
is much more prevalent and frequent among fraternity members than non-members. Among

drinkers, fraternity members binge drank an average of 6.7 days compared to 4.8 days for non-

members. Fraternity members are more likely than non-members to be male, in the middle of

the age distribution, juniors and seniors, white, and unmarried, and to have mothers who attended

college and fathers who graduated from college. Overall and situational alcohol use is also much

more common among fraternity members. Fraternity housing appears to crowd out primarily off

campus housing rather than dormitories. Compared with non-members, fraternity members

work fewer hours in paid jobs, are taller and heavier, play on more sports teams, and use

cigarettes and marijuana more often.



3. Results

a. Baseline estimates

       Results for baseline models that do not control for alcohol use or other heterogeneity

proxies are shown in table 2. Columns 1 and 4 indicate large and highly significant bivariate

relationships between fraternity membership and past 30 day binge drinking, with implied semi-

elasticities at the dependent variable means of .56 for any binge drinking and .83 for days of

binge drinking. Adding exogenous personal characteristics in columns 2 and 5 has only a small

mediating effect on the fraternity coefficient sizes, which are reduced by 18 percent for any

binge drinking and 22 percent for binge drinking days. Moreover, in contrast to the presumption

that school fixed effects would absorb some of the self-selection of heavy drinkers into

fraternities, fraternity coefficients increase slightly when school indicators are added in columns

3 and 6. These estimates predict that, in the previous 30 days compared to non-members,

fraternity members are more likely to binge drink by 23 percentage points (i.e. 47 percent), and




                                                13
binge drink on 1.7 additional days (i.e. 67 percent). Out of hand, these seem too large to reflect

purely causal effects, thus warranting the insertion in subsequent models of the previously

described controls for unobserved confounders.

       Columns 2 and 3 also show the coefficients of the included exogenous variables, other

than the school indicators. Binge drinking is more common among males, whites and the

unmarried, but not significantly related to age, grade level, or parental education.



b. Adding alcohol use covariates

       Tables 3 and 4 present results for models that include alcohol use covariates to account

for self-selection of students into fraternities based on drinking preferences. The dependent

variable is the binge drinking indicator in table 3 and the number of binge drinking days in table

4. For both, the starting point is the specification in columns 3 and 6 of table 2, i.e. with all

exogenous factors including school indicators on the right hand side. Columns 1–5 add to this a

single alcohol use variable, while column 6 inserts all five of the alcohol use variables at once.

       For both forms of the dependent variable, each alcohol use measure enters highly

significantly and reduces the size of the fraternity membership coefficient. The covariate that

has the largest quantitative impact by far is days of drinking in the past 30 days, which enters in

column 1. Adding drinking days as an explanatory factor reduces the fraternity membership

coefficient by 60 percent in table 3 and 72 percent in table 4. In terms of the pseudo R-squared,

i.e. the ratio of the model and constant-only log likelihoods subtracted from one, the drinking

days variable explains an additional 31 percent of the total variation in binge drinking propensity

and 25 percent of the variation in frequency. Six more days of consuming alcohol, which is




                                                  14
slightly less than the standard deviation of 6.2, predicts binge drinking increases of 31 percentage

points in the probability of occurrence and nearly two days.

       Importantly, however, the effect of fraternity membership remains highly significant.

This is partly because the additional explanatory power of days drinking reduces the standard

errors of the estimates by lowering the regression standard errors (i.e. increasing the pseudo R-

squared). This is especially noticeable in table 4, in which the nearly three-quarters reduction in

coefficient size is accompanied by a t statistic decline of only 45 percent.

       Drinking and driving (column 4) is the next most important alcohol use behavior in terms

of both the partial R-squared and the reduction in magnitude of the fraternity coefficient.

Drinking before sex (column 5) follows in importance, having a larger impact in table 3 than in

table 4 perhaps because, as an indicator, it better explains binge drinking occurrence than

frequency. While years since first consuming alcohol (column 2) has the largest t-statistic in

table 3, and in partial R-squared terms its contribution is more important than that of using

alcohol with drugs (column 3) and comparable to that of drinking before sex, it has the smallest

impact on the fraternity coefficient. Years of drinking also has the largest predetermined

component of the alcohol covariates. Fraternity involvement can bring about drinking initiation

only for students who did not drink until entering college, but 58 percent of respondents first

drank by age 16 and another 22 percent did so at age 17 or 18. The relative lack of influence of

years since first drinking on the fraternity coefficient could therefore signal that fraternity

membership directly affects the other alcohol measures. Net of further omitted factors, this

suggests that a model including all of these measures might yield a conservative estimate of the

effect of fraternity membership on binge drinking.




                                                  15
       Estimates for the model just described are given in column 6. Even when included

simultaneously, all five alcohol covariates are highly significant with the exception of using

alcohol with drugs in table 4, which is marginally significant. But comparing the fraternity

coefficients and partial R-squareds in columns 1 and 6 reveals that the other alcohol use

measures have little further impact once drinking days is held constant. In table 3, the fraternity

coefficient actually grows when the other four drinking measures are added, while in table 4,

over 98 percent of reduction in coefficient size from table 2 is attributable simply to including

the drinking days variable.

       The column 6 estimates imply that joining a fraternity or sorority will increase the

probability of past 30 day binge drinking by just under 10 percentage points and days of binge

drinking in the past 30 days by slightly less than one-half. The associated semi-elasticities of

around 0.2 are much more plausible causal effect sizes than are those in table 2.

       Does this mean that these coefficients indeed represent causal effects of fraternity

membership? Their large t statistics, even while holding constant various forms of alcohol use

that are highly correlated with binge drinking, suggests that they might be. This is particularly

true given that the main fraternity coefficient mediator is days of any drinking over the same

period as the binge drinking measures that serve as response variables. It is hard to imagine that

alcohol consumption frequency is completely predetermined and not at all influenced by

fraternity membership. Even if this were true, for the fraternity coefficient to reflect merely

spurious correlation in this context, selection would have to simultaneously occur on binge

drinking but be essentially unrelated to the length of time since alcohol initiation and three

specific drinking behaviors that are also highly correlated with binge drinking. This scenario

seems somewhat convoluted as a full explanation of the fraternity membership effect.




                                                 16
       Yet the pseudo R-squareds, though large by cross sectional data standards, are

sufficiently small to leave unexplained a substantial portion of the variation in binge drinking.

Combined with the reality that it is impossible to know for sure if other types of unobserved

heterogeneity are present, the case for causality can never be unquestioningly made. But this

concern can be addressed at least partially by weighing evidence regarding the presence of

additional unmeasured confounding factors.



c. Adding other unobserved heterogeneity proxies

       To further investigate the causality issue, tables 5 (any binge drinking) and 6 (binge

drinking days) add other controls for self-selection into fraternity membership. The format is

identical to that of tables 3 and 4, i.e. columns 1–6 insert single sets of variables on their own

while column 7 includes the entire group of additional variables at once.

       The only new heterogeneity proxy that is a meaningful mediator of the fraternity

membership effect is the number of sports teams on which the respondent played during the

school year, which consistently enters with a t-statistic of slightly above 4. Students with greater

sports involvement are heavier drinkers: an additional sports team raises the likelihood of binge

drinking by just under 10 percent and binge days by nearly eight percent. Moreover, when

appearing without the other new selection controls, the sports variable reduces the fraternity

membership coefficient by 13 percent in the propensity equation and 17 percent in the frequency

equation, relative to the specifications in column 6 of tables 3 and 4. This would seemingly

provide evidence against the argument that binge drinking-related self-selection into fraternities

is fully accounted for by holding constant other measures of alcohol use.




                                                 17
         Several other aspects of tables 5 and 6, however, support a causal interpretation of the

fraternity effect. None of the other additional factors are close to reaching significance except

cigarette smoking, which is marginally insignificant in explaining any binge drinking and

actually raises the fraternity coefficient in both tables. Since smoking and binge drinking are

positively related, the partial correlation of smoking with fraternity membership must be

negative. If variation in smoking behavior truly reflects differences in time preference, then

contrary to expectations, fraternity members discount the future slightly less than do non-

members. Also, once all the variables listed in tables 5 and 6 are included along with sports

involvement, the coefficient on fraternity membership falls by only 6–7 percent. Further,

playing on sports teams could be a mechanism through which fraternity membership indirectly

influences binge drinking, given that fraternities are often represented in intramural leagues and

having a fraternity-based team might turn sports competitions into binge drinking occasions.4

         Still, even in column 7 of each table, the fraternity coefficient falls despite only very

small increases in the pseudo R-squared relative to the models in the final columns of tables 3

and 4. In pseudo R-squared terms, the fraction of variation in binge drinking that remains

unexplained is close to one-half in the probit model and almost two-thirds in the interval model.

This implies that there is scope for other sources of spurious correlation between fraternity

membership and binge drinking. To further investigate, tables 9 and 10 below present estimates

for samples stratified on the covariates listed in tables 3–6.




4
  Unfortunately, there is no information regarding whether the teams represented by the sports variable are
intercollegiate or intramural.


                                                         18
d. Other sample permutations

       Before that, table 7 explores the sensitivity of the fraternity membership effect under

various permutations to the sample inclusion criteria. These and remaining models employ the

specification from column 6 of tables 3 and 4. The additional heterogeneity proxies from tables

5 and 6 are omitted for several reasons. Because the already small sample necessarily shrinks

substantially when it is split along various dimensions in tables 8–10, parsimony is desirable.

Also, as already argued, the estimated effects might be conservative even without the additional

mediators if fraternity membership in reality causes more frequent non-binge drinking, and this

leads to more binge drinking. Plus, as mentioned above, fraternity membership might increase

binge drinking through its effect on sports participation, the only variable in the additional set

which has a tangible impact on the fraternity coefficient when included.

       The overall theme of table 7, in which each row represents a different model, is that the

previously estimated fraternity membership effects are robust to a wide array of changes to the

sample. The coefficients for any binge drinking, in column 2, are particularly stable, as they

never deviate by more than five percent from the baseline of 0.96. The estimates for binge

drinking days fluctuate somewhat more, yet are never different from the baseline of .448 by

more than 15 percent.

       The smallest coefficients are in row A., which simply re-estimates the main model

without using sample weights. For binge days, removing the roughly one-third of respondents at

schools with sample fraternity membership of less than 10 percent (row I.) has a similar impact.

Incorporating the 157 respondents who are 25–34 years old (row C.) has a comparable effect in

the opposite direction. A similar coefficient is obtained in the days regression when the 74

respondents who have complete information on all variables except those listed in tables 5 and 6




                                                 19
are included. Fraternity effects are smaller when students who have attended school for more

years than their class standing would predict are excluded, larger when currently and formerly

married students are excluded, and largely unchanged when part-time or two-year college

students are included or schools with no sample fraternity members (which does not necessarily

imply that the school has no fraternities) are excluded. The latter is unsurprising after observing

earlier that selection on schools is unimportant. Significance remains high in all models, with t

statistics of nearly 3 or above in all cases.



e. Stratifying on exogenous factors

        The final three tables present results for samples that are stratified along a number of

different dimensions. In table 8, five separate exercises are conducted in which the main sample

is divided into two distinct sub-samples based on values of an exogenous factor that until now

has served as an explanatory variable. Panel A. shows that fraternity membership effects are

more than twice as large for males as for females. This could be a function of males binge

drinking more often or (male) fraternity activities being more focused on drinking than those of

sororities. Regardless, coefficients for both measures of binge drinking remain significant for

females despite their smaller magnitudes.

        Panel B. divides the sample into respondents who are at least 21 years old and thus able

to drink legally, and those who are no more than 20 years old and therefore underage. The

fraternity coefficients are somewhat larger for the younger group than for the sample as a whole,

by around 10 percent for binge days and over one-third for any binge drinking, but are quite

small and highly insignificant for the older group. This is one of the more noteworthy results of

the analysis. Students who can legally drink presumably face fewer barriers to obtaining alcohol




                                                 20
by means other than fraternities than do underage students. Consequently, the heterogeneity in

effects by age suggests that the easier access to alcohol provided by fraternities is an important

avenue through which fraternities increase binge drinking.

       The results in panel C. support this hypothesis, in the sense that the distinction between

the younger and older classes is less stark, particularly for binge days, than that between the

underage and legal age. Still, the parallel between the estimates in B. and C. might provide

evidence in support of the other two reasons offered by Borsari and Carey (1999) to explain how

fraternities increase binge drinking. Social pressure to drink heavily could be more intense for

new pledges who want to fit in than for students who have belonged to a fraternity for several

years and are more liable to have leadership roles. Similarly, observed drinking activity at

fraternity events might inflate peer drinking norms less as students acquire experience in various

campus social settings and thereby have opportunities to gain a more representative perspective

about drinking behavior at their schools.

       Panel D. of table 8 makes apparent that binge drinking is more responsive to fraternity

membership for whites than non-whites, particularly in terms of frequency. Taken together, the

results from panels A., B. and D. imply that the impact of fraternity membership on binge

drinking is particularly problematic for underage white males. In contrast, panel E. indicates that

parental education has little to do with fraternity affiliation-related differences in binge drinking.



f. Stratifying on alcohol use

       Table 9 again shows several pairs of estimates derived from splitting the sample into two,

this time based on values of the alcohol use covariates. This is a further check on whether the

fraternity effect is attributable to self-selection of heavy drinkers into fraternities. Consider two




                                                  21
groups consisting of respondents with low and high values of a particular drinking measure. If

selection on that variable is important, a substantial component of the relationship between

fraternity membership and binge drinking should be explained by changes from below average to

above average rates of both membership and binging when moving from one group to the other.

The expectation in that case is for coefficients in both corresponding sub-samples to be relatively

small compared with those from the full sample.

       If this expectation is correct, then from the table 9 results it remains difficult to argue that

self-selection is a predominant reason for the significant and large fraternity membership

coefficients. To begin with, panel A. divides the sample based on whether alcohol was

consumed on at least three occasions in the past 30 days. The fraternity effect on any binging in

the infrequent drinking group is about 50 percent larger than in the combined sample, casting

serious doubt on an explanation in which unobserved tastes for drinking play a key role. At the

same time, the analogous coefficient is smaller, but still sizable and significant, for frequent

drinkers, among whom fraternity membership has an effect on binge days that is again roughly

50 percent larger than in the full sample.

       Panels B. and C. split the sample into groups of more and less experienced drinkers,

based first on age when alcohol was first consumed (B.) and then on years since that event (C.).

In both, among less experienced drinkers fraternity coefficients remain highly significant; they

are smaller than in the baseline models, but only slightly so for any binge drinking. For more

experienced drinkers, the effect of fraternity membership on any binge drinking is akin to the

main estimate when the distinction is according to age at first drink, and slightly smaller than

that for less experienced drinkers but still significant when categorization is according to years




                                                 22
since first drink. But in each case, the impact on binge days is close to 50 percent larger than

originally.

       Panel D. reveals that engaging in drunken driving over the past 30 days might be a

marker for students among whom fraternity membership has particularly strong effects on heavy

drinking. For these students, who make up slightly less than 30 percent of the sample,

coefficients are nearly three times as large as in the primary specification, indicating that

fraternity affiliates are 28 percentage points (35 percent) more likely to binge and do so on 1.25

(24 percent) more days than non-members. Analogous effects are considerably smaller among

students who did not drive while drinking, but are still significant for the prevalence of binging

and indicate binge drinking increases of non-trivial size, i.e. 17 percent for incidence and 11

percent for days.

       Panels E. and F. separate students who did and did not use illegal drugs with alcohol in

the past 30 days and drink before the last time they had sex, respectively. Few students

combined drugs or sex with alcohol. Consequently, results for the samples containing students

who did not engage in the corresponding activity are similar to those from the whole sample,

with coefficients slightly larger in the any binging models and smaller in the binge days models.

The dual samples in each case are too small for estimating the probit regressions, which drop

observations that are perfect predictors of the outcome. However, for the few students who did

use drugs or have sex while drinking, the fraternity coefficients in the binge frequency models

are of comparable size to that for students who drove while drinking. Again, particularly for

these three groups of students but also to a lesser extent for more frequent and experienced

drinkers, if these behaviors drive the link between fraternity membership and binge drinking, the




                                                 23
coefficients for these groups should be much smaller, not much larger, than those prevailing for

the full sample.



g. Stratifying on other endogenous variables

        Finally, table 10 shows estimates for samples stratified on the unobserved heterogeneity

proxies listed in tables 5 and 6, even though these are not included as explanatory factors in the

regressions starting with table 7. The results for specifications A.–D. are similar to those for

many of the table 9 models. Coefficients are larger than in the full sample regressions for

cigarette and marijuana smokers and the tall and heavy, groups that were candidates to have

greater likelihood of fraternity membership and binge drinking for spurious reasons. In each of

these cases, coefficients are considerably smaller in the residually defined groups, yet are still

practically large and statistically significant. In specification E., fraternity effects are smaller,

but still important, for those who live on campus even though binge drinking prevalence higher,

i.e. 54 percent compared to 43 percent for those living off campus.

        Panel F. indicates that the relationship between fraternity membership and binge drinking

is substantially different for students who do and do not work. One hypothesis is that non-

working students are simply more likely to join fraternities (20.5 percent versus 16.4 percent for

working students) and binge drink, particularly with regards to drinking frequency. However, as

fraternity membership and its effect on the probability of binge drinking are still sizable among

non-workers, and fraternity effects are quite large among workers, it seems unlikely that this sort

of selection mechanism drives the relationship.

        A much bigger disparity in fraternity membership exists between students who did not

play a sport (13.1 percent) and those who did (27.5 percent). Again, though, the pattern of




                                                   24
results makes it difficult to argue that this is a manifestation of an important selection mechanism

that is responsible for the association between fraternity affiliation and binging. Even among

those not participating in sports, the effect of fraternities on whether binge drinking took place is

over three-quarters of that in the baseline model and highly significant. Conversely, though not

quite significant at standard levels in the small sample of sports participants, the effect on binge

drinking frequency is over three-quarters of that in the baseline model. An alternative

explanation, given the prevalence of fraternity-affiliated intramural sports teams, is that sports

participation is a mechanism through which fraternity membership leads to binge drinking.



4. Conclusion

       Using data on 18–24 year old full-time four-year college students who participated in the

1995 National College Health Risk Behavior Survey, this study examined the relationship

between binge drinking and membership in social fraternities and sororities. The primary

contribution was to enter various measures of situational and overall alcohol use as explanatory

variables in binge drinking regressions. This directly addresses the specific type of unobserved

heterogeneity expected to inflate the estimated effect of fraternity membership on binge

drinking, i.e. that students who like to drink heavily are precisely the ones who choose to join

fraternities. Indeed, including these alcohol use covariates substantially reduces fraternity

membership coefficients. But the continued significance of these coefficients in both the

statistical and economic sense support the hypothesis that fraternity membership increases binge

drinking.

       Again, the main caveat is that the alcohol use explanatory variables and other unobserved

heterogeneity proxies do not necessarily fully control for endogenous self-selection into




                                                 25
fraternities. Thus it is impossible to argue with absolute certainty that the fraternity membership

coefficient represents a causal effect. At a minimum, however, a very idiosyncratic selection

mechanism must prevail for these results to be consistent with the absence of a causal effect. In

particular, fraternity members must drink more intensely than non-members, yet consume

alcohol in similar frequencies and situations and for similar lengths of time. Moreover, an

instrumental variables method, which is infeasible with these data, would suffer from analogous

uncertainties regarding the correlation between the instruments and unobservable determinants of

binge drinking.

        Also, the analysis does not attempt to correct for measurement error. This could bias

estimates up if binging is over-reported by fraternity members or under-reported by non-

members. In contrast, if random, measurement error would impart downward bias in the

magnitude of the estimated effect.

        From a social perspective, the fraternity membership coefficient is an underestimate of

the total effect of fraternities on binge drinking, because it fails to account for effects on drinking

by non-members. For instance, holding constant fraternity membership status, Chaloupka and

Wechsler (1996) find that the presence of a fraternity on campus increases the likelihood that a

student binge drinks, while Glindemann and Geller (2003) estimate that levels of intoxication are

higher at fraternity parties than at other parties.

        The positive impact of fraternity membership on binge drinking suggests targeting

campus alcohol education efforts towards fraternity members. The earlier outlined psychosocial

explanations for causal fraternity effects on drinking suggest that fraternity-wide rather than

individual sanctions for drinking-related violations, efforts to lower peer drinking norms among

fraternity members, and vigilant monitoring of fraternity-house activities might help reduce




                                                      26
binge drinking on campus and its external effects. Particular focus should be placed on underage

fraternity members, as they are largely responsible for the observed relationship between

membership and binge drinking.

       Also, Sacerdote (2001) found that peer effects among roommates and fellow dormitory

residents are a major determinant of whether Dartmouth students joined a fraternity. Combined

with the conclusion of this study, the implication is that fraternity membership is an indirect way

through which peers influence binge drinking. Assigning incoming freshmen who are

particularly likely to join fraternities, based on observable characteristics, to the same rooms and

dorms might be a way to limit fraternity membership and thus binge drinking.

       A problem with this strategy is that increased drinking is only one of many potential

effects of fraternity membership, some of which might be positive. Hunt and Rentz (1994)

report that fraternity membership provides a sense of security and trust that comes from

belonging to a group and identifying with others in the community, which might lead to

advantageous outcomes. De Los Reyes and Rich (2003) propose that fraternity members are

more involved in campus life and more likely as alumni to maintain connections to their alma

mater than are non-members. Indeed, Harrison et al. (1995) found that schools with greater

participation in fraternities and sororities had higher rates of alumni giving. Further, Marmaros

and Sacerdote (2002) found that among the Dartmouth senior class of 2001, fraternity members

and students networking with fraternity members were more likely to obtain a high paying job.

More generally, fraternity membership is important for lifelong friendships that could ultimately

impact various outcomes (Sacerdote, 2001). Thus, it is important to stress that a large leap

would be required to conclude, merely on the basis of a link between fraternity membership and

binge drinking, that fraternities should be banned or even limited in any way.




                                                 27
References

       Alva, Sylvia Alatorre, “Self-reported Alcohol Use of College Fraternity and Sorority

Members,” Journal of College Student Development, January/February 1998, 39(1), 3–10.

       Baer, John S., Daniel R. Kivlahan and G. Alan Marlatt, “High-risk Drinking Across the

Transition from High School to College,” Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research,

February 1995, 19(1), 54–61.

       Borsari, Brian E., and Kate B. Carey, “Understanding Fraternity Drinking: Five

Recurring Themes in the Literature, 1980-1998,” Journal of American College Health, July

1999, 48(1), 30–37.

       Cashin, Jeffrey R., Cheryl A. Presley and Philip W. Meilman, “Alcohol Use in the Greek

System: Follow the Leader?” Journal of Studies on Alcohol, January 1998, 59(1), 63–70.

       Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance:

National College Health Risk Behavior Survey – United States, 1995,” Morbidity and Mortality

Weekly Report, 17 November 1997, 46(SS-6), 1–54.

       Chaloupka, Frank J., and Henry Wechsler, “Binge Drinking in College: the Impact of

Price, Availability, and Alcohol Control Policies,” Contemporary Economic Policy, October

1996, 14(4), 112–124.

       De Los Reyes, Guillermo, and Paul Rich, “Housing Students: Fraternities and Residential

Colleges,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, January 2003, 585,

118–123.

       Fersterer, Josef and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, “Smoking, Discount Rates, and Returns to

Education,” Economics of Education Review, December 2003, 22(6), 561–566.




                                              28
       Glindemann, Kent E., and E. Scott Geller, “A Systematic Assessment of Intoxication at

University Parties: Effects of the Environmental Context,” Environment and Behavior, 35(5),

September 2003, 655–664.

       Harrison, William B., Shannon K. Mitchell and Steven P. Peterson, “Alumni Donations

and Colleges’ Development Expenditures: Does Spending Matter?” American Journal of

Economics and Sociology, October 1995, 54(4), 397–412.

       Hunt, Stephen, and Audrey L. Rentz, “Greek Letter Social Group Members’ Involvement

and Psychosocial Development,” Journal of College Student Development, July/August 1994,

35(4), 289–296.

       Lo, Celia C., and Gerald A. Globetti, “The Facilitating and Enhancing Roles Greek

Associations Play in College Drinking,” International Journal of the Addictions, 1995, 30(10),

1311–1322.

       Marmaros, David, and Bruce Sacerdote, “Peer and Social Networks in Job Search,”

European Economic Review, April 2002, 46(4-5), 870–879.

       Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postlewaite and Dan Silverman, “The Effect of Adolescent

Experience on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height,” Journal of Political Economy,

October 2004, 112(5), 1019–1053.

       Sacerdote, Bruce, “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth

Roommates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2001, 116(2), 681–704.

       Schall, Matthew, Attila Kemeny and Irving Maltzman, “Factors Associated with Alcohol

Use in University Students,” Journal of Studies on Alcohol, March 1992, 53(2), 122–136.




                                               29
       Sher, Kenneth J., Bruce D. Bartholow and Shivani Nanda, “Short- and Long-term Effects

of Fraternity and Sorority Membership on Heavy Drinking: A Social Norms Perspective,”

Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, March 2001, 15(1), 42–51.

       Wechsler, Henry, George D. Kuh and Andrea Davenport, “Fraternities, Sororities, and

Binge Drinking: Results from a National Study of American Colleges,” NASPA Journal,

Summer 1996, 33(4), 260–279.

       Williams, J., Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Frank J. Chaloupka and Henry Wechsler, “Alcohol

and Marijuana Use Among College Students: Economic Complements or Substitutes?” Health

Economics, September 2004, 13(9), 825–843.




                                             30
                                           Table 1: Sample means
Sample                                                             Full          Fraternity         Non-
                                                                 sample          members           members
                                                                    (1)              (2)              (3)
Sample size                                                       1,404              260            1,144
Fraternity or sorority member                                      .179               1                0
Binge drank in past 30 days                                        .477             .697             .428
Days binge drank in past 30 days                                   2.54             4.70             2.06
Female                                                             .518             .494             .523
19 years old                                                       .202             .188             .206
20 years old                                                       .203             .190             .206
21 years old                                                       .217             .267             .206
22 years old                                                       .139             .162             .134
23 years old                                                       .081             .080             .081
24 years old                                                       .047             .013             .055
Sophomore                                                          .239             .234             .240
Junior                                                             .243             .278             .235
Senior                                                             .319             .348             .313
Black non-Hispanic                                                 .092             .083             .095
Hispanic                                                           .049             .026             .054
Asian                                                              .078             .047             .085
Other non-white                                                    .035             .033             .035
Married                                                            .045             .017             .051
Separated, divorced or widowed                                     .008             .016             .006
Mother did not finish high school                                  .052             .033             .057
Mother graduated from high school                                  .251             .227             .257
Mother attended college                                            .283             .330             .273
Mother graduated from college                                      .401             .406             .400
Father did not finish high school                                  .063             .040             .068
Father graduated from high school                                  .194             .197             .194
Father attended college                                            .234             .218             .238
Father graduated from college                                      .478             .517             .469
Days drank in past 30 days                                         5.39             8.34             4.75
Years since first alcoholic drink                                  4.51             4.72             4.46
Times used alcohol with drugs in past 30 days                      .763             1.32             .640
Times drank and drive in past 30 days                              .792             1.33             .674
Used alcohol last time had sex                                     .194             .321             .167
Lives in fraternity or sorority house                              .046             .255               0
Lives in college housing other than fraternity or dorm             .021             .009             .024
Lives in off-campus house or apartment                             .354             .276             .371
Lives in home of parent or guardian                                .217             .120             .238
Lives in other non-dorm residence                                  .005             .004             .005
Hours per week works for pay                                       12.0             10.6             12.3
Height in inches                                                   68.1             68.7             68.0
Weight in pounds                                                  154.7            157.2            154.2
Sports teams played for this school year                          .573             1.06             .467
Cigarettes smoked in past 30 days                                 39.6             47.7             37.8
Times used marijuana in past 30 days                              1.80             2.31             1.68
Means are calculated using sample weights. Omitted groups for categorical variables are 18 years old, freshman,
white, never married, unsure of parental education, and lives in dormitory.



                                                       31
               Table 2: Effects on binge drinking with only exogenous covariates
                                       Any binge drinking            Days of binge drinking
                                          in past 30 days                 in past 30 days
                                     (1)         (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)
Fraternity or sorority member       .268        .220       .225     2.11        1.65       1.71
                                   (7.33)      (6.85)     (7.10)   (7.51)      (7.12)     (7.15)
                                    .562        .461       .472     .831        .650       .673

Female                                         -.127      -.113                -1.08      -.980
                                              (4.86)     (4.49)               (5.83)     (5.42)
19 years old                                   -.001      .029                 .213       .297
                                              (0.02)     (0.58)               (0.59)     (0.84)
20 years old                                   -.004      .039                 .285       .417
                                              (0.06)     (0.66)               (0.65)     (1.01)
21 years old                                   -.081      -.017                .357       .549
                                              (1.16)     (0.25)               (0.63)     (1.03)
22 years old                                   -.085      .009                 .187       .584
                                              (1.11)     (0.13)               (0.31)     (1.07)
23 years old                                   -.017      .074                 .720       1.12
                                              (0.20)     (0.88)               (1.16)     (1.91)
24 years old                                   -.091      .035                 -.325      .289
                                              (0.96)     (0.37)               (0.47)     (0.45)
Sophomore                                      .028       .012                 -.210      -.221
                                              (0.60)     (0.28)               (0.60)     (0.68)
Junior                                         .005       -.041                -.325      -.352
                                              (0.09)     (0.72)               (0.71)     (0.84)
Senior                                         .034       -.047                -.301      -.521
                                              (0.53)     (0.74)               (0.57)     (1.11)
Black non-Hispanic                             -.362      -.301                -2.73      -2.41
                                              (7.97)     (5.56)               (6.96)     (5.28)
Hispanic                                       -.127      -.127                -1.01      -.804
                                              (2.86)     (2.54)               (3.02)     (2.06)
Asian                                          -.403      -.379                -2.93      -2.78
                                              (6.94)     (6.30)               (6.14)     (5.65)
Other non-white                                -.010      .042                 -.513      -.163
                                              (0.14)     (0.61)               (1.29)     (0.40)
Married                                        -.337      -.269                -2.62      -2.16
                                              (4.37)     (3.59)               (4.27)     (3.74)
Separated, divorced, widowed                   .210       .281                 1.34       1.56
                                              (1.33)     (1.45)               (1.28)     (1.36)




                                               32
        Table 2 (continued): Effects on binge drinking with only exogenous covariates
                                               Any binge drinking                  Days of binge drinking
                                                 in past 30 days                       in past 30 days
                                             (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)         (5)        (6)
Mother did not finish HS                               -.051      -.084                      -.216      -.305
                                                      (0.32)     (0.58)                     (0.17)     (0.24)
Mother graduated from HS                               .017       -.002                      -.020      -.126
                                                      (0.11)     (0.02)                     (0.02)     (0.11)
Mother attended college                                .035       .015                       .266       .234
                                                      (0.23)     (0.11)                     (0.22)     (0.20)
Mother graduated from college                          .042       .005                       .269       .109
                                                      (0.28)     (0.04)                     (0.22)     (0.09)
Father did not finish HS                               -.077      -.058                      -.631      -.644
                                                      (0.82)     (0.61)                     (0.72)     (0.73)
Father graduated from HS                               -.069      -.077                      -.551      -.721
                                                      (0.85)     (0.94)                     (0.70)     (0.90)
Father attended college                                .018       .009                       -.004      -.183
                                                      (0.22)     (0.11)                     (0.01)     (0.23)
Father graduated from college                          .021       -.006                      -.115      -.342
                                                      (0.26)     (0.07)                     (0.15)     (0.44)
Includes school indicators?                  No         No         Yes             No         No         Yes
Pseudo R-squared                            .031       .151       .212            .018       .069       .093
The sample size is 1,404. Sample weights are used. Probit (interval) regressions are used to estimate the models in
columns 1–3 (4–6). The average marginal effect across respondents is shown, along with the absolute value of the
heteroskedasticity-adjusted t-statistic in parentheses. The semi-elasticity of the dependent variable with respect to
fraternity membership, evaluated at the dependent variable mean, appears in italics.




                                                         33
        Table 3: Effects on any past 30 day binge drinking with alcohol use covariates
                                                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
Fraternity or sorority member                         .089       .214       .199       .177       .177       .096
                                                     (3.45)     (7.20)     (6.50)     (6.07)     (5.55)     (3.85)
                                                      .187       .449       .417       .371       .371       .201

Days drank in past 30 days                            .052                                                   .038
                                                     (9.29)                                                 (7.32)
Years since first alcoholic drink                                .055                                        .017
                                                                (11.3)                                      (4.40)
Times drank with drugs in past 30 days                                      .106                             .021
                                                                           (5.15)                           (1.62)
Times drank and drive in past 30 days                                                  .154                  .041
                                                                                      (9.40)                (2.93)
Used alcohol last time had sex                                                                    .386       .098
                                                                                                 (10.2)     (3.01)
Pseudo R-squared                                      .519       .298       .276       .340       .297       .552
The sample size is 1,404. Sample weights are used. Probit regressions are used to estimate all models. The average
marginal effect across respondents is shown, along with the absolute value of the heteroskedasticity-adjusted t-
statistic in parentheses. The semi-elasticity of binge drinking with respect to fraternity membership, evaluated at the
binge drinking mean of .477, appears in italics. Regressions also control for all table 2 variables, including school
indicators.




                                                          34
      Table 4: Effects on days of past 30 day binge drinking with alcohol use covariates
                                                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
Fraternity or sorority member                         .472       1.62       1.45       1.10       1.25       .448
                                                     (3.94)     (7.46)     (6.57)     (5.61)     (6.15)     (3.88)
                                                      .186       .638       .571       .433       .492       .176

Days drank in past 30 days                            .309                                                   .256
                                                     (26.2)                                                 (19.1)
Years since first alcoholic drink                                .453                                        .102
                                                                (11.6)                                      (5.14)
Times drank with drugs in past 30 days                                      .259                             .044
                                                                           (4.91)                           (2.40)
Times drank and drive in past 30 days                                                  .788                  .120
                                                                                      (13.1)                (2.97)
Used alcohol last time had sex                                                                    2.69       .422
                                                                                                 (12.3)     (3.49)
Pseudo R-squared                                      .343       .141       .124       .161       .145       .362
The sample size is 1,404. Sample weights are used. Interval regressions are used to estimate all models. The
average marginal effect across respondents is shown, along with the absolute value of the heteroskedasticity-
adjusted t-statistic in parentheses. The semi-elasticity of binge drinking days with respect to fraternity membership,
evaluated at the binge drinking days mean of 2.54, appears in italics. Regressions also control for all table 2
variables, including school indicators.




                                                         35
         Table 5: Effects on any past 30 day binge drinking with additional covariates
                                            (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
Fraternity or sorority member              .093       .095       .097       .084       .099       .096       .089
                                          (3.32)     (3.82)     (3.89)     (3.40)     (3.95)     (3.84)     (3.22)
                                           .195       .199       .203       .176       .208       .201       .187

Lives in fraternity house                  -.002                                                             -.028
                                          (0.03)                                                            (0.52)
Lives in other non-dorm college            .033                                                              .022
housing                                   (0.60)                                                            (0.44)
Lives in off-campus housing                -.035                                                             -.029
                                          (1.26)                                                            (1.04)
Lives with parent or guardian              .001                                                              .018
                                          (0.05)                                                            (0.61)
Lives in other non-dorm, non-              .063                                                              .073
college housing                           (0.70)                                                            (0.88)
Hours per week works for pay                          -.001                                                  -.001
                                                     (1.21)                                                 (1.07)
Height in inches                                                 .004                                        .003
                                                                (0.93)                                      (0.75)
Weight in pounds                                                -.0001                                      -.0001
                                                                (0.20)                                      (0.34)
Sports teams this school year                                               .047                             .046
                                                                           (4.26)                           (4.06)
Cigarettes in past 30 days                                                            .0001                 .0001
                                                                                      (1.36)                (1.62)
Times used marijuana in past                                                                     .0001      .0001
30 days                                                                                          (0.05)     (0.03)
Pseudo R-squared                           .553       .552       .552       .561       .552       .552       .565
The sample size is 1,404. Sample weights are used. Probit regressions are used to estimate all models. The average
marginal effect across respondents is shown, along with the absolute value of the heteroskedasticity-adjusted t-
statistic in parentheses. The semi-elasticity of binge drinking with respect to fraternity membership, evaluated at the
binge drinking mean of .477, appears in italics. Regressions also control for all variables listed in tables 2 and 3,
including school indicators.




                                                          36
       Table 6: Effects on days of past 30 day binge drinking with additional covariates
                                             (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
Fraternity or sorority member               .442       .445       .445       .374       .453       .454       .422
                                           (3.64)     (3.84)     (3.86)     (3.23)     (3.92)     (3.92)     (3.52)
                                            .174       .175       .175       .147       .178       .179       .166

Lives in fraternity house                   -.046                                                             -.190
                                           (0.20)                                                            (0.84)
Lives in other non-dorm college             .031                                                              .067
housing                                    (0.12)                                                            (0.27)
Lives in off-campus housing                 -.086                                                             -.051
                                           (0.62)                                                            (0.37)
Lives with parent or guardian               -.088                                                             .021
                                           (0.54)                                                            (0.13)
Lives in other non-dorm, non-               -.488                                                             -.223
college housing                            (1.06)                                                            (0.55)
Hours per week works for pay                           -.003                                                  -.002
                                                      (0.60)                                                 (0.53)
Height in inches                                                  .026                                        .024
                                                                 (1.31)                                      (1.24)
Weight in pounds                                                  .002                                        .002
                                                                 (0.96)                                      (0.85)
Sports teams this school year                                                .201                             .201
                                                                            (4.09)                           (4.05)
Cigarettes in past 30 days                                                             .0008                 .0009
                                                                                       (1.85)                (2.11)
Times used marijuana in past                                                                       .009       .010
30 days                                                                                           (0.79)     (0.88)
Pseudo R-squared                            .362       .362       .363       .366       .363       .362       .369
The sample size is 1,404. Sample weights are used. Interval regressions are used to estimate all models. The
average marginal effect across respondents is shown, along with the absolute value of the heteroskedasticity-
adjusted t-statistic in parentheses. The semi-elasticity of binge drinking with respect to fraternity membership,
evaluated at the binge drinking days mean of 2.54, appears in italics. Regressions also control for all variables listed
in tables 2 and 4, including school indicators.




                                                          37
       Table 7: Effects of fraternity membership using other samples and specifications
                                                                                               Any          Days of
                                                                               Sample         binge          binge
       Modification to model from tables 3 & 4, column 6                         size        drinking       drinking
                                                                                  (1)           (2)            (3)
A.     Does not use sample weights                                              1,404          .091           .380
                                                                                              (3.72)         (3.55)

B.     Includes students with missing table 5 & 6 variables                     1,478          .098           .514
                                                                                              (3.93)         (4.58)

C.     Includes 25–34 year olds                                                 1,561          .100           .517
                                                                                              (4.15)         (4.60)

D.     Includes part-time students                                              1,493          .099           .446
                                                                                              (4.13)         (3.92)

E.     Includes students at 2-year schools                                      2,071          .093           .441
                                                                                              (3.91)         (4.32)

F.     Excludes students not on pace to graduate in 4 years                     1,159          .091           .409
                                                                                              (3.46)         (3.34)

G.     Excludes ever-married students                                           1,320          .099           .481
                                                                                              (3.85)         (4.00)

H.     Excludes schools with no sample fraternity members                       1,322          .097           .443
                                                                                              (3.86)         (3.88)

I.     Excludes schools with < 10% sample frat. members                          964           .094           .382
                                                                                              (3.36)         (2.98)
Sample weights are used in all models except A. Probit (interval) regressions are used to estimate the models in
column 2 (3). The average marginal effect across respondents is shown, along with the absolute value of the
heteroskedasticity-adjusted t-statistic in parentheses. Regressions also control for all covariates listed in table 2–4,
including school indicators.




                                                           38
          Table 8: Effects of fraternity membership in exogenously stratified samples
                                                                                             Any          Days of
                                                                              Sample        binge          binge
       Modification to model from tables 3 & 4, column 6                       size        drinking       drinking
                                                                                (1)           (2)            (3)
A.     Females                                                                 840           .061           .294
                                                                                            (1.98)         (2.47)
       Males                                                                    564          .137           .683
                                                                                            (3.00)         (2.97)

B.     18–20 year olds                                                          749          .129           .491
                                                                                            (3.31)         (3.56)
       21–24 year olds                                                          655          .006           .087
                                                                                            (0.18)         (0.46)

C.     Freshmen & sophomores                                                    623          .110           .467
                                                                                            (2.68)         (2.93)
       Juniors & seniors                                                        781          .044           .283
                                                                                            (1.41)         (1.72)

D.     Whites                                                                   930          .118           .575
                                                                                            (3.55)         (3.55)
       Non-whites                                                               474          .071            .07
                                                                                            (1.90)         (0.53)

E.     Both parents attended or graduated from college                          799          .104           .452
                                                                                            (3.00)         (2.72)
       At least one parent possibly did not attend college                      605          .099           .471
                                                                                            (2.51)         (3.22)
Sample weights are used. Probit (interval) regressions are used to estimate the models in column 2 (3). The average
marginal effect across respondents is shown, along with the absolute value of the heteroskedasticity-adjusted t-
statistic in parentheses. Regressions also control for all covariates listed in tables 2–4, including school indicators.




                                                          39
        Table 9: Effects of fraternity membership stratifying on alcohol use covariates
                                                                                             Any          Days of
                                                                              Sample        binge          binge
       Modification to model from tables 3 & 4, column 6                       size        drinking       drinking
                                                                                (1)           (2)            (3)
A.     Drank on 2 or fewer of past 30 days                                     673           .143           .048
                                                                                            (1.68)         (1.12)
       Drank on 3 or more of past 30 days                                       731          .077           .677
                                                                                            (2.09)         (2.81)

B.     First drank when age 18 or older                                         591          .089           .226
                                                                                            (2.77)         (2.11)
       First drank when age 17 or younger                                       813          .099           .624
                                                                                            (2.60)         (3.07)

C.     First drank 4 or fewer years ago                                         661          .084           .253
                                                                                            (2.60)         (2.45)
       First drank more than 4 years ago                                        743          .071           .623
                                                                                            (1.88)         (2.83)

D.     Did not drive while drinking in past 30 days                            1,001         .056           .144
                                                                                            (1.81)         (1.45)
       Drove while drinking in past 30 days                                     403          .278           1.25
                                                                                            (3.61)         (4.04)

E.     Did not use illegal drugs with alcohol in past 30 days                  1,252         .107           .359
                                                                                            (3.77)         (3.48)
       Used illegal drugs with alcohol in past 30 days                          152                         1.00
                                                                                                           (1.54)

F.     Did not drink before last time had sex                                  1,150         .102           .327
                                                                                            (3.57)         (3.21)
       Drank before last time had sex                                           254                         1.27
                                                                                                           (2.23)
Sample weights are used. Probit (interval) regressions are used to estimate the models in column 2 (3). The average
marginal effect across respondents is shown, along with the absolute value of the heteroskedasticity-adjusted t-
statistic in parentheses. Regressions also control for all covariates listed in tables 2–4, including school indicators.




                                                          40
        Table 10: Effects of fraternity membership stratifying on additional covariates
                                                                                             Any          Days of
                                                                              Sample        binge          binge
       Modification to model from tables 3 & 4, column 6                        size       drinking       drinking
                                                                                 (1)          (2)            (3)
A.     Did not smoke cigarettes in past 30 days                                1,002         .091           .375
                                                                                            (3.11)         (3.73)
       Smoked cigarettes in past 30 days                                        402          .191           .698
                                                                                            (4.02)         (2.43)

B.     Did not use marijuana in past 30 days                                   1,167         .096           .277
                                                                                            (3.31)         (2.75)
       Used marijuana in past 30 days                                           237                         .718
                                                                                                           (1.34)

C.     Below mean height                                                        735          .063           .337
                                                                                            (1.83)         (2.69)
       At or above mean height                                                  669          .121           .667
                                                                                            (3.31)         (3.29)

D.     Below mean weight                                                        807          .064           .279
                                                                                            (1.88)         (2.24)
       At or above mean weight                                                  597          .137           .656
                                                                                            (3.49)         (3.06)

E.     Lives off campus                                                         781          .085           .433
                                                                                            (2.27)         (2.39)
       Lives on campus                                                          623          .074           .228
                                                                                            (2.27)         (1.62)

F.     Works for pay                                                            872          .129           .576
                                                                                            (4.00)         (4.29)
       Does not work for pay                                                    532          .070           -.020
                                                                                            (1.46)         (0.10)

G.     Did not play on a sports team this school year                           963          .073           .194
                                                                                            (2.20)         (1.45)
       Played on at least one sports team this school year                      441          -.029          .348
                                                                                            (0.86)         (1.59)
Sample weights are used. Probit (interval) regressions are used to estimate the models in column 2 (3). The average
marginal effect across respondents is shown, along with the absolute value of the heteroskedasticity-adjusted t-
statistic in parentheses. Regressions also control for all covariates listed in tables 2–4, including school indicators.




                                                          41
