                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      EURO-PRODUCTIVITY AND EURO-JOB SINCE THE
                     1960S: WHICH INSTITUTIONS REALLY MATTERED?

                                             Gayle J. Allard
                                             Peter H. Lindert

                                          Working Paper 12460
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12460


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




The authors are indebted to Matthew Pearson for able research assistance, and to seminar audiences at
Berkeley, British Columbia, Copenhagen, Cornell, Harvard, Oxford, and the World Bank for helpful
comments on earlier drafts.             Any remaining errors are ours. For data files, see
http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/fzlinder, and click on “Allard-Lindert data sets for OECD 1950-2001.”
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Gayle J. Allard and Peter H. Lindert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Euro-Productivity and Euro-Jobs Since the 1960s: Which Institutions Really Mattered?
Gayle J. Allard and Peter H. Lindert
NBER Working Paper No. 12460
August 2006
JEL No. N13, N3

                                           ABSTRACT


How have labor market institutions and welfare-state transfers affected jobs and productivity in
Western Europe, relative to industrialized Pacific Rim countries? Orthodox criticisms of European
government institutions are right in some cases and wrong in others. Protectionist labor-market
policies such as employee protection laws seem to have become more costly since about 1980, not
through overall employment effects, but through the net human-capital cost of protecting senior male
workers at the expense of women and youth. Product-market regulations in core sectors may also
have reduced GDP, though here the evidence is less robust. By contrast, high general tax levels have
shed the negative influence they might have had in the 1960s and 1970s. Similarly, other institutions
closer to the core of the welfare state have caused no net harm to European jobs and growth. The
welfare state’s tax-based social transfers and coordinated wage bargaining have not harmed either
employment or GDP. Even unemployment benefits do not have robustly negative effects.


Peter H. Lindert
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
phlindert@ucdavis.edu
       Western Europe’s productivity and employment performance has puzzled
researchers for years. Unemployment rates jumped in the 1970s, and remained high until
the mid-1990s. Since then the unemployment rates have eased but are still high.
Meanwhile, labor productivity advanced as well in Western Europe as in the whole
OECD until 1995, but then lagged.i In the search for explanations, most economists have
focused on unemployment rates and a narrow range of variables, country experiences and
time periods, with uncertain and non-robust results.
       We believe that in the spirit of the new comparative economic history, a broader
approach should be taken to these pressing issues, which involve the workings of entire
national and regional economies. In this paper, we search eclectically for tests and avoid
discarding information. While we take a broader empirical view, this paper does share a
narrowness of the past literature’s view of contrasts between Europe and the Pacific-Rim
OECD countries. Like most writers, we focus here on possible flaws in institutions that
prevail more in Europe, and not on possible flaws in other countries. Thus in the trans-
Atlantic contrast, we shall ignore some areas where American institutions may well be
inferior, such as health care, energy policy, or cell-phone service.
       Our results contradict theories on the negative effects of the welfare state, and
contain important messages about Europe’s productivity lag and the insider-outsider
divide in rigid labor markets, which is gaining visibility in Europe. Specifically, we find:


       • Employee protection legislation (EPL) redistributes human capital formation
       away from youths and women to senior males. This shows up as a delayed loss in
       labor productivity rather than a net effect on jobs or unemployment.
       • Product market regulations may have also reduced productivity, though this
       result is not yet robust.
       • Coordinated wage bargaining boosts productivity growth, presumably through
       its effects on wage moderation and macro-policy.
       • Although tax wedges and transfer payments are often blamed for slow European
       job growth, we find that tax and transfer packages in high-spending welfare states
       have no clear cost in jobs or in productivity. Past studies showed negative effects
       because they failed to separate transitory from durable effects, and because some
       accepted theory as an empirical test.


Our paper broadens the empirical debate in several ways. First, we examine effects on
jobs and productivity together, which sheds extra light on both. This is a crucial step
missed by two past literatures: the labor-market literature on European unemployment,
and the GDP-growth literature. We also combine institutions that have been considered
separately in the labor market or growth literature. Finally, we offer new historical
estimates of two labor-market institutions and new econometric tests, which point to a
new reading of the verdicts on different institutional suspects. Past studies missed some
of these verdicts by discarding fixed effects as mere control variables, when they in fact
offer telling clues on the roles of different institutions. Our conclusions counter some of
the recent pessimism about the usefulness of international macro-panel evidence.


                        I. Two Court Trials That Should Be One


A. Euro-jobs as victims
       The debate over the causes of European unemployment has raged for a quarter
century. In the 1960s, unemployment was considered a bigger problem in the United
States, and many pointed to Europe’s central controls as the reason for its full
employment. This view was dramatically reversed in the 1970s, and it soon became clear
that the oil shocks alone could not explain the persistence of double-digit European
unemployment rates through the 1980s and 1990s.ii Meanwhile, labor productivity grew
faster in Europe up to 1995, and the popular view was that Europeans worked less than
Americans, but almost as productively. In the early 21st century, the job and productivity
winds shifted. Unemployment stayed high in some European countries and dropped
below the United States and Japan in others; and flagging European productivity became
a new concern.
        Not surprisingly, the literature exploring the Euro-jobs issue is vast.iii We
introduce only a few strands, and the difficulties they have encountered in analyzing
joblessness in the leading industrialized countries. The Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) has been at the center of research on comparative
unemployment, providing the key data for investigating these issues and joining the
policy debate. Its efforts have delivered a Washington Consensus package of policy
conclusions: Europeans have lost their jobs to product and labor market rigidities, high
tax rates on labor, and over-generous unemployment compensation and early retirement
subsidies.iv These orthodox conclusions emerged from ground-level observation of
individual country programs, micro-econometric studies of labor supply behavior, and
international macro-panel data on OECD countries from 1980 or earlier.
        Baker et al. (2005) and Freeman (2005) level serious criticisms at the OECD-
panel econometric literature. They suggest that OECD economists and others entered the
statistical laboratory with biased glasses, possibly adjusting their institutional measures of
employment protection, product market regulation, and openness to fit their prejudice.
Baker et al. note that the same researchers downplayed their econometric findings that
coordinated wage setting and active labor market policies have favorable job effects.
They conclude that there is “a yawning gap between the confidence with which the case
for labor market deregulation has been asserted and the evidence that the regulating
institutions are the culprits.”v Freeman calls for forsaking the macro-panel approach in
favor of micro-economic studies of individual country labor markets.
        A key message of these studies and others is that econometric analysis on
international panels is unlikely to yield clear answers. Blanchard and Wolfers (2000) say
a key reason for this failure is that the institutional variables are essentially fixed country
effects which cannot explain the dramatic rise in European unemployment across the
1970s and 1980s.vi Heckman and Pagés (2004) express the same skepticism --
        “The fragility of the macro-based estimates ... suggests one reason why relatively
        little is known about the impact of regulations in Europe, despite an abundance of
        cross-country time series papers analyzing policies in that region.”vii


B. Euro-GDP as Victim
        In contrast, the literature on comparative economic growth is less agnostic about
econometrics and more pessimistic about European institutions. In this literature, Western
Europe lags behind North America for institutional reasons that overlap only partially
with the labor-market institutions indicted in the unemployment literature. In the growth
trial, the leading suspects are technology policy, telecommunications taxes and
restrictions, education, taxes, the welfare state, restrictions on product-market
competition, and policies toward big-box retail stores. Employee protection laws,
coordinated wage bargaining and minimum wages receive little attention, even though
authors who contrast European and American productivity would agree that these
institutions are anti-growth.viii
        The only overlap between the two trials is taxes and welfare-state transfers. Just
as the OECD and other critics blame unemployment compensation and taxes on labor for
raising unemployment, the growth literature finds that some kinds of taxes and spending
reduce GDP. The most persuasive study in this genre is Kneller, Bleaney and Gemmell
(1999), which classifies taxes by whether they discourage investments, and divides
expenditures into uses that are productive (general public services, defense, education,
health, housing, transport, communications) or unproductive (social benefits, recreation,
“economic services”). Using macro-panels with attention to budget accounting
constraints, the authors reach intuitively persuasive conclusions: distortionary taxes (on
income, payrolls, property) hurt growth if they finance unproductive expenditures, while
non-distortionary taxes (on buying goods and services) do not: and productive
government expenditures enhance growth, while unproductive ones do not.ix Hence both
suspects and victims in the unemployment and growth literatures are quite different.


C. The Case for Merging the Trials
       Since these literatures have remained separate, both have failed to pursue some
potentially decisive tests. Even though each set of accusations implies effects on both
jobs and GDP, researchers have missed the chance to test the employment and
productivity effects of each institution together. Intuition indicates that some institutions
may retard both job creation and productivity, while others should raise one and reduce
the other.x Common sense also predicts that the effects should unfold with different time
lags, allowing another opportunity for testing by exploring the two kinds of effects
simultaneously.
       The debate over employee protection legislation (EPL), which raises the costs of
worker dismissal, illustrates the need to test for job and productivity effects together.
Here, the unemployment literature has missed two kinds of chances. First, although
theory argues that EPL creates insiders and outsiders, protecting the jobs of the former
and reducing incentives to hire the latter, most writings have failed to quantify total and
separate effects in this way, even though the marginal data cost is minimal.xi Any study
of EPL’s alleged job effects should not only estimate the impact on total jobs for insiders
plus outsiders, but also estimate the effects on the two groups separately.
       Exploring EPL’s separate effects on insiders and outsiders takes us through a
doorway that was always open but seldom traversed in the Euro-jobs debate: the doorway
to exploring EPL’s human capital and productivity consequences. Advocates of job
protection have long asserted that EPL raises productivity by stabilizing jobs, in this case
for protected “insiders”. This leads them to accumulate human capital on the job, which,
along with induced capital deepening, should raise GDP per worker or per hour.xii
However, strict EPL also denies new jobs to outsiders. This delays their human capital
formation and reduces later productivity.
       Which productivity effect dominates? The answer involves some dynamics, since
the gains and losses in human capital have a different time path. The positive effects on
insiders’ productivity begin as soon as a law protects their jobs. This effect can continue
indefinitely, as new insiders replace retiring older ones. The negative effect on outsiders’
productivity, however, probably worsens over time before stabilizing on a per-capita
basis. The longer that EPL denies work to outsiders, who are often young, female or
immigrant job-seekers, the greater is their loss of human capital. This loss will persist
throughout the outsiders’ careers, even after they eventually become insiders; in fact, the
job interruption literature suggests that they may never fully catch up.xiii So the negative
human-capital effects of EPL could rise over an adult career. To evaluate these
contradictory effects on productivity over time, we propose a new test: can the negative
productivity effects of exogenously tightening EPL rise for two or three decades? Our
results suggest that they do, making the productivity effects of older, longer-standing
EPL more negative than newly instituted protections.
       Other institutions also affect both jobs and productivity in ways that allow extra
testing of each leading hypothesis from labor or growth economics. Standard static
reasoning says that any institutional or policy change that limits labor supply should raise
productivity while it reduces jobs, simply because the static labor demand curve has a
negative slope. That common presumption deserves to be tested: If generous
unemployment compensation, taxes on labor earnings or higher minimum wages restrict
labor supply, do they raise labor productivity as static theory suggests? A more optimistic
theoretical model even suggests that more generous unemployment compensation will
raise both labor productivity and long-run labor supply, if the extra safety nets replace
missing private insurance markets and allow persons to take more productive risk.xiv As
these examples illustrate, competing views of the effects of institutions and policies have
many testable implications about both job and productivity effects.


  II. Better Measures of Labor-Market Institutions -- and the History They Reveal


       “Explanations (of high unemployment) based solely on institutions also run
       however into a major empirical problem: many of these institutions were already
       present when unemployment was low .... Thus, while labour market institutions
       can potentially explain cross country differences today, they do not appear able to
       explain the general evolution of unemployment over time.”xv


       This concern voiced by Blanchard and Wolfers (2000) has led to the view that
since the institutional suspects antedate the onset of high unemployment and slow
productivity growth in the 1970s, they cannot explain it. However, this view is based on
imperfect impressions of the longer history of labor-market institutions. Better measures
of the main institutions show that some of the main suspects—strict EPL, generous
unemployment compensation and high tax rates-- arrived on the scene just before
European jobs and productivity growth began to suffer. Even if the problems that began
in the 1970s owed much to the oil shocks, the causal mechanisms cannot be uncovered
without a correct charting of institutional history.


A. Unemployment Compensation: The Net Reservation Wage Measure
                “It is unfortunate that we have no comprehensive time series data on the
                coverage of the [unemployment compensation] system or on the strictness
                with which it is administered.” -- Nickell, Nunziata and Ochel (2005)xvi


        To provide this more accurate institutional history, we start by offering improved
measures back to 1950 of two key labor market institutions in OECD economies: the
generosity of unemployment compensation and the strictness of employment protection
legislation (EPL).xvii
        Unemployment compensation is clearly a work disincentive in the short run. How big
a disincentive it is depends on three components of the generosity of unemployment
compensation:


        (a) the “replacement rate,” or (benefits per recipient) divided by (market wage), net
of taxes;
        (b) the eligibility of the unemployed for benefits, including requirements for job
search and sanctions for non-compliance set out in national law; and
        (c) the duration of coverage (6 months, 1 year, etc.).


Many studies measuring unemployment compensation have focused on the replacement
rate alone, omitting the other two components. Others consider duration, but still do not
put the whole picture together for a long time span. We introduce estimates that
incorporate all three components into a single measure of the “net reservation wage:” the
expected value of unemployment compensation as a percent of the median market wage
after taxes.xviii
         The new picture of unemployment compensation charted in Figure 1 reveals
important differences in the timing of more generous benefits. Benefits rose from 1967 in
most of the core countries of the European Community, especially the Netherlands and
Germany. These early increases antedate the post-1973 macro-shocks. Other countries
escalated benefits after the first oil shock (Sweden in 1978, Denmark and Spain in 1985,
and Italy in the mid-1990s). Generous unemployment benefits never reached Greece and
Portugal, or the Pacific Rim countries besides New Zealand. Clearly, unemployment
compensation differed in its timing as well as in long-run national averages.


B. The Strictness of Employment Protection Legislation


         Past studies have been restricted to a few limited snapshots of EPL due to lack of
dataxix. This study draws on one author’s detailed reading of legislation through history,
which was codified into an index of EPL strictness dating back to 1950. The new index
reveals that job protection was neither fixed over time nor the same across countries. The
view that strict EPL was already in place in the low-unemployment era before 1973 is
incorrect except for Spain and Portugal, where firm EPL dates to the dictatorships of
Franco and Salazar (but where democracy also brought greater job protection). Figure 2
illustrates the differences in timing across countries since 1960. As with the dole, EPL
rose at varying times and to different extents across countries; and strict EPL often
antedated other institutional changes and poorer macro-performance by a few years. Italy
was a leader, tightening protection for workers in formal sectors in the 1960s, three
decades before it instituted generous unemployment benefits. France, Germany, and the
Netherlands also tightened EPL in the years of union strength and full employment
between 1967 and 1973. Other countries such as Sweden, the United Kingdom and
Ireland built up their legal job defenses after the first oil shock hit. Since the mid-1980s
EPL, like unemployment benefits, has hardly retreated for the OECD as a whole, and
cross-country differences persist.
C. Other Institutions
       The only labor-market institution that was already present when unemployment
was low in the 1960s was coordinated wage bargaining, which brings large employer
groups and organized labor together to negotiate wages and working conditions for most
of the economy. Such bargains are outside of the ordinary functioning of decentralized
markets and thus qualify as an interventionist institution, even when the government does
not participate. To plot the history of coordinated wage bargaining, we use recent
estimates by Ochel (2000).xx Over the last four decades of the 20th century, the nature of
coordinated wage bargaining was stable for about half the OECD countries: some clung
to coordination, and others consistently rejected it. In some cases coordinated bargaining
broke down, the main examples being Spain and Portugal after the dictatorships, Britain
in the Thatcher revolution, and New Zealand in 1990. In Scandinavia it weakened, yet
did not collapse. In contrast, it strengthened in Ireland in the 1990s. For the OECD as a
whole, there was very little trend in the degree of coordination.
       Other government institutions rose gradually in importance, especially after the
onset of the oil shocks. Tax rates and tax wedges on labor earnings followed the upward
path noted in the generosity of unemployment compensation. Active labor market
policies, such as subsidies for retraining and job search, rose later, from the mid-1980s.
The only interventionist policy that tapered off was product market regulation, for which
a seven-sector index developed by the OECD shows gradual declines since 1980.


                                     III. Better Tests


       With improved institutional measures in hand, our next step is to expand the range
of tests. We will concentrate on macro-panel tests in this and the next section despite the
pessimism about the effectiveness of international macro-panels for judging national
institutions. We agree that micro-studies for individual countries can yield important
evidence if they draw on true policy experiments: and we cite such studies below. Yet
better evidence can be squeezed from the international contrasts than recent authors have
acknowledged.
        Our specifications of the determinants of international job and productivity
performance differ from those in past studies. However, our most durable results do not
depend on the details of variable inclusion or functional form. The main points emerge
simply because we combine job and productivity determinants into a single system, we
re-test with different periods and countries, and we re-interpret fixed effects that also
showed up in other studies.


A. The Basic Equation Set
        We explore the effects of a common set of control variables and institutions on
jobs, productivity, and growth using the following basic equation defined over j = (1, ...,
J) countries and t = (1, ..., T) time periods:


(1)     Yjt = ßk Xkjt + ujt,


where the Y’s are the job and productivity variables to be explained, the Xk’s are k
identified influences on the Y’s, and the ujt’s are the error terms. The choice of
behavioral X’s should envelope competing theories. The X’s can be instrumented or not,
and can have time lags or not. The choices of X’s depend on data availability, as do the
countries and time periods. To reduce serial correlation, we use three-year averages as the
time dimension of each observation. More complete data permits us to span the
1963/1965 – 1999/2001 period in a single set of equations. However, for the following
discussion we split that long span into two overlapping samples (1963/1965 – 1978/1980
and 1978/1980 – 1999/2001) due to structural shifts that will not be difficult to interpret.
        The independent influences (Xk’s) on jobs, productivity, and growth are
summarized in Table 1. The dependent variables are the five job outcomes, four
productivity and GDP outcomes, and one growth rate listed at the top of the table. Next
come some control variables often used in the literature. For most equations the lagged
dependent variable must be included, since the behavior of jobs and productivity depends
strongly on influences that also influenced the previous period’s jobs and productivity.
One can deal with this feedback in various familiar ways, including first differencing.
One of these differencing approaches is the simple growth equation in the middle
column. We will not explore complete first differencing here, since we will argue that the
fixed country effects that differencing is designed to finesse often contain vital
information for judging institutions.
       The other control variables are familiar. The lagged term for GDP per capita
relative to the United States, a proxy for catching-up potential, will have the effects one
expects from the growth convergence literature: a poorer recent past lowers current
productivity but raises the growth rate. Educational attainment is a familiar source of
productivity, though its influence is sometimes obscured in our regressions by the
inclusion of the lagged dependent variable. The age shares of the very young and very old
also have familiar effects on employment and productivity.
       Aggregate demand and aggregate supply shocks strongly affect jobs and
productivity in all studies. Those shocks can be national or global, and macroeconomists
proxy them in various ways. We take a cautious approach, capturing key influences while
minimizing risk of simultaneity bias. We proxy aggregate demand shocks with OECD-
wide inflation minus unemployment, and aggregate supply shocks with the familiar
“misery index,” the sum of inflation and unemployment at the same global level.
       Next Table 1 lists the institutional and budgetary variables at the center of the
debates over Euro-jobs and Euro-growth. Product market institutions and policies are
represented by the OECD index of product-market regulation, and by the Freedom House
index of business leaders’ opinions on the openness of the country’s markets. The OECD
regulation index covers seven basic sectors (airlines, telecommunications, electricity, gas,
post, rail, and road freight), but omits sectors that have stood out in recent technological
advances, such as retailing. Arguably these omitted sectors grew faster in the United
States than in Europe because of European regulations on land use and work hours. The
Freedom House measure of openness seems appropriate here since it tries to capture
policy and not geography. However, this variable explains little because it has been
almost constant in the OECD countries since the 1970s.
       We use the long reach of our new EPL estimates to capture the possible dynamics
of employment protection laws. As conjectured above, EPL may save jobs and encourage
productivity in the first few years, when it protects working-aged men and increases their
human capital. However, it could cost jobs and productivity later, as the share of
unprotected youths and women in the labor force rises. To explore the dynamics and test
for the durable net effects, we use just one level of lagged EPL and a couple of changes
in EPL. The level is the oldest, with a 12-year lag.
       Next comes the Ochel index of coordination in functional forms designed to test
some ideas in the literature. One idea dating back at least to Calmfors and Driffil (1988)
is that wage-setting coordination has a U-shaped effect on jobs. It promotes employment
at the two extremes, when bargaining is either fully decentralized or centralized; while
semi-coordinated bargaining is predicted to cost jobs.xxii We can test this, and also test
whether EPL and coordinated bargaining, which both pursue stable jobs and costs, are
substitutes or complements.
       The conventional view on budgetary policies is that any higher taxes or transfers
cut jobs, and some of them reduce productivity as well. The main budgetary suspects are
tax rates on productive labor and subsidies to the unemployed. As prominent as this
suspicion is, surprisingly few studies test for a familiar corollary: The output loss from a
tax wedge or a non-work subsidy should increase non-linearly. Perhaps this frequent
oversight is another casualty of emphasizing job effects at the expense of output effects.
The corollary can be tested, and we use cubic functions to explore the differences in the
effects of consecutive tax or transfer increases of the same size.
       In addition to the total tax burden and unemployment compensation, we explore
the effects of the tax and spending mix. On the tax side, we follow the shares of income
and property tax and consumption taxes, and omit social security contributions. On the
expenditure side, we follow the share of social transfers and omit non-social expenditures
plus net budget surplus minus non-tax revenue.


B. Durable and Transitory Influences
       As some theories hint, we should be prepared for the possibility that a particular
kth independent variable Xk has different slopes for its durable influence (call it Xkd)
and its transitory residual (xkjt). That kind of split is important whenever behavior reacts
differently to durable and transitory influences, as in Milton Friedman’s permanent
income hypothesis of the consumption function. Therefore we prefer this generalization
of the basic equation:
(2)    Yjt = Bk xkjt + Ak Xkd + ujt.


Sometimes researchers are lucky, and find that the two component parts of Xkjt have the
same coefficients, so that each Bk = Ak = ßk, yielding the usual kind of panel equation in
Equation (1): Yjt = ßk Xkjt + ujt. Yet that is not the case in recent OECD experience, so
we need to distinguish durable from transitory effects.
       Durable influences pose an econometric challenge. The estimation task gets
complicated if the durable influences (Ak Xkd) behave like linear combinations of
conventional fixed place binaries and fixed time binaries, as with the budgetary variables
here. When this happens, Equation (2) behaves like


(3) Yjt = Bk xkjt + Ckj Xkj + Dkt Xkt + Uj + Vt + ejt


where the Bs, Cs and Ds are coefficients, the Xkj’s are fixed country profiles of the
durable influences, the Xkt’s are fixed time profiles of the durable influences, Uj and Vt
are vectors of coefficients on conventional place and time binaries, and ejt is the new
error term. A serious identification problem will loom in this case, because the durable
behavioral influences (Xkj and Xkt) will be linear combinations of the conventional fixed
effect binaries. We cannot separately estimate Xkj and Uj, or Xkt and Vt. We return to
this complication in a later section, after we examine the results from omitting
conventional fixed effects in the spirit of Equation (2).
       To underline the important difference between durable effects (Ak Xkd) and
transitory effects (Bk xkjt) and their problematic relationship to conventional fixed
effects, consider an analogy to the econometrics of the familiar consumption function.
Suppose that we had data on the consumption, income, and other attributes of 500 people
in a panel of 10 years, and we were asked to estimate what a permanent income gain
would do to consumption. The permanent income hypothesis or the similar life-cycle
hypothesis teach us that the marginal propensity to consume is much higher when income
is permanently raised than when it is raised only one year. Yet the standard approach to
pooled estimation throws in fixed effects for individuals or places plus fixed time effects
and then discards them, reporting only the slope with respect to transitory changes. In the
consumption function case, that would amount to hiding the long-run marginal propensity
to consume of perhaps 0.9, and then presenting the transitory slope of perhaps 0.2 as the
predicted effect of raising income permanently. The usual way of hiding the more durable
effect is to shorten the regression table by simply indicating whether or not fixed effects
were added to the equation. Yet fixed effects are often the closest approximation to the
effects of durable influences that could be proxied by long-run moving averages. This
difference, as we shall see, matters greatly to the debate over European institutions. We
return to it when confronting the possible role of fixed effects in the international macro-
estimates of job and productivity determinants.


        IV. Revealed Impacts on Euro-Jobs and Euro-Productivity, 1978-2001


A. The Basic Verdicts
        Our international macro-panel tests, approached on these terms, offer new insights
on which institutions matter and which do not. Although we encounter some of the
ambiguities that have bothered past authors, eclecticism offers a net gain in the end, once
we have presented slightly better tests, separated durable from transitory influences,
extended the time perspective, and visited other countries. We begin with the same data
period as most studies, starting from 1980 and ending in 2001, the latest year for OECD
data on social expenditures. We display results only for the instrumented version of each
equation, since the choice between IV and single-equation estimates had no effect on the
signs or general magnitudes of the institutional effects.xxiii
        Of the dependent variables introduced in Table 1, we focus in this section on six
key measures of job and output performance.xxiv We do not focus on the unemployment
rate, which has dominated the labor-market literature. It has the drawback of giving equal
weight to two labor transitions that are unequal in importance: the key transition between
being employed and being inactive, and the transition between two inactive states,
namely being in or out of the registered labor force. To focus on the first transition, and
to link to the results on labor productivity, we follow the gross employment ratio for the
15-64 population. Later we look at unemployment rates for demographic subgroups.
       Control variables. Before turning to the featured institutional effects, we note that
the control variables in Table 1 performed as expected. The strongest influence was the
lagged dependent variable, whose coefficient was always between one-half and one. It
should never be dropped from the equation, nor replaced with first differencing. A related
dynamic variable is the catch-up variable, this country’s income gap behind the United
States ten years earlier. As expected, backwardness raised the growth rate of GDP per
capita, but it had no clear effect employment or productivity levels.
       The only non-performer among the control variables is educational attainment of
the adult labor force. It proved insignificant in productivity and growth equations,
probably because its gradual effect is eclipsed by the lagged dependent variable and the
catch-up variable.
       Having large shares of old or young population dragged down employment,
productivity, and GDP growth, presumably because middle age groups are more
productive.
       Another strong set of control variables, the OECD-wide shocks to aggregate
demand and aggregate supply, performed as expected. Strong demand raised jobs,
productivity, output, and the growth rate, and bad supply shocks (here meaning the oil
shocks) cut jobs, productivity, output, and growth.
       The results for institutions and budgetary policies are illustrated with test statistics
on some very large institutional increments in Table 2.xxv
       Product market regulations. While European governments have retained most of
their job protection, unemployment compensation, and high taxes, they have been
steadily dismantling their product market regulations since 1980. In fact, all 21 core
OECD countries have followed this path. The top row in Table 2 suggests that this
movement boosted output per employed person or per labor hour everywhere, possibly
by large amounts. The average OECD country cut product market regulations by a little
over two points (on a 0-6 scale) since 1980, which should have raised GDP per worker or
per hour by more than one percent each initial three years, or by up to 10 percent over the
whole sample period, once one reckons in the feedback through the lagged dependent
variable. Plausible as this result may seem, we think the true unit effects of de-regulation
in product markets may be both larger and smaller than our coefficients show. Larger,
because the OECD measures of product market regulations cover only seven sectors
(airlines, telecommunications, electricity, gas, post, rail, and road freight), missing the
effects of deregulation in other sectors. Smaller, because other plausible specifications of
the same equations do not show the strong significance of the product-regulation variable
that is shown in Table 2. Deregulation probably did help growth throughout the OECD,
but the evidence is not yet robust.
        A related product-market institution, trade policy, did not show significant effects
because it was not given a chance to do so in this era. Trade policy (not shown in Table
2) did not differ much over time or across these 21 countries since 1980.
        Job Protection Laws (EPL). The debate over European jobs has devoted attention
to the charge that EPL costs jobs and raises unemployment. Our estimates suggest a
possible negative net effect on jobs, but one that could easily be zero. Our null result
matches the conclusion on this issue by Nickell, Nunziata and Ochel (2005): “evidence
that they [EPLs] have a decisive impact on overall rates of unemployment is mixed, at
best.”xxvi
        As we hinted earlier, EPL has had clearer effects on productivity, especially with
a 12-year lag. Interestingly, that effect depends on whether the country uses coordinated
wage bargaining as an alternative job protection device. Table 2 presents two sets of
results on EPL, one for countries with little or no wage coordination, and one for
countries with closely coordinated wage setting. In the no-coordination context, increased
job protection did not seem to reduce productivity. This may be because the extra job
protection was implemented where protection was initially low, so that it protected a
large number of relatively productive insiders while delaying the careers of very few
outsiders, yielding positive net effects on productivity. Examples would be the American
protections against collective dismissal under Reagan and Bush in 1988-1989, and similar
modest initial increases in job protections in Canada 1984-1985 or Australia 1992-1993.
By contrast, in contexts of strong wage coordination, extra EPL lowers productivity
significantly. In these settings, EPL was older and the negative effects on productivity
had time to appear. One example was Ireland in the decades after EPL was tightened in
1977-1978. Another was Spain after the end of the Franco era, in the dozen years when
new power and security for insiders coincided with lingering coordination that in fact did
little to moderate wages.
        Coordination in wage bargaining. Even though OECD jobs studies played down
the effects of coordinated wage setting, many econometric studies show that it had a
positive effect on jobs. We get a similar positive result, with two significant changes:
Coordination’s positive effect seems to be on productivity rather than on jobs, and it
appears to be strongest in economies where workers get relatively little protection from
EPL. Thus coordination in wage bargaining affects our productivity and output growth
results as strongly as it affected employment results in past studies.xxvii Its positive role
particularly fits the fuller and more secure employment achieved without strict EPL in the
late 1990s in Ireland, and to a lesser extent in Austria, Denmark, and the Netherlands.xxviii
        How can that be? While the sources of gains from coordination are not yet
quantified, scholars have identified channels through which it could raise productivity
over time. Coordination spawns wage moderation, which may tame sectoral rent-seeking
and rent-sharing with job security. The consensus it builds can also cut the personnel
costs of supervising workers.xxix It may facilitate stable macro-policy by promoting
trust.xxx
        The favorable effects of coordination (presumably with wage moderation) are so
strong that in combination with stricter EPL they significantly raise productivity. This
would explain the “double jump” test statistics in the middle rows of Table 2. Again, the
GDP gain seems to come mainly through productivity, suggesting the need for deeper
research into how such institutional packages affect human capital formation over the
longer run.
        Unemployment compensation. To explore budget-related institutions, we must
use the distinction between durable and transitory effects described above. Employment
and productivity seem to react very differently to the durable and transitory components
of unemployment compensation rules, taxes and transfers. The regressions confirmed this
difference, which probably has two explanations. One is that optimizing employers and
members of the labor force perceive the difference between durable and temporary
changes in taxes and transfers. The other source is econometric: No amount of
instrumenting seems to remove all short-run cyclical effects from tax and transfer shares
of GDP. We therefore explore the durable influences of fiscal variables (the Xkd’s), and
omit transitory elements (Xkjt’s) from the underlying equations. The durable effects can
be represented by countries’ sample averages of the relevant fiscal parameters, since
these parameters tended to stay on a plateau in the 1978/1980-1999/2001 sample.
       For this post-1980 period, the effects of more generous unemployment
compensation tend to be negative, as expected. The slopes shown in Table 2 reveal that
raising benefits reduces employment and overall GDP somewhat at the bottom and top of
the range of benefit generosity experienced in the OECD. Starting with essentially zero
benefits, as in Italy in 1979, the first introduction of unemployment compensation cuts
GDP slightly. Then across the more typical middle ranges, with unemployment
compensation at about 15 percent of median wage, offering more support to the
unemployed has no clear effect. At the high end, such as the 31 percent support ratio
offered in Belgium in 1982, more compensation reduces jobs and (probably) GDP.
While the effects tend to be negative, they are not dramatically large. Probably the main
reason for this is a simple point highlighted by the new estimates of the generosity of
unemployment benefits: The benefits did not cause large drops in employment because
those benefits were never greater than a third of a median wage for production workers.
       Broader fiscal shifts. The effects of higher tax and transfer rates for the economy
as a whole, in contrast, departed sharply from conventional wisdom. The “broader fiscal
shift” rows of Table 2 show that higher tax and expenditure rates actually raised
employment and output, whether the extra taxes were spent entirely on social transfers or
on all kinds of expenditures in fixed proportions. The only exception is the negative
effect on productivity per hour from raising taxes above 45 percent of GDP, as in
Belgium in 1985.
       As previous scholars have noted, this seldom-announced positive result should
not seem strange, once one factors in both sides of the government budgets.xxxi Sustaining
higher taxes and spending may not drag down growth in the context of the high-budget
welfare states, which have some of the world’s least corrupt governments. Since much of
the extra public expenditure is spent on efficiency-building public health, public
education and infrastructure, it outweighs the GDP costs of transfers like early-retirement
subsidies or unemployment compensation. It also seems likely that some of the
productivity gain comes from the stronger demand-smoothing effect of automatic
stabilizers in the higher-budget countries.
         Different effects for different worker groups. Many labor market institutions,
particularly those that raise the costs of turnover, could affect the employment of
different groups in diverse ways. The laws separating protected and unprotected workers
could boost the pay and productivity of protected insiders at the expense of outsiders. In
particular, many institutions benefit the jobs and pay of males over 25 at the expense of
females and youth (here 15-24) in the labor force. The differential employment effects
can be tested forxxxii by examining the the outsider/insider ratios of unemployment rates,
with women and youth as the outsider groups. We choose unemployment rates rather
than employment ratios because the employment ratio measures are complicated by
school enrollment (especially for the young) and other influences on female labor force
participation.
         The clearest result, shown in Table 3, is that EPL strongly redistributes
unemployment toward women and youth, to the advantage of males over 25. As
conjectured earlier, this insider/outside difference is one reason why the effects of EPL
might be positive when it is first instituted, and negative later on. When first
implemented, EPL protects a large share of the labor force and may do no net damage to
on-the-job skill formation. With the passage of time, however, a rising share of workers
spends a longer time queuing for protected jobs, causing a net drop in human capital.
Table 3 supports this story: where EPL is stricter, outsiders have higher unemployment
rates.
         Other institutions have mixed effects on female and youth unemployment. A
country with strict product market regulations seems to discourage female employment
and help youth, for unknown reasons. Closer wage coordination has the opposite
tendency. The combination of strong EPL and wage coordination still shifts
unemployment to outsiders, so that the discriminatory effect of EPL outweighs the more
equal treatment implied by wage coordination. Table 3 seems to show that more generous
unemployment compensation favors employment of outsiders, but the result should be
read through its male denominator: Unemployment compensation allows more males
over 25 to be officially unemployed. Finally, raising taxes in general seems to shift
unemployment toward youth, perhaps because social security taxes raise the cost of an
initial hire.
          If the insider-outsider effect of EPL is so strong, it should show up in the raw
data, and not just in multivariate regressions. It does, both in the broad movements over
time and in the differences across countries. It was in the 1970s that unemployment
became dramatically higher for youth and women, relative to men. This timing correlates
with the rise in EPL, and the shift toward unemployed women and youth was stronger in
the high-EPL Mediterranean and Belgium than elsewhere. Today’s international pattern
shows the likely link to EPL even more clearly. Table 4 contrasts the loci of
unemployment in highly protective Italy and Greece with the pattern in less protective
Ireland and Denmark. The unemployment-rate ratios tilt more strongly toward the young
and women in the two high-EPL Mediterranean countries, in a way that was much less
true before the rise in Mediterranean EPL. The strongest conclusion so far is that
employee protection laws clearly redistribute jobs toward males over 25 at the expense of
others.


B. Some Suspects Not Featured Here, and Why Not
          Not all institutions can be analyzed here, for varying reasons. The closest near
miss is the mix of tax types within the over tax bill. We did test for differences in jobs
and productivity caused by shifts among three tax categories: consumption taxes, social
security payroll deductions, and income plus property taxes. We did not find robust
results, however, so that any hunches about the merits of consumption taxation must
remain hunches.xxxiii
          Despite a determined effort to include the effects of active labor market policies
(ALMPs), we have still been unable to pin down their effects from such a panel. The
basic reason is that we could not reliably separate ALMP policies from the cyclically
sensitive outlays associated with them. We note the optimism about such activist policies
in the recent literature, but cannot confirm or reject it here.xxxiv
          Some other leading suspects escape trial for want of sufficient data. So it was
with minimum wage laws, early retirement subsidies, the productivity revolution in
retailing, and research and development policies.
C. Those Vexed Fixed Effects (UFOs)
       Institutional results for all studies of European employment are strongly affected
by the inclusion or exclusion of conventional time or country fixed effects. The usual
practice is to hide these effects behind rows that simply indicate whether unidentified
fixed effects are included. We feel this is a mistake in settings where the real influences
are durable rather than transitory, as in the recent history of jobs and growth in the
OECD. Recall from Equation (3) above that the durable behaviors can be linear
combinations of the coefficients of those binaries by time and place, posing a tough
problem of interpretation. A researcher must decide: Do I select linear combinations of
binary fixed effects that capture durable forces at work in the economy (the Xkd’s) or do
I use the standard approach, adding J-1 fixed place effects and T-1 fixed time effects to
the regression?
       In the name of reserving judgment, economists have chosen the latter path, and
have thrown away information. The usual fixed-effects interpretation reveals a belief in
mysterious UFOs (unidentified fixed objects), which are presented as though they were
forces known to be separate from the X’s. But what are they? Is there no hope of finding
what lies behind them? We press this issue with Table 5 and Figure 3.
       Table 5 shows that the UFOs so often used but so seldom displayed in other
studies correlate strongly with the country-average components of some variables but not
others. For our 1978-2001 sample, country fixed effects correlate strongly and positively
with big government (the total tax share) in all job, productivity, and growth equations.
One can even run regressions with the country UFOs as a dependent variable explained
by the tax share and a few other Xkd’s, and get suggestive. Doing so is a big first step
toward endogenizing the UFOs. Experimenting with such regressions in fact gives us
back the main conclusions featured in connection with Table 2.xxxv
       Figure 3 dramatizes the same point by comparing the fixed country effects for the
log of GDP per person with the share of all taxes in GDP. The usual way of presenting
fixed-effect binaries implies that something unexplained about Sweden and Japan made
Sweden’s GDP per person 56% higher than Japan’s, other things equal; yet the usual
presentation invites us to think that this 56% advantage is unrelated to Sweden’s high
taxes or welfare transfers, which already entered the same regression equation. Sweden’s
UFO also pushes Sweden’s GDP per person 39% above that of the United States, which
tends to be a favorable outlier in the international spectrum.
       How should people interpret such striking patterns? Attributing them to separate
“unobservable” forces seems inadequate. We recommend viewing such patterns as
revealing information that researchers should have featured all along: The durable effects
of institutional packages are often captured in the fixed effects, and are quite different
from the transitory coefficients that economists pursue and announce. Focusing on the
durable effects corresponds with the kind of question that motivated our research: What
would happen if an institution were durably changed, and not reversed the next year?
       We interpret the differences caused by fixed binary effects as follows:


       (1) The correct provisional results are those already presented in Table 2, without
conventional binary fixed effects.
       (2) Adding the conventional UFOs yields fixed-place coefficients that mix true
unobservables with large doses of durable effects from such variables as the welfare state
high-tax nexus. So the correlations of Table 5 and figure 3 suggest. Their positive
effects for welfare states partly reflect the productivity-raising features of the welfare
state, such as more efficient health care and support for mothers’ careers.xxxvi
       (3) Offsetting these positive effects of the larger-budget, larger-transfer nexus are
equally negative coefficients for transitory effects of extra taxes and (especially)
transfers, in the underlying fixed-effect regressions. We interpret these negative
transitory effects as showing the effect of nation-specific and time-specific cyclical
macro-shocks, which could not be distilled out in any clear way. In other words, what
some studies found to be negative effects of taxes-minus-transfers on growth are due to
positive effects in the reverse direction.


       Thus researchers using panel data face a hard choice between conventional binary
fixed effects (UFOs) and selecting only those fixed effects that are durable behavioral
influences, such as a country’s long-lasting labor laws. Which choice is correct depends
on the historical setting. Most panel studies assume that the durable and transitory forms
of behavior have the same slope, so that the UFOs represent only separate forces that
deserve to be kept out of the limelight. If the researchers are lucky, that assumption will
be true. Yet the task of judging institutions in OECD countries is not such a case. The
fixed effects probably reflect durable influences of the variables already entered into the
equation. Only a broader and more eclectic weighing of the evidence allows us to decide.


               V. A Deeper History: How the 1960s-1970s Were Different


        Institutional influences on employment and growth appear to evolve over time,
and we have begun to suggest some reasons why. To track this evolution, we compare
the results summarized above with those from a similar panel for 19 countries over six
three-year periods, 1963/1965-1978/1980.xxxvii
        For this earlier period, like the recent one just summarized, control variables
explained most of the temporal changes in employment and productivity. The shocks to
aggregate demand and supply, especially the oil shocks, account for much of the change
from 1973 on. Lagged dependent variables and age variables also played the same strong
roles as in the later era.
        The institutional effects, however, seem to have been evolving. The contrasts
between Table 6’s test statistics for the 1960s-1970s are quite different from those we
reviewed for the later era in Table 2.xxxviii
        Before 1980, employee protection laws did not seem to have the negative effects
they have delivered since 1980. Whether stricter EPL had a positive effect depended on
whether the tightening occurred in a context of coordinated wage bargaining. Without
coordinated settlements, tighter EPL may have had no clear effects within this time
period. With coordination, tightening EPL seems to have had positive effects on jobs and
GDP over the 1960s and 1970s, even though it eventually dragged down productivity, as
shown in Table 2 above. Combining strict EPL with coordinated wage-setting worked
well in Scandinavia in these early years.
        We tentatively interpret EPL’s effects over time in terms of the insider-outsider
model and the career cycle. In the 1960s-1970s, EPL was new in most of Western
Europe, except on the Iberian peninsula. It protected a large share of workers and initially
denied work to relatively few outsiders, so the job effect was positive during cyclical
shocks, and productivity was not yet compromised. As the century wore on, however,
the outsider share of the labor force kept growing. The favorable job effect and the net
effect on human capital were overwhelmed by the negative effects on outsiders’ careers,
yielding the negative effects in Tables 2 and 3.
       On the fiscal front, the 1960s-1970s results differ from the fiscal effects in the
post-1980 era. Raising unemployment compensation from zero to low levels promoted
jobs and productivity in the way predicted by the Sinn (1995) model. General fiscal
expansion, on the other hand, had negative effects in the bottom and top budget ranges,
while its effect on the heavily represented middle range could have any sign. We offer no
explanation why raising taxes and spending had a negative effect on results for the 1960s-
1970s, yet lacked any clear negative effect in other plausible specifications for these same
decades or for the period after 1980.xxxix


                   VI. A Wider World: Evidence beyond the OECD


       To avoid passing up relevant information, the debate over Europe’s jobs and
growth should look beyond the OECD to other countries where restrictive labor laws are
in place. Although Europe’s high transfers are not matched elsewhere, costly dismissals
for senior workers or high minimum wages are also found in Latin America, Southern
Africa and India. The spirit of the new comparative economic history calls on the OECD
debate to consider this wider evidence, which, as in Europe, spans all of the economist’s
usual micro- and macro-tests.
       For Latin America and the Caribbean, institutions that make labor markets less
flexible seem to have reduced formal-sector employment and output, as in Western
Europe since about 1980. The institutions are not always as focused on preventing layoffs
as in Europe, but they are similar enough to offer strong suggestions for the European
debate. Latin American and Caribbean experience, like the OECD over the last quarter
century, shows that EPL has lowered formal sector employment, mainly for women and
youths.xl
       Chilean experience offers a particularly good laboratory for testing the effects of
changes in labor laws, thanks to annual surveys of Santiago spanning four decades that
included sharp reversals in labor market policy. The costs of dismissal were sharply
raised in 1966, slashed by Pinochet in 1974, and raised in 1985 and 1991. Real minimum
wages stagnated in relation to average wages over last four decades of the 20th century,
except in the mid-1970s, when the minimum/average ratio was raised sharply (average
wages were held down while the minimum rose, an un-Chicago result). Surveys of about
300,000 workers in Santiago showed that tightening job security raised employment for
prime working-aged males and reduced employment for women and youths, as in the
OECD experience.xli
       A study of responses to two increases in Brazil’s dismissal costs confirms that job
tenure for youths and women declined relative to males aged 25 and older. Gonzaga
(2003) used about 500,000 job records from six cities between 1982 and 2002, when the
costs of dismissing workers rose twice (the1988 Constitution and a September 2001 law),
within the context of a complicated government-run severance fund system.                    A
differences-in-differences analysis shows that men over 25 gained in job tenure relative
to women and youths, even though the net effect on total jobs is unclear.xlii
       For India and Southern Africa, the effects are more broadly negative, even when
measured as contemporaneous net effects on employment and productivity. Besley and
Burgess (2004) trace the effects of 28 changes in India’s labor market institutions, most
of which involved raising the cost of layoffs. These changes reduced jobs, output and
productivity, and raised poverty.xliii Labor market restrictions similarly seem to account
for much of Zimbabwe’s unemployment since independence.xliv


                               VII. Two Kinds of Verdicts


       This paper demonstrates how eclecticism in pursuing evidence pays off by
delivering clearer verdicts than a narrower empirical exercise might have yielded. Our
wider range of tests brings us to two different kinds of verdicts, familiar from American
trial law: reasonable-doubt verdicts and preponderance-of-evidence verdicts.
       The reasonable-doubt rule, as practiced in American criminal cases, makes it
harder to rule against a defendant (here, institutions). If some evidence doesn’t fit, we
must acquit. Robustness is one econometric translation of the reasonable-doubt yardstick.
Only one of our conclusions delivers this demanding a verdict against any of Europe’s
debated labor-market or fiscal institutions. This verdict is that employee protection laws
have created labor-market insiders and outsiders as portrayed by Lindbeck and Snower
(2001),xlv reducing employment and earning power for women and youths relative to
males over 25.
       However, our eclectic body of evidence has yielded several preponderance-of-
evidence verdicts.xlvi The preponderance of evidence suggests that the effects of
employee protection laws on employment and GDP have become less positive and more
negative over time. When first instituted, EPL can boost employment without
compromising productivity, as in the 1960s-1970s era. Over time, however, the
employment gain evaporates as outsiders become a rising share of the labor force. At the
same time, negative productivity effects creep in, as a declining share of the whole work
force’s career history is spent as protected insiders. Product market regulations also
appear guilty of lowering productivity, though the evidence against them still leaves
reasonable doubts. By the 1980s-1990s unemployment compensation had also drifted
toward the negative effect predicted by theory.
       Other institutions are acquitted, even on the preponderance of evidence criterion.
Coordinated wage setting seems to have very positive job and productivity effects. And
the overall bundle of welfare state transfers shows no negative effects on either jobs or
output, at least not since 1980.
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY


Addison, John T. and Paulino Teixeira. 2003. “The Economics of Employment Protection.”
       Journal of Labor Research 24, 1 (Winter): 85-129.
Agell, J. 1999. “On the Benefits from Rigid Labour Markets: Norms, Market Failures, and
       Social Insurance.” Economic Journal 108: 143-164.
Allard, Gayle. 2003. “Jobs and Labor Market Institutions in the OECD.” Doctoral
       dissertation, University of California - Davis.
Allard, Gayle J. 2005. “Jobs and Labor-Market Institutions in the OECD: A New Look at
       the Dynamics.” Working Paper, Instituto de Empresa, Madrid.
Atkinson, A.B. 1999. The Economic Consequences of Rolling Back the Welfare State.
       Cambridge: MIT Press.
Auer, Peter. 2000. Employment Revival in Europe: Labour Market Success in Austria,
       Denmark, Ireland, and the Netherlands. Geneva: ILO.
Baker, Dean, Andrew Glyn, David Howell, and John Schmitt. 2005. “Labor Market
       Institutions and Unemployment: A Critical Assessment of the Cross-Country
       Evidence.” In David Howell (ed.), Fighting Unemployment. Oxford: Oxford
       University Press, pp. 72-118.
Bassanini, A., S. Scarpetta, and P. Hemmings. 2001. “Economic Growth: The Role of
       Policies and Institutions: Panel evidence from OECD Countries.” Economics
       Working Departmental Paper, no. 283, OECD.
Bean, Charles. 1994. “European Unemployment: A Survey,” Journal of Economic
       Literature, 32, 2 (June): 573-619.
Bertola, Giuseppe, Francine D. Blau, and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2001. “Comparative Analysis
       of Labor Market Outcomes: Lessons for the US from International Long-Run
       Evidence.” NBER Working Paper 8526, October 2001, and in Alan B. Krueger and
       Robert Solow (eds.), The Roaring Nineties: Can Full Employment Be Sustained?
       New York: Russell Sage Foundation 2001.
Bertola, Giuseppe, Francine D. Blau, and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2005. “Labor Market
       Institutions and Demographic Employment Patterns”, European University Institute,
       January.
Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess. 2004. “Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic
       Performance? Evidence from India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1
       (February): 91-134.
Blanchard, Olivier. 2004. “Explaining European Unemployment.” Written for NBER
       Reporter, April 5, 2004.
Blanchard, Olivier. 2004. “The Economic Future of Europe.” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 18, 4 (Fall): 3-26.
Blanchard, Olivier and Justin Wolfers. 2000. “Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of
       European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence,” Economic Journal 110, 462
       (March): C1-C33; and “Data and Appendix.” http://econ-
       wp.mit.edu/RePEc/2000/blanchar/harry_data/ .
Bruno, Michael and Jeffrey. 1985. The Economics of Worldwide Stagflation. Cambridge
       MA: Harvard University Press.
Calmfors, Lars and J. Driffil. 1988. “Centralisation of Wage Bargaining, Corporatism, &
       Macroeconomic Performance.” Economic Policy 6.
Elmeskov, J., J. Martin, and Stefano Scarpetta. 1998. “Key Lessons for Labor Market
       Reforms: Evidence from OECD Countries Experience.” Swedish Economic Policy
       Review 5 2: 205-252.
Fallon, Peter R. and Robert E.B. 1991. “The Impact of Changes in Job Security Regulations
       in India and Zimbabwe.” World Bank Economic Review 5, 3: 395-413.
Flanagan, Robert J. 1988. “Unemployment as a Hiring Problem.” OECD Economic Studies
       11 (Autumn): 123-154.
Flanagan, Robert J. 1999. “Macroeconomic Performance and Collective Bargaining: An
       International Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature 37, 3 (September): 1150-
       1175.
Freeman, Richard B. 1998. “Single-Peaked vs. Diversified Capitalism: The Relation between
       Economic Institutions and Outcomes.” NBER Working Paper 7556.
Freeman, Richard B. 2005. “Labour Market Institutions without Blinders: The Debate over
       Flexibility and Labour Market Performance.” NBER Working Paper 11286 (April).
Freeman, Richard B. and James L. Medoff. 1984. What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic
       Books.
Freeman, Richard B. and Ronald Schettkat. 2005. “Marketization of Production and the
       US-Europe Employment Gap.” Economic Policy 20, 41 (January): 6-50.
Gonzaga, Gustavo. 2003. “Labor Turnover and Labor Legislation in Brazil.” Economía 4,
       1 (Fall): 165-207.
Gordon, D. 1994. “Bosses of Different Stripes: A Cross-National Perspective on
       Monitoring and Supervision.” American Economic Review 84, 2 (May): 375-379.
Gordon, Robert J. 2004. “Why Was Europe Left at the Station when America’s
       Productivity Locomotive Departed?” NBER Working Paper 10661 (August).
Gordon, Robert J. and Ian Dew-Becker. 2005. “Why Did Europe’s Productivity
       Catch•up Sputter Out? A Tale of Tigers and Tortoises.” San Francisco Federal
       Reserve Bank, November.
Gordon, Robert J. Forthcoming. “Comparing Welfare in Europe and the United States.”
       In a Berkeley-Vienna volume edited by Barry Eichengreen.
Heckman, James, and Carmen Pagés (eds.). 2004. Law and Employment: Lessons from
       Latin America and the Caribbean. National Bureau of Economic Research
       Conference Report, University of Chicago Press.
Helms, L. Jay. 1985. “The Effects of State and Local Taxes on Economic Growth: A
       Time Series Cross Section Approach.” Review of Economics and Statistics 67, 4
       (November): 574-582.
Kneller, Richard, Michael Bleaney, and Norman Gemmell. 1999. “Fiscal Policy and Growth:
       Evidence from OECD Countries.” Journal of Public Economics 74, 2 (November):
       171-190.
Lazear, Edward P. 1990. “Job Security Provisions and Employment.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 105: 699-726.
Lindbeck, Assar and Dennis J. Snower. 2001. “Insiders versus Outsiders.” Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 15, 1 (Winter): 165-188.
Lindert, Peter H. 2004. Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth since the
       Eighteenth Century. Two volumes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Montenegro, Claudio E. and Carmen Pagés. 2004. “Who Benefits from Labor Market
       Regulations? Chile, 1960-1998.” In Heckman, James, and Carmen Pagés (eds.),
       Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press, pp. 401-434.
Nickell, Stephen J. 1997. “Unemployment and Labor Market Rigidities: Europe versus North
       America.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, 3 (summer): 55-74.
Nickell, Stephen J. 2004. “Employment and Taxes.” CEP Discussion Paper No 634 (May).
Nickell, S. J. and Layard, R. 1999. “Labour Market Institutions and Economic Performance”
       in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol 3
       (Amsterdam: North Holland).
Nickell, Stephen J., Luca Nunziata, and Wolfgang Ochel. 2005. “Unemployment in the
       OECD since the 1960s: What do We Know?” Economic Journal 115 (500): 01-27.
Ochel, Wolfgang. 2000. “Collective Bargaining (Centralization/Coordination).” Munich: Ifo
       Institute.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 1985. Social
       Expenditure 1960-1990. Paris: OECD.
OECD. 1994. The OECD Jobs Study: Evidence and Explanations. Two volumes. Paris:
       OECD.
Polachek, S.W. and W.S. Siebert. 1993. The Economics of Earnings. New York:
       Cambridge University Press.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. 1997. “I Just Ran Two Million Regressions.” American Economic
       Review 87, 2 (May): 178-183.
Scarpetta, Stefano. 1996. “Assessing the Role of Labour Market Policies and Institutional
       Settings on Unemployment: A Cross-Country Study.” OECD Economic Studies 26, 1:
       43-98.
Schneider, Friedrich and Robert Klinglmair. 2004. “Shadow Economies around the World:
       What Do We Know?” CESifo Working Paper No. 1167 (April).
Siebert, Horst. 1997. “Labor Market Rigidities: At the Root of Unemployment in Europe.”
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, 3 (summer): 37-54.
Sinn, Hans-Werner. 1995. “A Theory of the Welfare State.” Scandinavian Journal of
       Economics 97, 4: 495-526.
Sinn, Hans-Werner. 1996. “Social Insurance, Incentives, and Risk Taking.” International Tax
       and Public Finance 3, 3 (July): 259-280.
Teulings, Coen and Joop Hartog. 1998. Corporatism or Competition? Labour Contracts,
       Institutions and Wage Structures in International Comparison. Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press.
                            CAPTIONS FOR FIGURES


Figure 1. Unemployment Compensation, 1950-2000
Figure 2. Employee Protection Laws, 1950-2000
Figure 3. UFOs and Taxes: One Pattern Explaining Unidentified Fixed Country Effects
       (UFOs) for GDP per Person in the OECD, 1978-
       2001
                                                 ENDNOTES



    Gordon 2004, Gordon and Dew-Becker 2005, Gordon forthcoming.
    Bruno and Sachs 1985 captured the best thinking on these issues in the mid-1980s, by blending macro-
shocks and labor-supply institutions into a plausible explanation of comparative stagflation.
    For two surveys of the earlier literature, see Bean 1994 and Nickell and Layard 1999.
!   OECD 1994, Scarpetta 1996, Nickell 1997, Siebert 1997, Elmsekov et al. 1998, Flanagan 1999,
Bassanini et al. 2001, Nickell 2004, Nickell et al. 2005.
!   From Baker et al. 2005. See also Freeman 2005.
!   Blanchard and Wolfers 2000.
!    Heckman and Pagés 2004, p. 2.
!    To survey the growth literature, see Bassanini et al. 2001; Blanchard, “Future,” 2004; Gordon 2004; and
Gordon and Dew-Becker 2005.
    Kneller et al. 1999 emphasize that growth equations that estimate the impacts of either taxes alone or
expenditures alone yield “biased” estimates, because they omit the other side of the budgetary balance.
Our own estimates do take account of both sides, yet we note that their term “biased” is perhaps too
ominous. The previous one-side-of-the-budget literature was not statistically biased. The tax-alone and
expenditure-alone estimates can give unbiased answers to different questions, of the form “what if we
changed only one budget category, and financed the change with the mixture of offsetting items actually
used in practice?” Such questions are natural and practical, so that the one-sided approach also serves a
useful purpose.
           Not all of our results, here or in Lindert 2004, Chs. 18, 19, agree with those of Kneller et al.
Differences between their approach and ours include: they do not try non-linear effects, they instrument
only by using lagged variables, and they do not explore the full range of institutions and time periods
explored here.
    GDP and productivity here refer to the formal economy, and exclude the shadow economy. Thus the
effects on formal jobs and GDP of institutions that raise the shadow-economy share of employment or
output will be understated in this and other studies. According to the literature estimating the shadow
economy, taxes on employment have this effect (see the studies cited in Schneider and Klinglmair 2004).
Therefore payroll and similar taxes should have a more positive effect on true jobs and output than the
usual econometric estimates will show. This and past studies may similarly understate the positive job and
productivity effects of EPL and unemployment compensation, a point implicit in Freeman and Schettkat
2001.
    For a laudable exception, exploring the effects on labor groups by age and sex, see Bertola, Blau, and
Kahn 2005.
     A classic statement is Freeman and Medoff 1984.
     Polachek and Siebert 1993, 82-83, 155-164.
 !   Sinn 1995, 1996, Agell 1999.
!    Blanchard and Wolfers, 2000, p.C2. Similarly, Blanchard, “Explaining,” 2004, p. 3: “European labor
market institutions did not come into being in the early 1970s. For the most part, both the architecture and
the level of social protection were put in place earlier, and were then consistent with low unemployment.”
!    Nickell, Nunziata, and Ochel 2005, p. 4.
!       Allard 2003, 2005.
!       These measures are based on rules and statutes. At times observed expenditure behavior shows
different movements from what the rules imply at face value.
     Before these new estimates based on Allard 2003 and 2005, the historically deepest set of estimates was
that of Lazear 1990.
     Ochel 2000.

        To capture these two shocks, we used four variables rather than two. The first two are the (inflation -
unemployment) and (inflation + unemployment) shocks for the whole OECD, multiplied by the individual
country’s trade openness (exports plus imports divided by GDP). The other two are the same thing
multiplied by a dummy for the United States. This reflects the fact that the United States carries a
considerably greater weight than any other country in the OECD-wide averages for inflation and
unemployment.
        Calmfors and Driffil 1988. A similar idea is presented by Freeman 1998.
        For the first-stage instrruments used in the IV variant, see Appendix A.
    !   To focus on the most meaningful conclusions about institutional impacts, Tables 2, 3, and 6 present
results based primarily on test statistics for linear combinations of coefficients, rather than on single
coefficients. For a few of the original regressions from the 1978/1980-1999/2001 sample, see Appendix B.
 !      We caution that Tables 2, 3, and 6 will display very large increments in institutions and budgetary
policies for rhetorical purposes. Such jumps never actually occurred from one three-year period to the next,
even though all the institutional combinations actually occurred in the sample. The counterfactuals shown
in these tables violate the “speed limit” for counterfactuals described in Lindert 2004, vol. 2, pp. 29-30.
 !      Nickell, Nunziata, and Ochel 2005, p. 10. For a similar conclusion, see Addison and Teixeira 2001.
 !      Baker et al. 2005, and the studies cited there.
 !       Auer 2000.
        Gordon 1994, Teulings and Hartog 1998.
        Auer 2000; Blanchard “Explaining,” 2004.
         See, for example, Helms 1985, Atkinson 1999, and Lindert 2004, Chapters 10 and 18. Kneller et al.
1999 results agreed with this statement regarding higher taxes spent on government purchases, but not
regarding higher taxes for transfer spending.
         See, in particular, Bertola, Blau, and Kahn 2001 and 2005. Some of their tests trace the effects of
unionization rather than the institutions emphasized here, but unionization rates and these institutions are
sufficiently correlated to make the results comparable.
         Clearer results were announced by Kneller et al. 1999, as noted earlier. Yet we prefer our regression
specification, and could not confirm their results with our chosen equations.
     !   Nickell, Nunziata, and Ochel (2005, p. 6) are relatively upbeat about ALMP’s ability to cut
unemployment, citing macro-studies by Scarpetta 1996, Nickell, 1997, and Elmeskov et al., 1998, and the
microeconometric studies summarized in Martin 2000.
     !   We have done so in unreported regressions on the 22 fixed country effects (21 countries minus the base
country, but with different effects for Germany before and after 1990). The same UFO regressions should
have more power when there are more fixed place effects, as in inter-state regression analyses of the fifty
United States.
     !   For fuller evidence on these effects, see Lindert 2004, especially Chapter 10.
     !    The 19 countries are those listed in the notes to Table 2, minus Portugal and Spain, for whom we lack
data on social transfers. The earlier sample also lacks the OECD index of product-market regulations.
     !    The differences in structure make it unwise to combine the whole 1963-2001 era into a single sample,
unless one can cleverly specify equations that capture the structural evolution.
         For alternative specifications over both historical samples, see Lindert 2004, Volume 2, Appendix E.
  See the studies in Heckman and Pagés 2004.
     Montenegro and Pagés 2004.
     Gonzaga 2003. In Brazil’s case, the rise in dismissal costs lowered turnover within a policy system that
generated fake layoffs and a labor turnover rate as high as any in the world. It is therefore possible that by
reducing Brazil’s turnover rate, the 1988 Constitution and the 2001 law raised the productivity of
privileged insiders enough to outweigh the productivity losses to outsiders, who had high turnover in any
case. Our text here emphasizes the clearer point: Raising dismissal costs favored men’s jobs over jobs for
women and youths.
     Besley and Burgess 2004.
 !   Fallon and Lucas 1991.
 !   Lindbeck and Snower 2001.
 !   The econometric analogy to a preponderance of evidence verdict is Xavier Sala-i-Martin’s acceptance
of confidence interval verdicts from repeated trials instead of stricter interpretations of “robustness.” (Sala-
i-Martin 1997).
        Table 1. Sets of Second-Stage Equations to Explain Employment, Unemployment,
                    Productivity, and Growth in the OECD, 1963-2001

                                                            Main       Growth          Results
                                                          equations   equations      displayed?
Job outcomes
     Employment ratio, 15-64 population                     Dep                     Tables 2, 5
     Employment ratio, 15-64 women                          Dep
     Unemployment rate, overall                             Dep
     Unemployment rate, women/men                           Dep                     Table 3
     Unemployment rate, youth/men                           Dep                     Table 3
Productivity and GDP outcomes
     ln (GDP per person employed)                           Dep                     Tables 2, 5
     ln (GDP per labor hour)                                Dep                     Tables 2, 5
     ln (GDP per person 15-64)                              Dep                     Tables 2, 5
     ln(GDP per capita)                                     Dep
     3-year log growth rate, GDP per capita                             Dep         Tables 2, 5
Basic control variables
     Dependent variable, lagged 3 years                      X*
     ln(GDP per cap./US GDP per cap.), 10 yr. lag            X           X
     Educational attainments of adults                       X           X
     Young (0-15 share)                                      X           X
     Old (share 65 and up)                                   X           X
     Global demand shocks (OECD infl. - unem.)               X           X
     Global supply shocks (OECD infl. + unem.)               X           X
Institutional forces
     Product-market regulations in seven sectors             X           X        (Post-1978 sample only)
     Internationally open policies (Freedom House)           X           X
     Employee protection laws (EPL)
         12 years ago                                       X           X
         Change from 12 years ago to 6 years ago            X           X
         Change from 6 years ago to current               X & IV      X & IV        (IVs in Tables 2, 5)
         12 years ago, interacted with levels of coord.     X           X
     Coordinated wage-setting is intermediate               X           X
     Coordinated wage-setting is strong                     X           X
Budgetary policies
     Unemployment comp. (& squared & cubed)               X & IV      X & IV        (IVs in Tables 2, 5)
     Total taxes/GDP (& squared & cubed)                  X & IV      X & IV        (IVs in Tables 2, 5)
     Income & property tax share of total taxes           X & IV      X & IV        (IVs in Tables 2, 5)
     Consumption tax share of total taxes                 X & IV      X & IV        (IVs in Tables 2, 5)
     Social transfer share of total taxes                 X & IV      X & IV        (IVs in Tables 2, 5)

Fixed-country binaries**                                      s           s         Table 4
Fixed-time binaries                                           s           s




Notes to Table 1:
* = For the female and youth rates of employment and unemployment, the lagged "dependent"
         variable is the lagged overall rate, not the rate specific to women or youth.
** For Germany, there are two different binary-variable "fixed countries":
         West Germany up through 1989, then all Germany from 1990 on.
Dep =              Dependent variable, to be explained in one of this set of equations.
X=                 An exogenous variable used in all variations of this equation.
IV =               A predicted value based on instruments in a first-stage OLS equation.
s=                 An exogenous variable used in some variants of this equation, not others.

The sample is a balanced panel of 21 OECD countries times three-year time periods.
The 21 countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France,
        Germany (West to 1989, all Germany 1990 on), Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands,
        New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom,
        and USA. However, Spain and Portugal were omitted from the pre-1980 sample, for want
        of OECD measures of social transfer spending.
The three-year time periods are 1978/80-1999/2001 (so that n = 21 * 8 periods = 168),
        1963/1965-1978/1980 (so that n = 19 * 6 periods = 114), and in some non-displayed
        variants, the whole period 1963/1965-1999/2001 (n = 19 * 13 = 247).
Employment ratio = employment divided by the 15-64 population.

EPL = an index (0-5) of the strictness of employee protection laws, updated from (Allard 2003).
Coordinated wage setting = an index from 1 to 3, from Ochel 2000, with 1999 values extended
       through 2001. An intermediate level of wage coordination was any Ochel rating between
       2.0 and 2.5, inclusively. A strong level of wage coordination was any case with the
       rating = 3.0. (There were no cases between 2.5 and 3.0.)

For a sketch of the first-stage equations generating the predicted values from instruments,
        see Appendix A. These refer only to the Instrumental Variable (IV) variants, of course.
For data sources, see (Allard 2003) and the Excel table "OECD annual 1950-2001,"
        forthcoming on our internet sites.
     Table 2.    The Three-Year Effects of Selected Institutional Changes on Jobs and GDP, 1978-2001

                                              The percentage estimated effects on --
                                                      GDP per GDP per             GDP per      3-year growth rate
Institutional changes (independent variables)  Jobs     worker         hour       person 15-64 of GDP per capita
Market regulations --
Raising the index of product-market regulations -0.06
                                                  by 1     -1.23 **     -1.13 **     -2.16 **     0.30
                                                  ####    (0.45)       (0.36)       (0.74)      (0.40)
Tightening employee protection laws (EPLs), by 1 index point for 12 years or more
   (a) with little or no wage-setting coordination-0.66     1.70 a       1.66 **     -1.26        0.51
                                                  ####    (0.90)       (0.67)       (1.42)      (0.91)
   (b) with close coordination in wage-setting -0.52       -6.06 **     -3.50 **     -5.16 *     -3.66 **
                                                  ####    (1.50)       (1.13)       (2.49)      (1.45)
Shifting the index of coordinated wage-setting from no wage coordination to high
   (a) with weak EPLs                              2.92   22.62 ** 15.31 **         20.64 **    14.70 **
                                                  ####    (3.09)       (2.79)       (4.92)      (2.83)
   (b) with strict EPLs                            3.39    -4.14        -1.87         6.47        0.59
                                                  ####    (2.76)       (1.75)       (4.78)      (2.78)
The double jump, both from low (0.4) to high (3.5) 1.33     5.59 *       6.18 **      5.14        4.70 b
   EPL and from no wage coordination to high ####         (2.54)       (1.76)       (4.09)      (2.60)

Fiscal wedges in the labor market --
Raising the unemployment compens. support ratio
   • from 0% (e.g. Italy 1979) to 1%         -0.20         -0.39 a     -0.05         -0.82 *     -0.18
                                             ####         (0.22)      (0.19)        (0.34)      (0.22)
   • from 15% (e.g. France 1982) to 16%       0.04         -0.06        0.12 b       -0.10        0.03
                                             ####         (0.08)      (0.06)        (0.12)      (0.07)
   • from 30% (e.g. Belgium 1982) to 31%     -0.25 *       -0.10        0.19         -0.28       -0.15
                                             ####         (0.16)      (0.12)        (0.22)      (0.14)
   Table 2, continued

                                                The percentage estimated effects on --
                                                        GDP per GDP per             GDP per      3-year growth rate
Broader fiscal shifts --                         Jobs     worker         hour       person 15-64 of GDP per capita
Raising all taxes and transfers in proportion
   • taxes up from 27% of GDP (USA) to 28% 0.13              0.35 b     -0.16          0.36        0.62 **
                                               ####        (0.20)      (0.16)        (0.33)      (0.21)
   • taxes up from 35% of GDP (Italy 1985) to 36%
                                               -0.01         0.33 **     0.37 **       0.29 b      0.09
                                               ####        (0.10)      (0.08)        (0.16)      (0.11)
   • taxes up from 45% of GDP (Belgium 1985) 0.20
                                                to 46%      -0.10       -0.44 **       0.61 *      0.06
                                               ####        (0.15)      (0.10)        (0.27)      (0.15)
Raising taxes and spending them only on extra transfers
   • taxes up from 27% of GDP (USA) to 28% 0.17              0.37       -0.20          0.56        0.57 *
                                               ####        (0.25)      (0.20)        (0.41)      (0.26)
   • taxes up from 35% of GDP (Italy 1985) to 36%
                                                0.03         0.34 *      0.33 *        0.44 b      0.05
                                               ####        (0.17)      (0.13)        (0.25)      (0.18)
   • taxes up from 45% of GDP (Belgium 1985) 0.22
                                                to 46%      -0.09       -0.46 **       0.71 *      0.04
                                               ####        (0.17)      (0.12)        (0.30)      (0.17)

Coefficient on the lagged dependent variable#    0.98 **     0.86 **     0.89 **       0.76 **
                                                ####       (0.02)      (0.02)        (0.04)
Notes and sources to Table 2:
(Standard errors in parentheses. ** = significant at the 1% level (two-tail). * = significant at the 5% level.
   a = significant at the 7% level; b = significant at the 10% level.)
# To compute eventual steady-state impacts, multiply the (logged) 3-year coefficients by 1/(1 - this coefficient).

For the structures of the equations, see the sketch in Table 1 and the details in the Appendices.

"Jobs" here = the ratio of employed persons to the adult population of working age (15-64).
   Min, mean, max of its natural log = -0.78, -0.43, -0.16.
Productivity per worker = real GDP per employed person. Min, mean, max of its natural log = 9.9, 10.57, 11.1.
Productivity per hour = GDP per labor hour. Min, mean, max of its natural log = 9.9, 10.55, 11.0.
Product market regulation = an index of the degree of regulatory intervention in product markets.
   Min, mean, max = 1.00, 4.1455, 5.98.
The index of strictness of employment protection laws (EPLs) ranges from 0 to 5. See Allard (2003).
   Min, mean, max = 0.10, 2.09, 3.83. Here "weak" EPLs = an index of 0.4 (USA), and "strict" = an index of 3.5 (Italy).
The index of collective wage setting ranges from 1 to 3, and is from Ocher (2000). Min, mean, max = 1.0, 1.98, 3.0.
   Here "little or no coordination" = 1 and "close coordination" = 3.
The overall generosity and use of compensation to the unemployed is the Allard "net reservation wage."
   More specifically, it is measured as the product of
   (a) the marginal “replacement rate,” or (benefits per recipient) divided by (market wage), net of taxes;
   (b) the coverage rate, the share of unemployed persons who are eligible; and
   (c) the duration of coverage over the first year.
Welfare-state social transfers as a share of GDP include public pensions, public health, unemployment
   compensation, family assistance, and public housing. Min, mean, max = 7.64%, 20.50%, 32.80%.
The variants shown here exclude non-human capital formation from the set of regressors, implicitly
   endogenizing capital formation and the capital stock.
The equation for GDP per person 15-64 is estimated directly, not derived from the
   by the employment and productivity estimates shown in the earlier columns.
All equations displayed here have highly significant F statistics.
     Table 3.    The Three-Year Effects of Selected Institutional Changes
                 On the Relative Unemployment of Women and Young Adults, 1978-2001

                                                       The estimated effects on --
                                                        Female/ male unemploy-       Youth (15-24) unemployment /
Institutional changes (independent variables)           ment, among those 15-64      unemployment among males 15-64
Market regulations --
Raising the index of product-market regulations by 1     0.065 (0.024) **            ####    (0.05) **

Tightening employee protection laws (EPLs), by 1 index point for 12 years or more
   (a) with little or no wage-setting coordination   0.197 (0.052) **             0.482      (0.10) **
   (b) with close coordination in wage-setting       0.288 (0.101) **             0.420      (0.13) **

Shifting the index of coordinated wage-setting from no wage coordination to high
   (a) with weak EPLs                                  #### (0.232) *            0.085       (0.28)
   (b) with strict EPLs                                #### (0.124) a            ####        (0.22) b

The double jump, both from low (0.4) to high (3.5) 0.282 (0.148) a                   1.328   (0.30) **
  EPL and from no wage coordination to high (from 1.0 to 3.0)

Fiscal wedges in the labor market --
Raising the unemployment compensation support ratio
   • from 0% (e.g. Italy 1979) to 1%                #### (0.016) **                  ####    (0.03) **
   • from 15% (e.g. France 1982) to 16%             #### (0.006) *                   ####    (0.01) **
   • from 30% (e.g. Belgium 1982) to 31%            0.015 (0.012)                    ####    (0.04) **
                                                       The estimated effects on --
   Table 3, continued                                   Female/ male unemploy-        Youth (15-24) unemployment /
                                                        ment, among those 15-64       unemployment among males 15-64
Broader fiscal shifts --
Raising all taxes and transfers in proportion
   • taxes up from 27% of GDP (USA) to 28%         0.016 (0.014)                      0.095    (0.03) **
   • taxes up from 35% of GDP (Italy 1985) to 36% #### (0.008) b                      0.043    (0.01) **
   • taxes up from 45% of GDP (Belgium 1985) to 46%#### (0.010) *                     0.023    (0.02)

Raising taxes and spending them only on extra transfers
   • from 27% of GDP (USA) to 28%                      0.033 (0.018) a                0.077    (0.03) *
   • from 35% of GDP (Italy 1985) to 36%               #### (0.011)                   0.030    (0.02)
   • from 45% of GDP (Belgium 1985) to 46%             #### (0.011)                   0.014    (0.02)


Coefficient on the lagged ln(employ't ratio), 15-64s     #### (0.238) **              ####     (0.37) **

Notes and sources to Table 3:
(Standard errors in parentheses. ** = significant at the 1% level (two-tail). * = significant at the 5% level.
   a = significant at the 7% level; b = significant at the 10% level.)

The female/male ratio of unemployment rates in the 15-64 age range has a 21-country (min, average, max) = (0.57, 1.35, 2.88).

The youth/men unemployment ratio has sample (min, average, max) = (1.1, 2.31, 5.4). Its sample consists of 14 countries:
   Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, USA.
For the structures of the equations, see the sketch in Table 1 and the details in the Appendix.
The other notes to Table 2 also apply here.
Table 4. Employee Protection Laws Redistribute Unemployment
             toward Outsiders: Four Countries in 2002

                                 Ratios of unemployment rates
                    EPL          Youth 15-24         Women 25-64
                    strictness   /men 25-64          /men 25-64
Greece              3.8          4.2                 2.4
Italy               3.3          3.8                 1.8
         versus
Ireland             1.3          1.7                   0.8
Denmark             1.6          1.6                   1.2



Source: SourceOECD, standardized unemployment rates.
                             Table 5. What's Hiding Inside the Conventional Unidentified
                                      Fixed-Country Effects (UFOs) for 1978-2001?


                                       Correlations of these regression-based fixed country effects …
… with 1978-2001 averages by            ln(employ- ln(GDP per ln(GDP per            ln(GDP per      log-growth
country for these variables             ment ratio) employed) labor hour) person 15-64) of GDP/capita
     Market regulations
Product market regulations                    -0.16        0.47          -0.03            0.24           0.34
EPL strictness now                             0.11        0.50          -0.05            0.44           0.43
EPL strictness 12 years ago                    0.17        0.44           0.00            0.42           0.39
Wage-setting coordination (Ochel)              0.41        0.42           0.41            0.48           0.52
     Overall budget variables
Total taxes / GDP (see Fig. 3)                 0.67         0.63          0.66            0.86           0.68
Income and property tax / all taxes           -0.11        -0.70         -0.08           -0.54          -0.57
Consumption taxes / all taxes                 -0.27         0.21          0.19            0.04          -0.06
Social transfers / total taxes                 0.38         0.50          0.30            0.53           0.55
     Labor-specific budget variables
The "tax wedge" on labor earnings              0.43        0.77           0.47            0.80           0.72
Generosity of unemployment compensation        0.36        0.30           0.56            0.41           0.39
ALMP support ratio                             0.80        0.16           0.20            0.55           0.37
     Other conditioning variables
Educational attainment, in years               0.33        -0.47          0.10           -0.11          -0.41
Shadow economy / GDP in 1989                  -0.29         0.22         -0.13            0.07          -0.02

Notes:                                  Boldface = The column's top three correlations (in absolute value).
The fixed country effects for each column come from regressions described in connection with Tables 1 and 2. While these
came from the instrumented equations, those from uninstrumented equations give similar results.
There are 22 fixed country effects. These are for the 21 countries (USA = 0), but with German averages split into two
countries: West German averages for 1978-1989, and all-German averages for 1990-2001.
     Table 6.    The Three-Year Effects of Selected Institutional Changes on Jobs and GDP, 1963-1980

                                                The percentage estimated effects on --            3-year growth
                                                         GDP per GDP per             GDP per      rate of GDP
Institutional changes (independent variables)     Jobs     worker         hour       person 15-64 per capita
Market regulations --

Tightening employee protection laws (EPLs), by 1 index point for 12 years or more
   (a) with little or no wage-setting coordination -2.25      2.30      -1.58           1.03       -0.64
                                                  (1.45)    (1.51)     (1.32)         (2.33)      (1.57)
   (b) with close coordination in wage-setting      2.66 **   1.00       0.27           4.89 **     2.46 a
                                                  (1.13)    (1.24)     (1.17)         (1.85)      (1.34)
Shifting the index of coordinated wage-setting from no wage coordination to high
   (a) with weak EPLs                              -0.02      0.55       1.03          -0.13       -1.03
                                                  (1.61)    (2.09)     (2.10)         (2.78)      (2.18)
   (b) with strict EPLs                             8.99 *    2.96       7.02 b       12.17 a       8.89 a
                                                  (3.78)    (4.28)     (4.15)         (6.12)      (4.52)
The double jump, both from low (0.4) to high (3.5)6.44 *      3.16       1.07         12.98 **      4.91
   EPL and from no wage coordination to high (3.13)         (3.04)     (2.74)         (4.58)      (3.30)

Fiscal wedges in the labor market --
Raising the unemployment compens. support ratio
   • from 0% (e.g. Switzerland, Italy 1973) to 1%0.82 *       0.99 *      1.06 *        1.99 **     0.58
                                                (0.40)      (0.49)      (0.43)        (0.64)      (0.50)
   • from 10% (e.g. Denmark 1973) to 11%         -0.13        0.07       -0.05          0.16        0.29 b
                                                (0.15)      (0.15)      (0.15)        (0.21)      (0.16)
   • from 20% (e.g. Belgium 1973) to 21%          0.16        0.02       -0.27          0.01       -0.24
                                                (0.21)      (0.23)      (0.18)        (0.29)      (0.24)
   Table 2, continued

Broader fiscal shifts --
Raising all taxes and transfers in proportion
   • taxes up from 22% of GDP (Japan 1973) to 23%
                                                -0.04          -0.98 **     -1.15 **       -1.09 **     -1.29 **
                                               (0.21)         (0.25)       (0.21)         (0.36)       (0.27)
   • taxes up from 30% of GDP (Belgium 1964) to -0.26
                                                   31%*        -0.17        -0.10          -0.53 *       0.03
                                               (0.11)         (0.16)       (0.15)         (0.21)       (0.17)
   • taxes up from 40% of GDP (Austria 1979) to-0.26
                                                 41%           -0.66 *      -0.59 *        -1.34 **     -0.84 *
                                               (0.26)         (0.30)       (0.29)         (0.47)       (0.34)
Raising taxes and spending them only on extra transfers
   • taxes up from 22% of GDP to 23%            -0.23          -0.71 *      -0.60 *        -0.86 a      -1.13 **
                                               (0.27)         (0.30)       (0.25)         (0.44)       (0.33)
   • taxes up from 30% of GDP to 31%            -0.37 *        -0.01         0.22          -0.40         0.12
                                               (0.16)         (0.23)       (0.22)         (0.30)       (0.24)
   • taxes up from 40% of GDP to 41%            -0.33          -0.57 a      -0.40          -1.25 **     -0.78 *
                                               (0.26)         (0.30)       (0.28)         (0.46)       (3.35)

Coefficient on the lagged dependent variable#      0.86 **      0.96 **      0.95 **        0.90 **
                                                 (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.02)         (0.05)


Notes and sources to Table 6:
(Standard errors in parentheses. ** = significant at the 1% level (two-tail). * = significant at the 5% level.
   a = significant at the 7% level; b = significant at the 10% level.)

For the structures of the equations, see the sketch in Table 1 and the details in the Appendix.
The other notes to Table 2 also apply here.
                       APPENDIX A. The First-Stage Equations
                      Used in the Instrumental-Variable Variants


       For the instrumented-variable variants of the second-stage equations featured in
Tables 2, 3, 5, and 6, we chose first-stage instruments in a two-part procedure designed to
exclude groups of instruments that failed to add significant power to the first-stage
prediction of the potentially endogenous institutional and fiscal variables.
       First, we gave the broadest possible set of independent variables suggested by
theory, and began pruning insignificant sets of instruments. Of the variables that
survived this pruning process, some overlap with the second-stage regressors. This is
generally undesirable, yet such variables were kept in the set of instruments here on the
grounds that they really did affect some of the endogenous institutional variables.
       The second part of the first-stage was the actual OLS estimation based on the
narrower set of instruments that survived the pruning process. The predicted values from
these estimates were used in the IV variants of the second stage.
       As a possible alternative for purging cyclical effects from the endogenous fiscal
variables, we also experimented with extracting a cyclical component tied to
unemployment and inflation, in the spirit of many authors’ calculations of full-
employment budget surpluses. This failed to make any difference to the estimates.
Whichever variant was tried, there was still a cyclical and transitory component of the
budget variables (taxes and transfers), which behaved quite differently from the more
permanent component. As explained in the text, separating these two helps the equations
to answer the basic question about the effects of sustained institutional shifts.
       In the first part, or first regression pass, of the first-stage estimation, we used an
over-broad set of regressions to predict the following potentially endogenous institutional
and policy variables: (1) EPL strictness; (2) the “net reservation wage” offered to the
unemployed; (3) the degree of wage coordination; (4) the active labor market policy
(ALMP) support ratio, which equals (unemployment benefits per unemployed) / (GDP
per person in the labor force); (5) the country’s openness to international transactions,
measured by Freedom House’s Index 4; (6) income and property taxes as a share of GDP;
(7) social security contributions from payroll, as a share of GDP; (8) taxes on goods and
services as a share of GDP; (9) social transfers as a share of GDP; (10) total taxes as a
share of GDP; and (11) the tax wedge on labor earnings.
       The over-broad set of potential instruments included:


(a) a binary variable for a politically conservative regime;
(b) the share of adults who voted in the last general election, and itself squared and cubed;
(c) military spending as a share of GDP;
(d) membership in a customs union or free trade area;
(e) share of public sector in employment;
(f) log of national population in millions;
(g) share of population that is younger than 15, and the same share squared and cubed;
(h) share of population that is 65 or older, and the same share squared and cubed;
(i) primary and secondary school enrollment rate ten years earlier;
(j) university enrollment rate 10 years earlier;
(k) employee protection law strictness lagged 9 years, and its changes of the subsequent 6 years;
(j) the lagged "net reservation wage" (Allard 2003) received after taxes by the average
unemployed nine years earlier, and its changes of the subsequent 6 years;
(k) an index of centralized wage bargaining, and its lagged values of the preceding nine years;
(l) dummies for each three-year time period (except the last period in the sample); and
(m) dummies for each country except for the United States. An exception: Separate dummy
variables were used for West Germany before 1991 and for unified Germany thereafter.

       Next came the pruning process, to exclude groups of variables that did not prove
significant in the initial regressions run on this over-broad list of potential instruments.
In all equations, the binary variable for politically conservative regime added no
explanatory power and was pruned altogether. Here is an equation-by-equation listing of
other variables that got pruned from the first-stage equations:

Equation (1), predicting EPL strictness – The strictness of employee protection laws was
driven largely by its own earlier values. It was practically an exogenous variable subject
to a random walk. Still, to explore what difference it would make to endogenize EPL, we
ran an equation to predict EPL without these variables: the military spending share of
GDP, the public-sector employment share, membership in a customs union or free trade
area, the child share, the old share, the fixed-time dummies, and the levels of wage
coordination.

Equation (2), predicting the net reservation wage, our measure of the generosity of offers
of unemployment compensation – We dropped the military spending share, the public-
sector job share, membership in a customs union or free trade area, lagged school
enrollments, lagged university enrollments, and the log of total population.
Eq. (3), income and property tax as a share of GDP: Most instruments played a
significant role. The only ones dropped were the military share, the public sector’s share
of employment, and the school enrollment ratio.

Equation (4) for commodity taxation as a share of GDP, we dropped military spending,
the public sector share of employment, log of total population, the child (0-15) share of
the population, and the lagged net reservation wage.

Equation (5), social transfers as a share of GDP -- We dropped the log of population and
the wage coordination variables. The voting share was a strong determinant of social
transfers, here as in Lindert (2004).

Equation (6) Total taxes as a share of GDP – In this case, we dropped the military share,
the lagged school enrollment rate, the child (0-15) share, the elderly (over 65) share, and
the lagged rates of unemployment compensation.

Equation (7) The OECD’s publicized tax wedge as a share of labor earnings – This was
unavailable for early years. For the later sample, it usually showed negative influences
on jobs and productivity, as one would expect. For this study, it has been dropped in
favor of the larger total-tax aggregate that includes it.

        We omitted any equation predicting either wage coordination (linear version of
the index) or the binaries indicating whether the index was in the intermediate or high
coordination class. The wage coordination variables were left exogenous, since no
instruments other than fixed country effects predicted them well.

        In the case of the active labor market policy (ALMP) support ratio, this whole
variable had to be omitted from the second stage, even though we have data on it for most
countries after 1980. Trying to include it, either with or without instrumenting, yielded
fragile and often implausible results. The underlying problem is that the cyclical
determinants of this support ratio, or of ALMP expenditures as a simple share of GDP,
are too powerful. They yield highly sensitive results, even when this support ratio is
estimated with only those instruments that should not have been very cyclical. In some
variants, ALMP was wildly sensitive to GDP. We have to leave this variable out, relying
on continuing micro-based research to determine its role.

       Openness to trade, like ALMP, runs the risk of being highly endogenous and
responsive to the business cycle, especially if it is measured as trade shares of GDP. We
seek only the policy component of openness, and chose the Freedom House indicator of
how open are government and the law to international transactions. This was not easily
instrumented, and was viewed as exogenous.
 APPENDIX B. FULL REGRESSIONS BEHIND FOUR EQUATIONS OF TABLE 2

(n = 168)            Dependent variable: Jobs: ln (employment        Productivity: ln (GDP
                                          per person 15-64)          per employed person)
Independent variables                      coefficient Std. error   coefficient Std. error
Dependent variable, lagged 3 years              0.976 (0.027)             0.864 (0.023)
Low-GDP history #                              0.0014 (0.027)            0.0041 (0.034)
Educational attainments of adults             -0.0053 (0.0029)          -0.0017 (0.0036)
Young (0-15 share)                            -0.0067 (0.0018)           0.0019 (0.0019)
Old (share 65 and up)                         -0.0068 (0.0025)          -0.0046 (0.0028)
Global demand shocks (OECD infl. - unem.) 0.011 (0.002)                   0.014 (0.0020)
   " times (this is USA)                        0.034 (0.016)             0.051 (0.020)
Global supply shocks (OECD infl. + unem.) -0.0084 (0.0013)               -0.013 (0.0014)
   " times (this is USA)                       -0.014 (0.011)            -0.041 (0.015)
Product-market regulations in seven sectors -0.0006 (0.0034)             -0.012 (0.0045)
Internat'ly open policies (Freedom House) -0.0033 (0.0039)              -0.0022 (0.005)
EPL change, 6 years ago to current            -0.0079 (0.010)             0.017 (0.013)
EPL change, 12 years ago to 6 years ago        -0.012 (0.007)            0.0086 (0.0094)
EPL level 12 years ago                        -0.0066 (0.0075)            0.017 (0.009)
   " times intermediate wage-setting coord. -0.0029 (0.0052)           (0.0001) (0.0062)
   " times strong wage-setting coord.          0.0015 (0.015)            -0.079 (0.017)
Unemployment comp., country average            -0.216 (0.225)            -0.413 (0.230)
Unemployment comp., departure from ave. -0.155 (0.239)                   -0.268 (0.255)
Unemployment comp., squared                     1.745 (1.373)             1.800 (1.503)
Unemployment comp., cubed                      -3.931 (2.493)            -2.806 (2.872)
Coordinated wage-setting is intermediate       0.0008 (0.012)             0.012 (0.014)
Coordinated wage-setting is strong              0.028 (0.030)             0.236 (0.037)
Total taxes/GDP, country average                0.026 (0.029)            -0.018 (0.033)
Taxes/GDP, departure from country average 0.027 (0.029)                  -0.018 (0.033)
Taxes/GDP, squared                          -0.00074 (0.0008)          0.00069 (0.0009)
Taxes/GDP, cubed / 1000                      0.00695 (0.0071)         -0.00748 (0.0081)
Income tax share of all tax, country average 0.032 (0.033)                0.086 (0.040)
   " , departure from country average           0.044 (0.088)             0.434 (0.115)
Commodity tax share of all tax, country ave. 0.037 (0.054)               -0.194 (0.069)
   " , departure from country average           0.163 (0.116)             0.212 (0.138)
Transfers share of all tax, country ave.        0.024 (0.056)             0.010 (0.065)
   " , departure from country average          -0.088 (0.062)            -0.184 (0.065)
Constant                                       -0.041 (0.324)             1.675 (0.473)
Mean of dependent variable                   -0.428                10.578
# Low-GDP history = ln (US GDP per cap. / this country's GDP per cap.), 10 years earlier.
(For choices of IV's, see Table 1 and Appendix A.)



 APPENDIX B. FULL REGRESSIONS BEHIND TABLE 2, continued

(n = 168)            Dependent variable: Output: ln (GDP             Growth: 3-year change
                                          per person 15-64)          in log (GDP per capita)
Independent variables                      coefficient Std. error   coefficient Std. error
Dependent variable, lagged 3 years              0.757 (0.042)
Low-GDP history #                              -0.031 (0.055)           0.096    (0.032)
Educational attainments of adults             -0.0027 0.0055          -0.0012     0.0035
Young (0-15 share)                            -0.0086 0.0032          -0.0006     0.0018
Old (share 65 and up)                          -0.015 0.0045          -0.0049     0.0028
Global demand shocks (OECD infl. - unem.) 0.026 0.0032                 0.0149     0.0020
   " times (this is USA)                        0.068 (0.032)           0.066    (0.022)
Global supply shocks (OECD infl. + unem.) -0.024 (0.0023)              -0.014   (0.0013)
   " times (this is USA)                       -0.073 (0.024)          -0.041    (0.017)
Product-market regulations in seven sectors -0.022 (0.0074)            0.0030   (0.0040)
Internat'ly open policies (Freedom House)      -0.013 (0.0075)        -0.0018   (0.0053)
EPL change, 6 years ago to current            -0.0019 (0.019)         -0.0021   (0.0128)
EPL change, 12 years ago to 6 years ago        -0.023 (0.014)          0.0091   (0.0094)
EPL level 12 years ago                         -0.013 (0.014)          0.0051   (0.0091)
   " times intermediate wage-setting coord. 0.0089 0.0092              0.0006   (0.0064)
   " times strong wage-setting coord.          -0.040 (0.027)          -0.042    (0.016)
Unemployment comp., country average            -0.864 (0.364)          -0.189    (0.232)
Unemployment comp., departure from ave. -0.636 (0.400)                 -0.073    (0.258)
Unemployment comp., squared                     4.039 (2.281)           1.389    (1.465)
Unemployment comp., cubed                      -6.725 (4.249)          -2.906    (2.702)
Coordinated wage-setting is intermediate      -0.0047 (0.021)          0.0049    (0.015)
Coordinated wage-setting is strong              0.204 (0.058)           0.154    (0.034)
Total taxes/GDP, country average                0.029 (0.053)           0.058    (0.034)
Taxes/GDP, departure from country average 0.029 (0.053)                 0.055    (0.033)
Taxes/GDP, squared                            -0.0008 0.0015          -0.0014     0.0009
Taxes/GDP, cubed / 1000                        0.0077 0.0131           0.0117     0.0082
Income tax share of all tax, country average 0.075 (0.061)              0.096    (0.039)
   " , departure from country average           0.691 (0.179)           0.323    (0.115)
Commodity tax share of all tax, country ave. -0.198 (0.104)            -0.205    (0.074)
  " , departure from country average         0.478   (0.210)         0.317   (0.142)
Transfers share of all tax, country ave.     0.111   (0.099)        -0.026   (0.070)
  " , departure from country average        -0.176   (0.103)        -0.255   (0.068)
Constant                                     2.740   (0.743)        -0.655   (0.370)

Mean of dependent variable                   10.151                0.065
# Low-GDP history = ln(US GDP per cap./this country's GDP per cap.), 10 years earlier.
(For choices of IV's, see Table 1 and Appendix A.)
