NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STATURE AND STATUS: HEIGHT, ABILITY,
AND LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES
Anne Case
Christina Paxson
Working Paper 12466
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12466
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006

We thank Tom Vogl for expert research assistance, and Angus Deaton for comments on an earlier draft. This
research has been supported by NICHD grant HD041141 and NIA grant P01 AG005842. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2006 by Anne Case and Christina Paxson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market Outcomes
Anne Case and Christina Paxson
NBER Working Paper No. 12466
August 2006
JEL No. I1, J3
ABSTRACT
It has long been recognized that taller adults hold jobs of higher status and, on average, earn more
than other workers. A large number of hypotheses have been put forward to explain the association
between height and earnings. In developed countries, researchers have emphasized factors such as
self esteem, social dominance, and discrimination. In this paper, we offer a simpler explanation: On
average, taller people earn more because they are smarter. As early as age 3 — before schooling has
had a chance to play a role — and throughout childhood, taller children perform significantly better
on cognitive tests. The correlation between height in childhood and adulthood is approximately 0.7
for both men and women, so that tall children are much more likely to become tall adults. As adults,
taller individuals are more likely to select into higher paying occupations that require more advanced
verbal and numerical skills and greater intelligence, for which they earn handsome returns. Using
four data sets from the US and the UK, we find that the height premium in adult earnings can be
explained by childhood scores on cognitive tests. Furthermore, we show that taller adults select into
occupations that have higher cognitive skill requirements and lower physical skill demands.
Anne Case
367 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
accase@princeton.edu
Christina Paxson
316 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1022
and NBER
cpaxson@princeton.edu

I. Introduction
It has long been recognized that taller adults hold jobs of higher status and, on average, earn
more than other workers. Empirical research on height and success in the U.S. labor market dates
back at least a century. Gowin (1915), for example, presents survey evidence documenting the
difference in the distributions of heights of executives and of “average men.” Gowin also
compares the heights of persons of differing status in the same profession, finding that bishops
are taller on average than preachers in small towns, and sales managers are taller than salesmen,
with similar results for lawyers, teachers, and railroad employees (p. 32).
Height continues to be highly correlated with labor market success in developed
countries. Figures 1 and 2 provide evidence from the US and the UK that more highly-skilled
jobs attract taller workers.1 On average, American men in white collar occupations are an inch
taller than men in blue collar occupations. Among 30-year-old men in the UK, those working in
professional and managerial occupations are six-tenths of an inch taller on average than those in
manual occupations. Results for women are quite similar: in the UK, women working as
professionals and managers are an inch taller than those in manual unskilled occupations.
Taller people also have higher average incomes and earnings. Table 1 presents results on
the relationship between the logarithm of income and height for men and women observed in the
US National Health Interview Survey (column 1), and between log earnings and height for men
and women in a 1958 British birth cohort study (columns 2 and 3), and in a 1970 British cohort
study (column 4). For both men and women, the relationship is striking: a one-inch increase in

1

The US evidence is based on data from the National Health Interview Survey, and the
British evidence is based on data from the 1970 British Cohort Study. These data sets will be
discussed in more detail below.
1

height is associated with a 2 to 2.5 percent increase in income or earnings. An increase in US
men’s heights from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the height distribution — an increase of four
inches — is associated with an increase in earnings of 10 percent on average.
A large number of hypotheses have been put forward to explain the association between
height and earnings. In developing countries, the height premium in earnings is often attributed to
the greater strength and better health that accompany height (Haddad and Bouis 1991, Steckel
1995, Strauss and Thomas 1998). In developed countries, researchers have emphasized factors
such as self esteem (Freedman 1979, Lechelt 1975, Wilson 1968, Young and French 1996);
social dominance (Hensley 1993, Klein et al. 1972) and discrimination (Loh 1993, Magnusson,
Rasmussen, and Gyllensten. 2006). In a recent paper, Persico, Postlewaite and Silverman (2004)
suggest that boys who are taller during adolescence are more likely to participate in social
activities that build productive human capital. They postulate that adolescent experiences are
responsible for the higher earnings observed for taller men in adulthood, so that those who are
short as teenagers have lower earnings, even if their heights “catch up” by adulthood.
In this paper, we offer a simpler explanation: On average, taller people earn more
because they are smarter. As early as age 3 — before schooling has had a chance to play a role —
and throughout childhood, taller children perform significantly better on cognitive tests. The
correlation between height in childhood and adulthood is approximately 0.7 for both men and
women, so that tall children are much more likely to become tall adults. As adults, taller
individuals are more likely to select into higher paying occupations that require more advanced
verbal and numerical skills and greater intelligence, for which they earn handsome returns.
In Section II, we review the literature on environmental and genetic determinants of

2

growth and cognition and discuss the reasons why height and cognitive ability are likely to be
correlated. The timing of physical growth and cognitive development is important for our
empirical work, and we highlight the patterns that exist for each. Section III contains a theoretical
framework that motivates our empirical research, and Section IV discusses the data sets we use.
Section V presents evidence. We first show how the heights of children and adults are related to
the childhood environment, and make the case that common factors influence both height and
cognitive ability. We present evidence from three data sets — two from Britain and one from the
US — that taller children score better on a variety of cognitive tests administered at different
ages. We then examine how heights are related to earnings and occupational choice. We find
that the height premium in adult earnings can be explained by childhood scores on cognitive
tests. Furthermore, we show that taller adults select into occupations that have higher cognitive
skill requirements and lower physical skill demands.

II. A Primer on the Determinants of Growth and Cognition
Adult height reflects cumulative growth up to maturity. Figure 3 depicts the usual pattern of
growth observed in wealthy countries. After a period of intense growth from ages 0 to 3, growth
becomes relatively stable at approximately 6 cm a year until adolescence, at which point an
adolescent growth spurt (AGS) accelerates growth to an (adolescent) peak height velocity of
approximately 10 cm a year. In current European cohorts, girls tend to reach peak height velocity
at age 12, and boys at age 14. Final adult height is attained when growth ceases, which depends
on the timing and duration of the AGS. (See Beard and Blaser, 2002, for a thorough discussion
and references.)

3

Age-specific growth patterns and final adult height depend on a combination of factors,
including genes, environmental conditions (particularly nutrition and illness) and geneenvironment interactions. Although genes are key determinants of individual height, many
studies suggest that differences in average height across populations are due largely to
environmental factors (Steckel 1995). The marked increase in heights observed throughout the
developed world during the 20th Century occurred too rapidly to be due to selection and genetic
variation (Beard and Blaser 2002). Silventoinen (2003) argues that a full 20 percent of variation
in body height between individuals in developed countries today is due to environmental factors.
Adult height depends in part on a child’s uterine environment. Mother smoking during
pregnancy is a critical risk factor for intrauterine growth retardation (Institute of Medicine 2001).
In addition, low birth weight is a significant predictor of lower stature in adulthood (Hack et al.
2003, Ericson and Kallen 1998).
Adult height is also sensitive to environmental conditions experienced in childhood. The
period from birth to age three is generally identified as the postnatal period most critical to adult
height. The speed of growth is more rapid during this period than at any other during the life
course, and nutritional needs are greatest at this point. Infections (especially gastrointestinal and
respiratory) can be frequent and severe in early childhood, and these can impair growth. In
addition, children are at special risk from poor care-giving at youngest ages; once children are
more autonomous, they may be better equipped to protect themselves. (See Martorell, Kettel
Khan and Schroeder 1994 for discussion.)
Environmental conditions in childhood also affect the timing of the growth patterns
described above. The age of onset of the adolescent growth spurt (AGS) has fallen over the past

4

two centuries, in step with a fall in age at maturation. In late 19th Century Europe, adult height
was attained at age 26 – substantially different from today’s estimates of age 18 for boys, and age
16 for girls (Beard and Blaser, 2002). The timing of the AGS and age at maturation also vary
cross-sectionally. Through a combination of better nutrition and improved disease environments,
children of higher socioeconomic status experience an earlier AGS and attain their adult heights
at earlier ages. Conversely, children who experience deprivation may experience an extension of
the growth period that can last several years (Steckel 1995). An extended AGS can help shorter
children gain a similar amount of height as other children do during adolescence, but on average
this does not erase height deficits that developed in early childhood (Martorell et al 1994,
Martorell et al 1990, Satyanarayana et al 1989, Hack et al 2003).
Differences in the timing of pubertal growth spurts act to temporarily magnify differences
in heights between economic classes during adolescence. This has long been true: data collected
at a boarding school in Germany in the 18th Century, for example, suggests that upper class boys
reached their peak height velocity a full year earlier than lower class boys, exaggerating the
height difference between them during their teen years. Controlling for year and region of birth,
height differences between low aristocrats and middle class boys grew from 2.4 cm at age 10, to
5.8 cm at age 15, before returning to a mean height difference of 2.1 cm at age 19 (Komlos et al
1992).

Height and cognitive ability
While a positive correlation between body height and intelligence has been documented in
studies stretching back at least a century (Tanner 1979), the precise links between height and

5

cognition are still not well understood. Research on the determinants of cognitive ability suggests
an important role for nutrition, which may well prove to be a significant link between height and
intelligence (Lynn 1989, Kretchmer, Beard and Carlson 1996). Randomized control trials of
supplemental feeding have shown that growth-retarded children’s cognitive development benefits
significantly from better nutrition (Grantham-McGregor 2002).
There may be chemical channels that influence both height and cognition. Work on
insulin-like growth factors suggests that these may affect body growth while also influencing
areas of the brain in which cognition occurs (Berger 2001). Similarly, thyroid hormone is known
to stimulate growth and at the same time influence neural development (Richards et al 2002).
Features of the uterine environment may influence height and cognitive development.
Both prenatal smoking and low birth weight predict poorer cognitive ability. Maternal smoking
during pregnancy is associated with lower cognitive test scores, behavioral problems, and
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (Weitzman, Gortmaker and Sobol 1992; Romano et al.
2006). While these outcomes may be the result of factors correlated with mother smoking while
pregnant rather than the direct effect of smoking, animal studies have documented the role of
prenatal nicotine exposure on neural development (Slotkin 1998). Being born at low weight also
predicts poorer cognition (Ericson and Kallen 1998). Richards et al. (2002) examine data
collected on height and cognition at several points in childhood and adulthood for the 1946
British birth cohort study. They find that low birth weight is associated with lower cognitive test
scores through age 26.
Height and cognitive ability may also be linked by genes, although recent research on the
genetic ties between height and intelligence shows mixed results. One Norwegian twin study

6

suggests that approximately a third of the correlation between height and intelligence may be due
to overlapping genetic factors (Sunder et al 2005). However, other work on Finnish twins finds
no evidence that the correlation between height and educational attainment is due to genetic
overlap (Silventoinen et al 2000). Magnusson et al. (2006), comparing first and second born
biological brothers in Sweden, find that the taller brother is significantly more likely to attend
higher education. The height effect estimated across brothers is almost identical to that estimated
across all men, suggesting that the correlation between height and intelligence is not driven
solely by genetic or environmental factors common to brothers.
Nutrition and health affect cognitive development throughout childhood (Walter 1993,
Pollitt and Mathews 1998). There is limited evidence on whether individuals with low levels of
cognitive development in early childhood can catch up to others. However, recent work suggests
that catch up, if physically possible, is generally not complete. Using a large cohort of individuals
observed from birth to age 53, Richards and Wadsworth (2004) find that children who
experience early adverse circumstances have lower cognitive test scores at all ages. Abbott et al
(1998) document a significant correlation between height of men in mid-life and their cognitive
performance after age 70. Even after adjustment for education and father’s occupation, they find
a strong and significant association between height and cognitive function.

III. Framework
Our hypothesis is that the associations between height and labor market outcomes are primarily
due to the correlation of height with intelligence. In this view, returns to height in the labor
market are not due to pure discrimination against shorter individuals, nor are they due to the

7

greater strength or physical ability of taller people. Rather, the height premium is due to omitted
variables bias, with estimates of the height premium reflecting returns to unmeasured cognitive
ability.2
The following framework formalizes this idea and motivates our empirical work.
Following the earnings equations shown in Table 1, we start with a linear model of the form:
(1)

wi = θ hi + εi

for an individual i with log earnings

w who stands at height h . All other determinants of

earnings are grouped in the unobservable,

ε . Our interest is in determinants of earnings that are

correlated with height and that could bias our estimate of a true height premium, should one
exist. In particular, we focus on ability,

η , an unmeasured determinant of earnings that may also

be correlated with height. Ignoring momentarily other determinants of earnings, we write
(2)
where

εi = bηi + ei
ei is the idiosyncratic component of earnings assumed to be orthogonal to height. If

ability is correlated with height, then part of the estimated height premium is a reflection of that
correlation. Specifically, the probability limit of the OLS estimate of the height premium can be
expressed

p lim θˆ = θ + p lim(h′h) −1 h′ε = θ + bσ η h / σ h2 ,

(3)

where

σ ηh

is the covariance of height and ability and

σ h2

is the variance in height. The OLS

estimate is then a combination of a genuine height premium

2

θ

(due perhaps to height-based

If our hypothesis is correct, it is possible that employers with incomplete information
about the cognitive ability of their workers practice height-based statistical discrimination.
8

discrimination in the labor market, or a genuine efficiency gain directly attributable to height),
and the projection of ability onto height.
So far, we have not distinguished between different types of ability. Height may be
correlated with intelligence, as discussed above. However, height may also be positively
correlated with other productive characteristics, such as physical strength or coordination.
Indeed, the literature on developing countries typically assumes that the height premium in
earnings reflects better physical health and productivity. The framework can easily be extended
to include multiple kinds of ability, all of which may have different correlations with height.
Suppose, for example, that there are two types of productive ability–cognitive ability, η C , and
physical ability or “strength”, η S , so that:
(4)

εi = b cηic + b sηis + ei .

In this case, the estimated height premium, assuming that both cognitive ability and strength are
unobserved, will have a probability limit of:

⎡ b σ ch + b σ sh ⎤
p lim θˆ = θ + ⎢
⎥.
σ h2
⎣
⎦
c

(5)

s

Estimates of the return to height may be biased upwards due to its correlation with either strength
or cognitive ability. Note, however, that if the height premium is driven solely by the correlation
between height and cognitive ability, then estimates of earnings equations that control for
cognitive ability will show a height premium of zero. We examine this implication in the
following empirical work.
This framework can also be extended to examine occupational choice. As above, we
assume that height is correlated with a number of productive abilities. Following previous
9

literature on occupational choice, we assume that the returns to these different abilities vary
across occupations (Heckman and Scheinkman 1987; Gibbons et al 2005). Workers sort into the
occupations that yield the highest returns. If height is more strongly associated with cognitive
ability than physical ability—in a sense that we define more precisely below—then taller workers
will sort into jobs that require greater cognitive skill relative to physical skill.
To fix ideas, we assume there are two occupations, 1 and 2. We assume that the
productive abilities η C and η S are known by both workers and potential employers. (This model
could be extended to include learning about productive characteristics, as in Gibbons et al 2005.)
The wage equation has the same form used above, but with returns to productive abilities that
vary across the two occupations. Suppressing the individual subscripts, the logarithm of the
wage that a worker receives in occupation j is:

(6)

w j = θ j h + b cj η c + b sj η s + e j , for j=1, 2.

Assume, with no loss of generality, that occupation 1 places a higher premium on cognitive skills
and occupation 2 places a higher premium on physical skills, so that b1c > b2c and b1s < b2s . We
are agnostic about whether the pure height premium,

θ j , is larger in occupation 1 or 2. To

simplify notation, define λc = b1c − b2c , λs = b2s − b1s ,

λh = θ2 − θ1 , and e = e1 − e2 . The

worker chooses the highest-paying occupation given his or her characteristics, so that occupation
1 is chosen if:
(7)

u = λc η c − λsη s + e > λh h .

This equation indicates that, all else equal, an increase in
ability in occupation 1, relative to

λc , the excess return to cognitive

λs , the excess return to strength in occupation 2, will shift
10

workers from occupation 2 into occupation 1.
With assumptions about the joint distribution of height, productive abilities and e , it is
possible to derive the probability that occupation 1 is chosen conditional on height, and examine
how changes in height affect this probability. Assume that these variables have a multivariate
normal distribution, the measure of height ( h ) has been standardized to have a mean of zero and
a variance of 1, and the two productive abilities have means of zero. Using standard formulae for
multivariate normals, the probability of choosing occupation 1 conditional on height is:

(8)

⎡ ( λcσ ch − λsσ sh )h − λh h ⎤
P ( u > λ h | h) = Φ ⎢
⎥
σu
⎦
⎣
h

where σ ch and σ sh are the covariances of height with cognitive skill and strength, respectively;

σu

is the standard error of u as defined in (7) ; and Φ (⋅) is the standard normal distribution.

The change in the probability of selecting occupation 1 with respect to height will be positive
provided that

λcσ ch > λsσ sh + λh . In words, if the covariance between height and cognitive

ability, weighted by the excess return to cognitive skill in occupation 1, exceeds the covariance
between height and physical ability, weighted by the excess return to physical skill in occupation
2, plus any pure excess height premium in occupation 2, then taller workers will sort into
occupation 1.
In the empirical work that follows, we examine a number of the implications of the theory
developed above. We first provide evidence that environmental factors thought to influence
cognitive ability—including parents’ educations and socioeconomic status, low birth weight and
prenatal maternal smoking—are also correlated with heights and the timing of growth patterns,

11

even controlling for parental heights. We then provide direct evidence that

σ ch , the covariance

between cognitive ability and height, is positive. We present estimates of earnings equations that
indicate that the height premium in earnings is generally eliminated when measures of cognitive
ability in childhood are included in the models. Finally, we examine the implication that taller
workers sort into occupations that place a premium on the skills highly correlated with height.
We estimate multinomial logit models that relate height to occupational choice, and then use
information on the skill requirements of different occupations to show that occupations that
attract taller workers are those that require greater levels of cognitive skills.

IV. Data

We use four well known data sets that bring different strengths to the analysis. Documenting the
chain from height and ability in childhood to earnings and occupational status in adulthood
requires panel data that includes measures of heights from childhood to adulthood, childhood
cognitive ability, and adult labor market outcomes. For these reasons, we use data from two
British birth cohort studies — the 1958 National Child Development Study (NCDS) and the
1970 British Cohort Study (BCS). The NCDS has followed all children born in England,
Scotland and Wales in the week of March 3, 1958 from birth to age 42. Follow-up surveys on
health and economic well being were conducted at ages 7, 11, 16, 23, 33 and 42. In similar
fashion, the BCS has followed all individuals living in Great Britain born in the week of April 5,
1970. Full follow-up surveys were conducted at ages 5, 10, 16, 26 and 30. Both the NCDS and
the BCS administered tests to cohort members at early ages (7 and 11 in the NCDS, 5 and 10 in
the BCS), and both surveys report earnings in adulthood (at ages 33 and 42 in the NCDS, age 30

12

in the BCS). We use adult height measured at age 33 (for the NCDS) and self-reported at age 30
(for the BCS).
Summary statistics for these data sets are presented in the first two columns of Table 2,
where we restrict our attention to cohort members who were measured in childhood, and again in
adulthood (ages 7 and 33 for the NCDS, ages 5 and 30 for the BCS). Men in both surveys stand 5
foot 10 inches tall on average in adulthood, and women 5 foot four inches. Thirty percent of
cohort members were born to fathers in higher social classes (executives, managers, skilled nonmanual workers). Approximately 90 percent of men in both cohorts report working full or part
time, true for 80 percent of women in the NCDS at age 42, and 74 percent of women in the BCS
at age 30.
To examine the relationship between height and occupational choice, we use data from 9
years of the US National Health Interview Survey. In these large nationally representative crosssectional data sets, over the period 1986 to 1994, the NHIS reported detailed information on
occupations as well as on heights.3 The strength of the NHIS is largely its size — we work with a
sample of 435,514 men and women ages 18 to 65 who report an occupation — but it contains
little information on factors other than height that might influence occupational choice. For this
reason, we also examine height and occupational choice in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID), which covers fewer individuals than the NHIS but has the advantage of containing a
richer set of controls, in particular information on parents’ educations and a measure of whether
respondents were poor in childhood. The sample for the PSID consists of observations on men
between the ages of 25 and 65, from the 1988 to 1997 waves of the PSID. (The lower age cutoff
3

For uniformity, we limit our analysis to the period prior to the NHIS sample redesign of

1995.
13

of 25 is used because heights are recorded only for heads of households and their spouses,
whereas the NHIS records heights of all individuals over the age of 17.) The final sample
consists of 4,517 men observed an average of 6.8 years each, for a total of 30,575 observations.
Summary statistics for these data sets are presented in columns 3 and 4 of Table 2. The
heights of the men and women from the American data sets are similar to those in the British
samples. In the NHIS, a large fraction (90 percent of men, 84 percent of women) who reported an
occupation also reported that they worked in the week prior to the survey. The fraction of the
PSID sample that reported childhood poverty is high — nearly 33 percent. To maintain a large
sample size, we include the “Survey of Economic Opportunity” (SEO) sub-sample in our
analyses. The SEO sub-sample, which comprised roughly 40% of the original PSID families
enrolled in the study in 1968, were poor. The high fraction of this sample that were poor in
childhood is therefore to be expected.

V. Results

Height and Growth in the NCDS Cohort
The growth literature suggests that children raised in healthier environments are taller in
childhood and experience earlier adolescent growth spurts. We observe these patterns in the 1958
NCDS cohort. The top panel of Table 3 presents information on heights of male cohort members
at ages 7, 11, 16 and 33, from regressions that control for ethnicity and for the month in which
measurements were taken. We regress height on indicators for father’s social class at the time of
the cohort member’s birth, with the omitted category being the highest social class
(professional). Throughout life, children whose fathers were of lower social class are shorter. At

14

age 7, boys born into the highest social class are 0.4 inches taller on average than those born into
social class 2 (managers), and 1.4 inches taller than those born into social class 5 (unskilled
manual laborers). Differences in average heights between classes remain constant between ages 7
and 11. Cohort members are growing between these ages, but at approximately the same growth
velocity in each social class. But by age 16, boys in higher social classes have grown more
rapidly than those in the lowest three classes, temporarily magnifying the gap in heights between
them. Boys in the higher classes appear to reach their adolescent growth spurts earlier than those
in the lower classes. That young men in the lower three classes experience some catch up, during
their own later AGS, can be seen by comparing the differences in heights between the social
classes at ages 16 and 33. Although men from lower social classes are on average a full inch
shorter than are men from social class 1 when fully grown, they gained more height from 16 to
33 than did men from higher social classes. Girls from higher social classes in the NCDS are
taller on average at every age. The timing of girls’ AGS is earlier than that for boys, so that by
age 16 the height differentials by social class for young women are nearly identical to what they
had been at age 7.4
The timing of adolescent growth spurts — with young adults from healthier backgrounds
with better nutrition reaching their AGS earlier — calls into question a key assumption of Persico
et al (2004). These authors assume that “conditional on other observables, an individual’s heights
at various ages are exogenously given” (page 1030). Indeed, the timing of growth spurts leads us
to a new interpretation of Persico et al’s statement that “It’s all in teen height.” Boys’ heights at

4

That children in the NCDS from poorer backgrounds have “a delayed pattern of growth
before the pubertal spurt, followed by catch-up growth” has earlier been noted by Li, Manor and
Power (2004, p. 185).
15

age 16 may convey more information about childhood nutrition and health than do adult heights.
If better nutrition and health in childhood lead to greater cognitive ability, then teen height may
be a good marker for unobserved ability — perhaps a better marker than final adult height. We
return to this below when we examine the relationship between height and earnings..
The bottom panel of Table 3 reports how much of the variation in height we can explain
using the rich set of household and individual level background variables we have in the NCDS
data. Again restricting attention to male cohort members for whom measurements were taken at
all four ages, we regress height on ethnicity, the month of the cohort member’s height
measurement, and family background variables broken into three sets: parents’ socioeconomic
status; cohort members’ health at birth; and parents’ heights. Parents’ socioeconomic status is
represented here by indicators for mother’s and father’s school leaving ages, maternal
grandfather’s social class, father’s social class at the time of the cohort member’s birth, and the
logarithm of family income at age 16. Cohort members’ health at birth is measured using an
indicator for whether he was born at low birth weight (less than 2500 grams), and whether his
mother smoked while pregnant. Mother’s height was measured at the time of the birth, and
father’s height was reported when the cohort member was age 11. All three sets of background
variables are highly significant predictors of the cohort member’s height, with F-tests of each set
having p-values below 0.01 at every age. Taken together, these variables explain a quarter to a
third of the variation in heights at any age, with regression R²s between 0.25 and 0.33. Mother’s
and father’s SES and health at birth contribute to the R²s, as can be seen in the incremental
contributions to the R² presented in the second panel of Table 3. However, their contributions
are dwarfed by that made by mother’s and father’s heights, whose contribution is larger, the older

16

the cohort member becomes.
Mother’s and father’s heights contain both a genetic tie to cohort members’ heights and
environmental ties. Parents are taller, in part, because they were raised in healthier environments.
Mothers’ heights, for example, are significantly related to their own fathers’ social class in a
manner quite similar to that presented above for NCDS cohort members and fathers’ social class
in Panel A of Table 3. We are not able to distinguish which part of the association between
parents’ and cohort members’ heights is due to genetics, and which to environment. For our
analysis, this is not essential. What is important is that environmental factors that are thought to
influence cognitive development — parental education and SES, and aspects of the prenatal
environment — are also correlated with children’s heights.

Height and Childhood Cognitive Test Scores
We present direct evidence on the relationship between height and test scores in childhood in
Table 4, using data from the NCDS and BCS.
The tests administered to children vary across ages and surveys. For the 5-year-olds in the
BCS, we show results for a human figure drawing score, designed to test conceptual maturity, a
copy design test that measures visual-motor coordination, and the English Picture Vocabulary
Test (EPVT) score, which measures the size of the child’s vocabulary. At age 10, we show
results for the four subscales of the British Ability Scales (BAS) included in the BCS. We chose
to report these rather than scores on the math, reading and vocabulary tests that were given at age
10, since the BAS subscales are meant to measure cognitive ability rather than academic
achievement. For the NCDS, we show results for the human figure drawing test and math and

17

reading scores at age 7, and scores from verbal language, non-verbal language, math, and copydesign tests at age 11. All cognitive tests are standardized within sample to have a mean of zero
and a standard deviation of one, and the height measures are transformed into height-for-age zscores using the 2000 Centers for Disease Control growth charts (CDC, 2002). This
standardization makes it easier to compare estimates across ages and tests.
For both surveys, we first show results of regressions of test scores on height, controlling
for only a few key variables — the child’s sex, ethnicity, and the age in months at which the
testing occurred. We then show results (in the last column) that include an extended set of family
background controls. For the NCDS, these controls are identical to those included in the
regressions in the lower panel of Table 3. For the BCS, we substitute the mother’s social class at
the time of the child’s birth for her father’s social class, and a set of indicators for categories of
family income at age 10 for the log of income at age 16. The results in Table 3 indicate that these
family background variables are associated with heights in childhood and adulthood. We expect
the covariance between height and cognitive test scores will be smaller after conditioning on
these variables, since better-off children are both taller and have higher test scores. However, as
was shown in Table 3, a large share of the cross-sectional variation in heights is not explained by
these variables, and it is of interest to know if the correlation between height and cognitive ability
persists even after observable determinants of height are accounted for.
We find a large and significant association between height and test scores for children
followed in the BCS for tests they took at ages 5 and 10 (top panel) and for children in the NCDS
for tests at ages 7 and 11 (lower panel). Although the coefficients are somewhat larger for the
NCDS, especially among 11-year-olds, we find similar patterns across the two surveys. In neither

18

survey does it appear that the associations are systematically larger for older versus younger
children. The magnitudes of these associations are quite large, even when the extended controls
are included. For example, in the NCDS data using extended controls, a one standard deviation
increase in height at age 7 is associated with 10 percent of a standard deviation increase in
reading score at age 7, and in verbal language score at age 11. This effect is as large as that
predicted by a two standard deviation increase in log household income for these children.5
One possible explanation for these results is that taller children are provided with greater
levels of cognitive stimulation at school. Teachers may pay more attention to taller children, or
taller children may be more likely to be enrolled in school earlier than shorter children of the
same age. However, evidence from other surveys indicates that the association between height
and cognitive outcomes begins too early for this hypothesis to be plausible. For example, Rose
(1994) finds that the length of 5- to 12-month-old infants is associated with measures of
information processing speed.6
Additional evidence is shown in the bottom panel of Table 4. The data are drawn from
the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, a US birth cohort study of urban children
(Reichman et al. 2001). The Fragile Families data contains an assessment of both the child’s and
mother’s verbal ability, as measured by the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT). The
PPVT, on which the EPVT is based, is a test of receptive vocabulary that can be administered to
individuals from ages 30 months through adulthood, and has been used in numerous studies of

5

For reading scores at age 7 and verbal scores at age 11, log family income takes a
coefficient of 0.24. A one-standard deviation increase in log income is 0.234, so that a two
standard deviation increase would be necessary to have an effect as large as a one-standard
deviation in height at age 7.
6

These effects could be magnified by the behavior of teachers later in life.
19

pre-school-aged children (Dunn and Dunn, 1997).7 We find that taller children perform
significantly better on this test. A one standard deviation in height is associated with a 5 to 10
percent of a standard deviation increase in PPVT scores at age 3 for both boy and girls. This is
true even controlling for mother’s score on the PPVT, which is included in the set of extended
controls. The correlation between height and cognitive ability in these data cannot be explained
by differential treatment of taller children in school.

Height, Cognitive Ability and Earnings
We use data from the British birth cohorts to reexamine the height premia presented in Table 1,
drawing on the information we have on cognitive ability and family background. We present
results of log earnings regression in Table 5. The top panel shows results for men and women in
the 1970 BCS, and the bottom panel for the 1958 NCDS. We restrict our sample to individuals
who took cognitive tests at two points in childhood — ages 5 and 10 for the BCS cohort, ages 7
and 11 for the NCDS. We present results separately by sex, and then combine the sexes, running
regressions that include an indicator for whether the cohort member is a woman.
For both men and women in the BCS cohort, we find a positive and significant
association between height and log earnings, with an additional inch of height associated with a
one to two percent increase in earnings (columns 1 and 4). We first add test score variables to the
model. These are jointly highly significant in the BCS earnings equations, with F-tests of 31.1 for
men and 38.5 for women. Inclusion of these cognitive test scores reduces the size of the height
coefficients by more than 50 percent, and renders them insignificant. Inclusion of personal and
7

Information on reliability and validity of the PPVT and a research bibliography can be
found at http://ags.pearsonassessments.com.
20

parental background characteristics further reduces the height coefficients for men and women.
On average women earn 17 percent less than men in this sample. However, the height
difference between men and women does not explain women’s lower earnings. In the combined
sample of men and women, with controls for height, cognitive ability and family background,
men’s earnings premium stubbornly remains at 17 percent. With cognitive test scores and family
background variables included, the height coefficient is negative and insignificant in the
combined sample.
The bottom panel of Table 5 reexamines the Persico et al. results that adolescent height is
a better predictor of adult earnings in the NCDS data than is adult height—and specifically that
men’s adult heights are no longer associated with their earnings after controlling for adolescent
height.8 Above, we suggested that this might be because boys of higher socioeconomic status
reached their AGS earlier and were relatively taller at age 16 than at age 33. We make this more
concrete by modeling how earnings in adulthood relate to height at two points in time: height at
age 16, h16 , when some adolescents are well along in their pubertal growth spurts, and at age 33,
when final adult height, ha , has been attained by all.
We assume that earnings are an increasing function of cognitive ability, 0, which depends
on nutrition in infancy (ages 0 to 3), nI , and nutrition in childhood (ages 3 to puberty), nC .

(9) η = α + β nI + γ nC + uη

8

We could not explore this with BCS data because, although a follow-up survey was
undertaken for the BCS cohort at age 16, two-thirds of cohort members were not measured at
that age.
21

The literature discussed in Section II indicates that adult height is particularly sensitive to early
nutrition, nI . Although nutrition in childhood, nC , can change the timing of the adolescent
growth spurt, it does not change the amount of height children gain during their AGS. Thus we
describe adult height as:

(10) ha = a + δ nI + ua .
Height at age 16 depends on the timing of the adolescent growth spurt, which depends on
nutrition in infancy and childhood, so that children who were better nourished are taller when
observed at age 16:

(11) h16s = (ha − c16s ) + ψ s (nI + nC ) + u16

for s = f , m

s
where c16 denotes the average gain in height experienced by cohort members of sex s from age

16 to maturity. Girls reach their pubertal growth spurt earlier than boys, so that for girls we
f
expect c16 and ψ

f

to be small.

The relationship between ability and heights at age 16 and in adulthood can be obtained
by rearranging terms in (10) and (11) and substituting into equation (9). Suppressing the sex
superscripts, we find that:

(12) η = α + [ ( βδ−γ ) − ψγ ] ha + [ψγ ] h16 + u
where α is a constant. In (12), the coefficient on height at age 16 is unambiguously positive. Its
size depends upon the extent to which nutrition in childhood affects cognitive ability ( γ ), and
the impact of nutrition in infancy and childhood on the timing of the pubertal growth spurt ( ψ ).

22

In contrast, the coefficient on adult height can be positive or negative. Specifically, the greater
the impact of childhood nutrition on intelligence (i.e., the larger is

γ

), the smaller will be the

estimated relationship between final adult height and earnings, and the larger will be the
estimated relationship between height at age 16 and earnings.
Equation (12) also has implications for the coefficients on heights at different ages in
earnings equations for women and men. If ψ is smaller than ψ m (because girls have nearly
f

completed their AGS by age 16) and all other coefficients are the same for boys and girls, the
coefficient on height at 16 in an earnings equation will be larger for girls than for boys, and the
coefficient on adult height will be smaller. However, because height at 16 and adult height are
more highly correlated for girls than boys (the correlation coefficient is 0.92 for girls in the
NCDS relative to 0.77 for boys), coefficients for girls may be less precisely estimated when both
height measures are included.
The bottom panel of Table 5 presents evidence that is consistent with this model. The
results for men in the first column are similar to those of Persico et al, in that the coefficient on
height at age 33 (0.009) is smaller than that on height at age 16 (0.016), and only the coefficient
on height at 16 is statistically significant. The inclusion of test scores at ages 7 and 11 reduces the
age 16 height premium by more than 50 percent, similar to results shown for the BCS cohort in
the top panel. Moreover, their inclusion leaves the coefficients on height at ages 33 and 16
identical. That is, once controls for cognitive ability are included, the data have no reason to
favor height at 16 over height at 33. Although neither coefficient is individually significant, an Ftest reveals that these variables are jointly significant (F-test=7.07, p-value=0.001). The
additional inclusion of family background variables reduces the joint significance of the height
23

variables further, and leaves them just shy of significance at the 1 percent level.
Consistent with the model developed above, the results for women in the first column
show that the coefficient on height at age 16 is larger than that for men, and the coefficient on
adult height is smaller. Although the women’s height variables are jointly significant (Ftest=6.15, p-value=0.002), the point estimates are not precisely estimated, and the hypothesis
that the women’s coefficients are the same as the men’s cannot be rejected. The inclusion of test
scores at ages 7 and 11 renders the height variables jointly insignificant in women’s earnings
equations. Estimating results for men and women together, we continue to find a two-percent
premium for each inch of height at age 16, in the absence of other controls. The premium
disappears when cognitive test scores are added to these regressions.
Further evidence that the timing of growth spurts is related to cognition comes from
examining the associations between cognitive ability and changes in height at different
ages—from age 11 to 16, and from age 16 to adulthood. Because girls begin their adolescent
growth spurts earlier than boys, the associations between growth at different ages and cognitive
ability should vary by sex.
We first consider the relationship between changes in heights measured at ages 11 and 16
and cognitive ability, for girls and boys. At age 11, healthier girls will have begun their AGS. We
write girls’ heights at age 11:

h11f = (haf − c11f ) + τ (nI + nC ) + u11
f

where c11 represents the average amount of height girls will gain between age 11 and maturity,
and τ measures the extent to which healthier girls have grown by age 11. Most girls have

24

f
completed their growth by age 16, so that c16 and ψ

f

will be close to zero, and we can

represent the difference between girls’ heights at age16 and age 11 as:

(h16f − h11f ) = c11f − τ (nI + nC ) + (u16 − u11 ) .
A comparison of this equation with the expression for cognitive ability in equation (9) shows
that, for girls, cognitive ability should be negatively associated with the gain in height from ages
11 and 16. In contrast, even healthy well-nourished boys would not have begun their AGS by age
11. Their heights at age 11 can be written as:

h11m = (ham − c11m ) + u11 .
We can then express the difference between boys’ heights at age 16 and age 11:

(h16m − h11m ) = (c11m − c16m ) +ψ (nI + nC ) + (u16 − u11 ) .
This equation implies that measures of cognitive ability will be positively associated with boys’
growth from 11 to 16.
The first four columns of Table 6 present evidence that is consistent with these
predictions. Each cell shows the coefficient from a separate regression of an age 11 test score on
the change in height from age 11 to 16, for girls and boys. Girls show negative associations
between the change in height and each of the test scores, whereas these associations are positive
for boys. The sizes and significance levels of these coefficients change little when extended
family background controls are included, indicating that these observed variables do not capture
the common factors that influence both growth and cognitive development.
Different patterns are expected for the association between changes in height from age 16

25

to adulthood and test scores. By age 16, both boys and girls from better environments would have
completed most of their growth. The model implies that, for both boys and girls, those with
greater height gain between 16 and 33 are those who had experienced poorer environments in
childhood, and so should have lower age 11 test scores. Furthermore, larger height gains for girls
over this period are a signal of more severe deprivation than is the case for boys. For this reason,
lower cognitive ability at age 11 should predict larger height gains from 16 to 33 for girls than for
boys . The results in Table 6 are consistent with these implications. For both boys and girls, there
is a negative and significant association between height gain after age 16 and test scores at age
11, with the association for girls twice as large as that for boys.

Height and occupational choice
The framework developed in Section III indicates that, if the covariance between height and
cognitive ability is large relative to the covariance between height and physical ability, taller
workers should select occupations that require more cognitive relative to physical skills. This
section presents evidence on this proposition. Our strategy is to estimate models that relate
occupational choice to height using a large sample of adult workers, ages 18 to 65, from the
National Health Interview Surveys from 1986 to 1994. We then examine the extent to which
occupations that attract taller workers are those which require high levels of cognitive relative to
physical skills, where the measures of skill requirements are drawn from the Dictionary of
Occupational Titles (DOT), described in more detail below.
For men and women separately, we estimate multinomial logit models of occupational
choice, where the log odds of being in occupation j relative to a baseline occupation 1 is:

26

(13)

ln( Pj / P1) = Xβ j + γ j h + υ j , j=2..J.

In (13), Pj is the probability of working in occupation j, h is height and X is a vector containing
a set of controls for characteristics that may affect occupational choice independent of workers’
non-time-varying productive abilities, including age, age squared, and indicators for race and city
size. (Models that exclude these controls yield similar results.)
The second step, after estimating (13), is to examine how the estimates of

γ j —which

measure the change in the log odds of being in occupation j relative to the baseline occupation
with respect to height—are associated with the characteristics of occupations. Occupational
characteristics are obtained from the Occupational Measures from the Dictionary of
Occupational Titles for 1980 Census Detailed Occupations (England and Kilbourne 1988). This
data set contains ratings of specific job characteristics for the 503 occupations included in the
1980 Census detailed occupational categories—the same occupational categories used in the
NHIS. Our analysis uses ratings of four physical skill requirements, including manual dexterity,
motor control, physical demands, and strength, and four intellectual skill requirements, including
spatial skills, numerical skills, verbal skills, and intelligence.9 Each of these ratings were reverse
coded if necessary, so that higher values correspond to higher skill requirements. The ratings
range (in theory) from 0 to 5, although in practice few occupations require the minimum or

9

The ratings provided in this data set are based on even more finely detailed information
on 12,099 occupations collected by the Department of Labor through direct observation and
written job descriptions, and published in 1977. England and Kilbourne aggregated these ratings
so that they could be used with the 1980 Census detailed occupational codes. Further information
on how the original data were collected, as well as caveats about their reliability, can be found in
Cain and Treiman (1981).
27

maximum level of any skill.
DOT occupational ratings were matched to each person with an occupation in the NHIS.
After matching, our sample consisted of 230,172 men distributed across 479 occupations, and
205,027 women distributed across 469 occupations. Estimating multinomial logits with such a
large number of occupations is not feasible. Instead, we classified workers as being in one of 15
more broadly-defined occupations. Occupational characteristics for these 15 broad occupations
were computed as the (weighted) sample average of the 3-digit level occupational characteristics.
Thus, the characteristics of more common 3-digit occupations carry more weight when
computing average characteristics within the 15 broad groups. The mean characteristics were
computed separately for men and women.
The first 6 columns of Table 7 provide information on the occupational categories we
use, the fraction of the sample in each, and the average values of two of the six DOT
characteristics we use—the amounts of strength and intelligence required. There are substantial
differences in the distributions of men and women across occupations. Women are more likely to
be administrative/clerical workers, and to work in other service-sector positions. Men are more
likely to be transport workers, farmers, and to work in construction. When estimating the
multinomial logit models, we excluded any cell that had fewer than 500 observations—so that
men in domestic service and women in construction/mining are excluded from the regressions.
The table also shows unsurprising results for the patterns of scores for intelligence and strength
required for each broad occupation. The intelligence score is highest for professionals and lowest
for household service workers. Strength requirements are highest for farming and lowest for
executives/managers. The average intelligence scores for men and women differ only because

28

men and women have different distributions among the detailed occupations that make up each
broad occupation. Although the intelligence scores are similar for men and women within broad
occupations, the strength scores for women are typically lower, indicating that women tend to
work in less strenuous jobs within the broad categories.
The last two columns of Table 7 show estimates of the multinomial logit models for men
and women. We have converted coefficients to relative risk ratios by taking their exponents, i.e.

exp(γ j ) . The base occupation is “Laborers” so that the coefficients reported all show how a
one-inch increase in height increases the chance of being in the indicated occupation group
relative to being a laborer. An increase in height is, in general, associated with selection into
white collar jobs relative to the base of “laborer.” For example, the results for men, using the full
sample and controlling for city size, indicate that an extra inch of height increases the odds of
being an executive or manager or professional relative to those of being a laborer by 9.5 percent.
The corresponding number for women is 4.6 percent. The relative risk ratios for blue collar jobs
are typically close to or below 1.0. An exception is protective service workers: an extra inch of
height increases the odds of being a protective service worker relative to a laborer by 10.4
percent for men and 7.0 percent for women. This may be an occupation for which height is
valued in its own right.
Figure 4 (for men) and Figure 5 (for women) shows scatter plots of the estimates of the
relative risk ratios against the eight DOT ratings we use. Results for physical skills are shown in
the left side of the figure, and those for intellectual skills are shown on the right. Figure 4
indicates that, for men, occupations with higher relative risk ratios for height require lower levels
of physical skills. For example, the raw correlation between strength and the relative risk ratio for

29

height is –0.72. This correlation increases in absolute value to –0.81 when points are weighted by
the number of men within the occupation group. In contrast, the raw correlation between
intelligence and the relative risk ratio for height is 0.73, and the weighted correlation is 0.82. The
correlations are not as large for all skill measures. For example, the weighted correlation of the
relative risk ratio with motor control is –0.31, and that for spatial skills is 0.01. However, the
general pattern is that the occupations into which taller individuals select have greater intellectual
requirements and lesser physical requirements.
The results for women in Figure 5 are similar: the relative risk ratios for height are
generally negatively correlated with physical skill requirements and positively correlated with
intellectual requirements. However, the raw and weighted correlations differ more for women
than they do for men. This divergence is primarily due to three occupation groups—protective
service, mechanical repair, and transport—which have high relative risk ratios for height for
women (1.070, 1.069 and 1.073, respectively), and also have high physical requirements relative
to intellectual requirements. These are occupations in which very few women work. Combined,
only 1.9 percent of women are in these three occupation groups, in contrast to 17.3 percent of
men. It may be that women who are successful in these occupations must have physical skills
that are comparable to those of the men with whom they work. These occupations aside, the
results for women in Figure 4 are similar to those for men in Figure 5. The weighted correlations
between relative risk ratios and the four physical skill measures are similar for men and women.
The weighted correlations between the relative risk ratios and each of the intellectual skill
measures are larger for women than for men.
Does the sorting of taller workers into occupations that require greater levels of cognitive

30

skill reflect the better childhood socioeconomic status of taller workers? This question cannot be
answered using data from the NHIS. However, the PSID contains measures of the education of
the workers’ parents, as well as a self-reported indicator for whether the worker was poor as a
child. We use the PSID to examine whether the multinomial logit estimates of the relationship
between occupational choice and height are altered when these variables are added as controls.
We use the occupational data provided in the PSID to categorize workers as belonging to one of
the 15 occupation groups used for the NHIS. (Note that the categorizations differ somewhat
across the NHIS and the PSID, because the PSID uses detailed occupation codes from the 1970
Census whereas the NHIS uses those from the 1980 Census.) We first estimate multinomial logit
models that control only for age and race, and then re-estimate these models adding a set of
indicators for mother’s education, father’s education and childhood poverty.
The estimates of the relative risk ratios for height for these two specifications, plus the
relative risk ratios from the NHIS, are graphed in Figure 6. The figure indicates that results for
the two data sets, when no family background controls are included, are very similar. The largest
differences are for precision production workers and machine operators. This may be due to
fairly large changes in the coding schemes for the occupations in these groups between the 1970
and 1980 Censuses. The figure also shows that the selection of taller workers into occupations
that require greater cognitive skill is not explained by parental education and childhood poverty.
The relative risk ratios change very little when controls for these variables are included.

VI. Conclusion

There are substantial returns to height in the labor market in both the United States and Britain.

31

For both men and women, an increase in height of four inches is associated with an earnings
premium of approximately 10 percent. The estimates shown in Table 7 imply that an American
man who is 6 feet 2 inches tall is 3 percentage points more likely to be an executive and 2
percentage points more likely to be a professional than is a man who stands 5 feet 10.
The evidence we present is consistent with the hypothesis that economic returns to height
are the result of correlation between height and cognitive ability — a correlation that is evident
early in life and remains throughout. The return to height in earnings equations is generally
eliminated when we control for measures of childhood cognitive ability. The higher return to
adolescent height relative to adult height, in earnings equations that include both measures, is
consistent with evidence that more advantaged children—with higher cognitive test
scores—experience earlier adolescent growth spurts. Correlation between height and cognitive
ability can also explain our findings that taller adults select into jobs that require greater levels of
cognitive skills and lower levels of physical skills.
Together, this evidence supplies a rationale for why economic returns to height continue
to be observed, even in wealthy countries where increasingly small fractions of workers do
physically demanding work. It also provides an alternative to explanations for the height
premium that rely on pure discrimination or social stigma against shorter individuals.
The results of this paper suggest several areas for further research. One is the study of the
long-run effects of improved prenatal and childhood nutrition. Evidence from the medical
literature indicates that nutrition in childhood plays an important role in determining both height
and cognitive ability. However, there are few studies that have tracked children over time to see
how early nutritional interventions affect cognitive functioning and labor market outcomes in

32

adulthood. For the design of effective interventions, it is also essential to know whether there are
stages at which nutrition is most important for cognitive outcomes that are rewarded in the labor
market.
Much of the research on nutrition, child growth and cognitive function that has been
conducted to date provides evidence on very poor settings, where children may face large deficits
in calories and protein and a heavy disease burden. The extent to which insults in utero and
childhood illness and nutrition affect cognitive function in developed countries is not well
understood. Research in wealthier settings is also clearly warranted.

33

References

Abbott, Robert D., Lon R. White, G. Webster Ross, Helen Petrovitch, Kamal H. Masaki, David
A. Snowdon, and J. David Curb. 1998. “Height as a Marker of Childhood Development and
Late-life Cognitive Function: The Honolulu-Asia Aging Study.” Pediatrics 102(3): 602-9.
Beard, Albertine S. and Martin J. Blaser. 2002. “The Ecology of Height: The Effect of Microbial
Transmission on Human Height.” Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 45 (Autumn): 475-99.
Berger, Abi. 2001. “Insulin-Like Growth Factor and Cognitive Function.” BMJ 322:203.
Cain, Pamela S. and Donald J. Treiman. 1981. “The Dictionary of Occupational Titles and
Source of Occupational Data.” American Sociological Review 46 (June): 253-78.
Centers for Disease Control. 1977. “Data from the National Health Survey. NCHS Growth
Curves for Children, Birth-18 Years, United States.” Vital and Health Statistics, Series 11,
Number 165 (November).
Centers for Disease Control. 2002. “2000 CDC Growth Charts for the United States: Methods
and Development.” Vital and Health Statistics, Series 11, Number 246 (May).
Dunn, L. M. and L. M. Dunn. 1997. The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test - 3rd Edition.
Minnesota: American Guidance Service.
England, Paula, and Barbara Kilbourne. 1988. Occupational Measures From the Dictionary of
Occupational Titles for 1980 Census Detailed Occupations [Computer file]. Richardson, TX:
Paula England and Barbara Kilbourne [producers]. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium
for Political and Social Research [distributor].
Ericson, Anders and Bengt Kallen. 1998. “Very low birthweight Boys at Age 19.” Archives of
Disease in Childhood – Fetal and Neonatal Edition 78 (May): F171-4.
Freedman, D. G. 1979. Human Sociobiology. New York: Free Press.
Gibbons, Robert, Lawrence F. Katz, Thomas Lemieux and Daniel Parent. 2005. “Comparative
Advantage, Learning, and Sectoral Wage Determination.” Journal of Labor Economics 23: 681723.
Gowin, E. B. 1915. The Executive and His Control of Men. New York: Macmillan.
Grantham-McGregor, Sally. 2002. “Linear growth retardation and cognition.” Lancet 359: 542.
Hack, M. M. Schluchter, L. Cartar, M. Rahman, L. Cuttler and E. Borawski. 2003. “Growth in
Very Low Birth Weight Infants to Age 20 Years.” Pediatrics 112 (July): e30-8.
34

Haddad, Lawrence J. and Howarth E. Bouis. 1991. “The Impact of Nutritional Status on
Agricultural Productivity: Wage Evidence from the Philippines.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics
and Statistics 53 (February): 45-68.
Heckman, James and Jose Scheinkman. 1987. “The Importance fo Bundling in a GormanLancaster Model of Earnings.” Review of Economic Studies 54: 243-55.
Hensley, Wayne E. 1993. “Height as a Measure of Success in Academe.” Psychology, A Journal
of Human Behavior 30: 40-46.
Institute of Medicine, 2001. “Reproductive and Developmental Effects,” Chapter 15 in Clearing
the Smoke: Assessing the Science Base for Tobacco Harm Reduction, Washington: National
Academy Press: 543-559.
Klein, R. E., H. E. Freeman, J. Kagan, C. Yarbrough, and J.P. Habicht. 1972. “Is big smart? The
relation of growth to cognition.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 13: 219-225.
Komlos, J., J. M. Tanner, P. S. W. Davies, and T. Cole. 1992. “The Growth of Boys in the
Stuttgart Carlschule, 1771-93.” Annals of Human Biology 19(2): 139-52.
Kretchmer, Norman, John L. Beard and Susan Carlson. 1996. “The Role of Nutrition in the
Development of Normal Cognition.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 63: 997S-1001S.
Lechelt, Eugene C. 1975. “Occupational Affiliation and Ratings of Physical Height and Personal
Esteem.” Psychological Reports 36: 943-946.
Li, Leah, Orly Manor and Chris Power. 2004. “Early Environment and Child-to-Adult Growth
Trajectories in the 1958 British Birth Cohort.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 80: 18592.
Loh, Eng Seng. 1993. “The Economic Effects of Physical Appearance.” Social Science Quarterly
74(June): 420-438.
Lynn, R. 1989. “A nutrition theory of the secular increases in intelligence, positive correlation
between height, head size and IQ.” British Journal of Educational Psychology 59: 372-77.
Magnusson, Patrik K.E., Finn Rasmussen, and Ulf B. Gyllensten. 2006. “Height at Age 18 Years
is a Strong Predictor of Attained Education Later in Life: Cohort Study of Over 950000 Swedish
Men.” International Journal of Epidemiology 35 (January): 658-63.
Martorell, R., L. Kettel Khan and D.G. Schroeder. 1994. “Reversibility of Stunting:
Epidemiological Findings in Children from Developing Countries.” European Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 48: S45-S57.

35

Martorell, R., J. Rivera, and H. Kaplowitz. 1990. “Consequences of Stunting in Early Childhood
for Adult Body Size in Rural Guatemala.” Annales Nestlé 48: 85-92.

Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postlewaite and Dan Silverman. 2004. “The Effect of Adolescent
Experience on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height.” Journal of Political Economy 112
(October): 1019-1053.
Pollitt, Ernesto and Rebecca Matthews. 1998. “Breakfast and Cognition: An Integrative
Summary.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 67(4): 804S-813S.
Reichman, Nancy, Julien Teitler, Irwin Garfinkel and Sara McLanahan. 2001. “Fragile Families:
Sample and Design.” Children and Youth Services Review 23 (4/5): 303-26.
Richards, Marcus, Rebecca Hardy, Diana Kuh and Michael E.J. Wadsworth. 2002. “Birthweight,
Postnatal Growth and Cognitive Function in a National U.K. Birth Cohort.” International
Journal of Epidemiology 31(April): 342-48.
Richards, M. And M.E.J. Wadsworth. 2004. “Long Term Effects of Early Adversity on Cognitive
Function.” Archives of Disease in Childhood 89: 922-27.
Romano, E., R.E. Tremblay, A. Farhat, and S. Cote. 2006. “Development and Prediction of
Hyperactive Symptoms From 2 to 7 Years in a Population Based Sample.” Pediatrics, 117(6):
2101-10.
Rose, S.A. 1994. “Relation Between Physical Growth and Information Processing in Infants
Born in India.” Child Development 65(3): 889-902.
Satyanarayana, K., G. Radhaiah, K. R. Murali Mohan, B. V.S. Thimmayamma, N. Pralhad Rao,
B.S. Narasinga Rao, and S. Akella . 1989. “The Adolescent Growth Spurt of Height Among
Rural Indian Boys in Relation to Childhood Nutritional Background: An 18 Year Longitudinal
Study.” Annals of Human Biology 16(4): 289-300.
Slotkin, T.A. 1998. “Fetal Nicotine or Cocaine Exposure: Which One is Worse?” The Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 285(3), 931-934.
Silventoinen, Karri. 2003. “Determinants of Variation in Adult Body Height.” Journal of
Biosocial Science 35: 263-85.
Silventoinen, Karri, Jaakko Kaprio, and Eero Lahelma. 2000. “Genetic and Environmental
Contributions to the Association Between Body Height and Educational Attainment: A Study of
Adult Finnish Twins.” Behavior Genetics 30(6): 477-85.

36

Steckel, Richard H. 1995. “Stature and the Standard of Living.” Journal of Economic Literature
33 (December): 1903-40.
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas. 1998. “Health, Nutrition and Economic Development.”
Journal of Economic Literature 36 (June): 766-817.
Sunder, J. M., K. Tambs, J. R. Harris, P. Magnus, and T. M. Torjussen. 2005. “Resolving the
Genetic and Environmental Sources of the Correlation Between Height and Intelligence: A Study
of Nearly 2600 Norwegian Male Twin Pairs.” Twin Research and Human Genetics 8: 307-11.
Tanner, James M. 1979. “A Concise History of Growth Studies from Buffon to Boas.” Chapter
17 in Frank Falkner and J.M. Tanner (eds.) Human Growth, Volume 3, Neurobiology and
Nutrition, New York: 515-93.
Walter, T. 1993. “Impact of Iron Deficiency on Cognition in Infancy and Childhood.” European
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 47: 307-16.
Weitzman, M, S. Gortmaker and A. Sobol. 1992. “Maternal Smoking and Behavior Problems of
Children.” Pediatrics 90(3): 342-349.
Wilson, Paul R. 1968. “Perceptual Distortion of Height as a Function of Ascribed Academic
Status.” Journal of Social Psychology 74: 97-102.
Young, Thomas J. and Laurence A. French. 1996. “Height and Perceived Competence of U.S.
Presidents.” Perceptual and Motor Skills 82: 1002.

37

Table 1. Log earnings and height

NHIS
1986-94

NCDS
(1958 Birth Cohort)

BCS
(1970 Cohort)

MEN
1986-94

Age 33

Age 42

Age 30

Height in inches

0.024
(0.001)

0.024
(0.003)

0.023
(0.005)

0.015
(0.002)

Number of observations

74501

3027

2447

4161

WOMEN
Height in inches

0.019
(0.001)

0.029
(0.005)

0.019
(0.007)

0.028
(0.004)

Number of observations

88195

3195

2610

3868

Notes: OLS regression coefficients are reported, with standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variables are the
log of family income (NHIS); log weekly net earnings at ages 33 and 42 (NCDS); and log annual net earnings at age
30 (BCS). All regressions include indicators for race (NHIS) or ethnicity (NCDS, BCS). The NHIS regressions also
include a complete set of age and survey year indicators. NHIS regressions are weighted using person weights. The
NHIS reports family income in brackets. We use data from the CPS to assign households the mean income in their
bracket in the year surveyed. We restrict our NHIS sample to persons aged 18-60 who are not currently married, to
best approximate earnings for these individuals.

38

Table 2. Summary statistics

NCDS

BCS

NHIS

PSID

Number of observations

8912

8637

Number of observations

435,514

30,575

Female

0.508

0.515

Female

0.471

0

Adult height – women (inches)

64.16

64.15

Height – women

64.59

...

Adult height – men (inches)

69.65

69.73

Height – men

70.10

70.46

Indicator: Father executive, manager
or skilled non-manual

0.288

0.301

Age

37.76

40.08

Weekly take-home pay at age 42 (in
Year 2000 Pounds)

319.1

...

Major activity previous week
was “working” – men

0.897

...

...

13994

Major activity previous week
was “working” – women

0.837

...

Full/part-time employment, women

0.801

0.743

Reported poor when child

...

0.326

Full/part-time employment, men

0.920

0.899

Annual net earnings at age 30
(in Year 2000 Pounds)

Notes: The NCDS cohort is restricted to individuals with height measured at ages 7 and 33. The BCS cohort is restricted to individuals with height measured at
ages 5 and 30. Earnings are reported only for cohort members who report full- or part-time employment. Employment reported for NCDS at age 42 and for BCS
at age 30. The NHIS sample is drawn from the 1986 to 1994 waves of data. The sample is restricted to men and women aged 18 to 65 who reported an
occupation and had non-missing height data. The PSID is restricted to men aged 25 to 65 observed between 1988 to 1997. Height was only measured for heads
of households and their wives, and only in selected years. The sample is restricted to men who were a head of household in at least one year that height was
measured.

39

Table 3. Heights by social class and age, Men in the NCDS
.

Age 7

Age 11

Age 16

Age 33

Panel A: Regressions of height on indicators of father’s social class at birth

SC 2: Managers

–0.419
(0.205)

–0.418
(0.257)

–0.480
(0.296)

–0.629
(0.258)

SC 3.1: Skilled Non-manual

–0.580
(0.213)

–0.609
(0.267)

–0.774
(0.307)

–0.794
(0.267)

SC 3.2: Non-skilled Nonmanual

–0.953
(0.183)

–1.017
(0.230)

–1.202
(0.265)

–1.053
(0.231)

SC 4: Partly skilled
Manual

–1.121
(0.211)

–1.192
(0.265)

–1.356
(0.305)

–1.223
(0.265)

SC 5: Unskilled
Manual

–1.420
(0.233)

–1.530
(0.292)

–1.638
(0.336)

–1.144
(0.293)

Panel B: Incremental contribution of variables to the R2 , as a fraction of R2

Mother’s and father’s
education and SES

0.053

0.060

0.057

0.043

Low birth weight
Prenatal smoking

0.042

0.030

0.030

0.030

Parents’ heights

0.592

0.743

0.762

0.859

R²

0.298

0.269

0.256

0.318

Notes. Dependent variable is height in inches (measured, not self-reported). The top panel reports OLS regressions
with standard errors in parentheses. Reported are regression coefficients on indicators for father’s social class at the
time of the cohort member’s birth. The omitted category is “Social Class 1: Professional.” Number of observations =
2677. Included in all regressions are a complete set of ethnicity indicators, and for ages 7, 11, and 16, indicators for
the month in which the cohort member was measured. The sample is restricted to men in the NCDS who were
measured at all four ages. The bottom panel shows results of height regressions using the same samples. Reported
are the incremental contribution to the regression R² of variables listed in the first column. All of these regressions
include a complete set of ethnicity indicators, and for ages 7, 11, and 16, indicators for the month in which the cohort
member was measured. The controls for education and SES include indicators for the parents’ school leaving ages,
the mother’s father’s social class, the father’s social class at the time of the child’s birth, and the logarithm of family
income at age 16. Also included are indicators of low birth weight and maternal prenatal smoking, and mother’s
and father’s heights.

40

Table 4. Test scores and height in childhood
Controls for sex, ethnicity and age
boys and girls

boys

girls

Extended controls
boys and girls

1970 BCS Coefficient on age 5 height-for-age z-score when dependent variable is:
EPVT (receptive language) score at
age 5

0.132
(0.008)

0.129
(0.012)

0.134
(0.012)

0.078
(0.009)

Human figure drawing score
at age 5

0.070
(0.009)

0.057
(0.012)

0.083
(0.012)

0.041
(0.009)

Copy designs score at age 5

0.115
(0.008)

0.116
(0.012)

0.116
(0.012)

0.057
(0.009)

BAS Word score at age 10

0.131
(0.010)

0.125
(0.014)

0.133
(0.013)

0.064
(0.010)

BAS Similarities score at age 10

0.123
(0.010)

0.117
(0.014)

0.126
(0.013)

0.060
(0.010)

BAS Digit score at age 10

0.067
(0.010)

0.056
(0.014)

0.075
(0.014)

0.033
(0.011)

BAS Matrices at age 10

0.084
(0.010)

0.077
(0.014)

0.089
(0.014)

0.028
(0.010)

1958 NCDS Coefficient on age 7 height-for-age z-score when dependent variable is:
Reading score at age 7

0.154
(0.008)

0.158
(0.012)

0.150
(0.011)

0.109
(0.009)

Math score at age 7

0.123
(0.008)

0.124
(0.012)

0.121
(0.012)

0.081
(0.009)

Drawing Score at age 7

0.112
(0.008)

0.111
(0.012)

0.111
(0.012)

0.077
(0.009)

Verbal language score at age 11

0.170
(0.009)

0.151
(0.127)

0.189
(0.012)

0.109
(0.009)

Nonverbal language score at age 11

0.179
(0.009)

0.175
(0.013)

0.184
(0.012)

0.117
(0.009)

Math score at age 11

0.184
(0.009)

0.182
(0.013)

0.185
(0.012)

0.120
(0.009)

Copy designs score at age 11

0.077
(0.009)

0.076
(0.012)

0.077
(0.012)

0.047
(0.010)

Fragile Families Coefficient on age 3 height-for-age z-score when dependent variable is:
PPVT (receptive language) score at
age 3

0.089
(0.020)

0.084
(0.029)

0.094
(0.029)

0.052
(0.020)

Notes: Samples sizes are 11,360 for the BCS at age 5 and 8,747 at age 10; 12,449 for the NCDS at age 7 and 11,232
at age 11; and 2,150 for the Fragile Families sample. All regressions control for the age of the child at measurement,
a set of ethnicity indicators, and (for regressions in which boys and girls are pooled) an indicator for sex. For the

41

BCS, regressions with “extended controls” also include an indicator of low birthweight, the height of each of the
child’s parents, indicators for the parents’ school leaving ages, the mother’s and father’s social class at the time of
the child’s birth, and indicators for family income category at age 10. The NCDS includes the same extended
controls, except mother’s social class at birth is replaced by her father’s social class, and the logarithm of family
income at age 16 is used in place of indicators for income at age 10. For Fragile Families results, the extended
controls include an indicator for low birth weight, the heights of both parents, indicators for the education attainment
of both parents, indicators for the maternal grandfather’s education, the logarithm of family income at age 3, the
mother’s score on the PPVT, and an indicator of whether the mother took the Spanish-language version of the PPVT
(i.e. the TVIP).

42

Table 5. Log earnings, test scores and the returns to height
British Cohort Study (1970)
MEN Age 30
Height at age 30
Tests scores ages 5 and 10
(F-test, p-value)
Extended controls?
Number of obs

WOMEN Age 30

MEN and WOMEN

0.010
(0.003)

0.004
(0.003)

–0.004
(0.004)

0.015
(0.004)

0.006
(0.004)

0.002
(0.004)

0.012
(0.003)

0.005
(0.002)

–0.001
(0.003)

--

31.11
(0.0000)

15.20
(0.0000)

--

38.52
(0.0000)

19.75
(0.0000)

--

68.90
(0.0000)

35.02
(0.0000)

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

2253

2253

2253

2127

2127

2127

4380

4380

4380

National Child Development Study (1958)
MEN Age 33

WOMEN Age 33

MEN and WOMEN

Height at age 33

0.009
(0.006)

0.007
(0.006)

0.009
(0.006)

0.003
(0.016)

0.010
(0.016)

0.007
(0.016)

0.006
(0.007)

0.007
(0.007)

0.006
(0.007)

Height at age 16

0.016
(0.005)

0.007
(0.005)

0.006
(0.005)

0.020
(0.016)

0.003
(0.016)

–0.003
(0.016)

0.018
(0.006)

0.006
(0.006)

0.004
(0.006)

Height variables
F-test (p-value)

20.51
(0.0000)

7.07
(0.0009)

4.61
(0.0101)

6.15
(0.0022)

1.87
(0.1543)

0.24
(0.7902)

20.46
(0.0000)

6.05
(0.0024)

2.29
(0.1013)

--

33.93
(0.0000)

23.32
(0.0000)

--

26.03
(0.0000)

15.82
(0.0000)

--

50.78
(0.0000)

31.99
(0.0000)

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Tests scores ages 7 and 11
(F-test, p-value)
Extended controls?

Number of obs
2116
2116
2116
2210
2210
2210
4326
4326
4326
Notes. OLS regression coefficients presented with standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variable for BCS regressions is log annual
earnings at age 30, and for NCDS regressions is log weekly earnings at age 33. Included in all regressions are indicators for ethnicity. NCDS
regressions all include indicators for region of residence at age 33. The regression with “extended controls” include indicators of mother and
father school leaving ages, father’s social class at the time of the cohort member’s birth, mother’s father’s social class, low birth weight,

prenatal smoking, and controls for mother’s and father’s heights, and log family income in childhood.
43

Table 6. The association between test scores in childhood and change in height from age 11 to 16, and from age 16 to 33 , NCDS

Height gain from age 11 to 16
Each coefficient is from a different regression
where the dependent variable is:

Height gain from age 16 to 33

boys

girls

boys

girls

boys

girls

boys

girls

Verbal language score at age 11

0.020
(0.010)

–0.028
(0.008)

0.012
(0.009

–0.026
(0.007)

–0.031
(0.009)

–0.053
(0.020)

–0.017
(0.009)

–0.050
(0.019)

Nonverbal language score at age 11

0.023
(0.010)

–0.022
(0.008)

0.014
(0.009)

–0.019
(0.008)

–0.038
(0.009)

–0.055
(0.020)

–0.023
(0.009)

–0.049
(0.019)

Math score at age 11

0.030
(0.010)

–0.030
(0.008)

0.021
(0.009)

–0.028
(0.007)

–0.038
(0.010)

–0.061
(0.020)

–0.022
(0.009)

–0.054
(0.019)

3644

3478

3644

3478

2864

2877

2864

2877

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

Number of observations
Extended controls?

Note: Each coefficient comes from a separate regression where change in height from 11 to 16 is used as a control in columns 1 through 4, and
change in height from 16 to 33 is used as a control in columns 5 through 8. Regressions with extended controls include indicators of mother’s
and father’s school leaving ages, father’s social class at the time of the cohort member’s birth, mother’s father’s social class, low birth weight,
prenatal smoking, and controls for mother’s and father’s heights, and log family income in childhood. Samples are restricted to children who

did not lose more than an inch of height between the ages of measurement.

44

Table 7. Occupational characteristics and multinomial logit results
Occupation

% in occupation

Strength

Intelligence

Coefficient on height

men

women

men

women

men

women

men

women

Executives/
Managers

12.9

11.1

1.67

1.57

2.80

2.85

1.095
(0.004)

1.046
(0.007)

Professionals

11.1

15.0

1.76

2.09

3.38

3.10

1.086
(0.004)

1.050
(0.007)

Technicians

3.6

3.9

1.78

2.11

2.76

2.55

1.055
(0.005)

1.030
(0.008)

Sales

11.1

12.9

1.97

2.01

2.43

2.28

1.076
(0.004)

1.016
(0.007)

Administrative/
Clerical

5.8

27.0

2.05

1.40

2.13

2.48

1.035
(0.004)

1.015
(0.007)

Household
Service

0.1

1.3

2.22

2.19

1.10

1.07

...

0.977
(0.009)

Protective
Service

2.8

0.6

2.62

2.34

2.08

2.05

1.104
(0.006)

1.070
(0.013)

Other Service

6.9

15.7

2.91

2.62

1.67

1.68

0.980
(0.004)

0.986
(0.006)

Farming

4.3

1.1

3.60

3.57

2.01

2.04

0.996
(0.005)

1.021
(0.010)

Mechanics

6.9

0.3

3.01

2.82

2.06

2.09

1.021
(0.004)

1.069
(0.016)

Construction/
Mining

8.6

0.2

3.01

2.83

2.14

2.11

1.026
(0.004)

...

Precision
Production

4.5

1.7

2.71

2.49

2.02

1.86

1.010
(0.005)

0.987
(0.009)

Machine
Operators

8.3

6.5

2.75

2.49

1.68

1.51

0.985
(0.004)

0.976
(0.007)

Transport

7.5

0.9

2.73

2.88

1.87

1.92

1.044
(0.004)

1.073
(0.011)

Laborers

5.7

1.7

3.58

3.27

1.44

1.35

1.000

1.000

Notes: 230,034 men and 204,539 women. The percentages of workers in each occupation are calculated using
sample weights. Multnimonal logit results are in the last two columns. The base occupation is “Laborers”. All
regressions are weighted using sample weights provided by the NHIS. Other controls include age, age squared, race
indicators and 8 indicators for population density interacted with MSA status.

45

.5
0
-.5
-1

Deviation from mean height in inches, by occupation

Exec

Å

Prof Tech Sales Admn PrSv

White collar

Serv Farm Prec Mach Tran Hand

Æ

Å

Figure 1: Heights by occupation, Men in the NHIS 1997-2001

46

Blue collar

Æ

.4
.2
0
-.2
-.4

Deviation from mean height in inches, by social class

SC1
Professional

SC2
Managerial

SC3_1
Skilled
Non-manual

SC3_2
Non-skilled
Non-manual

SC4
Partly skilled
Manual

Figure 2: Heights and occupational class, Men at age 30, British Cohort Study (1970 cohort)
47

SC5
Unskilled
Manual

24

growth velocity in cm/year

18

12

6

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

age

Figure 3: Growth velocity for boys in the US, centimeters per year
SOURCE: Center for Disease Control (1977)

48

16

18

20

corr = .02, weighted corr = -.01

corr = -.58, weighted corr = -.68

3.5

3

3

2.5

2.5

Spatial skills

Manual dexterity

3.5

2
1.5
1
.95

1

1.05

2
1.5
1

1.1

.95

3.5

3

3

2.5

2
1.5

1
1

1.05

1.1

1
.95

corr = -.67, weighted corr = -.73

1

1.05

1.1

corr = .69, weighted corr = .80

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1

3.5
3
Verbal skills

Physical demands

1.1

2.5

2
1.5

.95

.95

1

1.05

2.5
2
1.5
1

1.1

.95

corr = -.72, weighted corr = -.81

1.05

1.1

corr = .73, weighted corr = .82
Intelligence

2.5
2
1.5
1
.95

1

3.5

3.5
3

Strength

1.05

corr = 0.63, weighted corr = .76

3.5

Numerical skills

Motor control

corr = -.12, weighted corr = -.31

1

3
2.5
2
1.5
1

1

1.05

1.1

.95

Coefficients on height (rrr)

Figure 4: Height selection and occupational characteristics, Men

49

1

1.05

1.1

corr = 0.50, weighted corr = .42
3.5

3

3
Spatial skills

Manual dexterity

corr = -.19, weighted corr = -.72
3.5
2.5
2
1.5
1
.95

1

1.05

2.5
2
1.5
1

1.1

.95

3.5

3

3

2.5
2
1.5
1
.95

1

1.05

2
1.5
1
.95

1.05

1.1

3.5
3
Verbal skills

Physical demands

1

corr = .48, weighted corr = .87

corr = -.10, weighted corr = -.72

.95

1

1.05

2.5
2
1.5
1

1.1

.95

1.05

1.1

3.5

3.5

Intelligence

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
.95

1

corr = .57, weighted corr = .88

corr = -.23, weighted corr = -.37

Strength

1.1

2.5

1.1

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1

1.05

corr = 0.42, weighted corr = .81

3.5

Numerical skills

Motor control

corr = 0.23, weighted corr = -.14

1

3
2.5
2
1.5
1

1

1.05

1.1

.95

1

Coefficients on height (rrr)

Figure 5: Height selection and occupational characteristics, women

50

1.05

1.1

Exec/Managers
Professionals
Technicians
Sales
Administrative
Other Svce
Farming
Mechanics
Construction
Precision Prdcn
Machine Oper.
Transport
Laborers
. 95

1

1 .05
NHIS
PSID_controls

Figure 6: Relative risk ratios for height, NHIS and PSID

51

1.1
PSID

1.15

