                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         COMPETITION, INNOVATION AND GROWTH
                              WITH LIMITED COMMITMENT

                                            Ramon Marimon
                                           Vincenzo Quadrini

                                         Working Paper 12474
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12474


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




We would like to thank Francesco Caselli, Hugo Hopenhayn, Boyan Jovanovic, Narayana Kocherlachota,
Omar Licandro, Michele Boldrin, Stephen Parente and seminar participants at CEMFI, CEPR
Macroeconomic Symposium in Cyprus, London School of Economics, ITAM, Monetary Conference at
Banco of Portugal, NBER Summer Institute, SED meeting in Budapest, Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
University of Porto, University of Southern California, University of Toronto and World Congress in
London. Marimon acknowledges support from Ente Luigi Einaudi, Fundacion BBVA and Ministerio de
Educacion y Ciencia. Quadrini acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2006 by Ramon Marimon and Vincenzo Quadrini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Competition, Innovation and Growth with Limited Commitment
Ramon Marimon and Vincenzo Quadrini
NBER Working Paper No. 12474
August 2006
JEL No. L14, L16, O4

                                          ABSTRACT


We study how barriers to competition---such as restrictions to business start-up and strict
enforcement of covenants or IPR---affect the investment in knowledge capital when contracts are
not enforceable. These barriers lower the competition for human capital and reduce the incentive to
accumulate knowledge. We show in a dynamic general equilibrium model that this mechanism has
the potential to account for significant cross-country income inequality.


Ramon Marimon
CREI - Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
rms2@mcyt.es

Vincenzo Quadrini
Department of Finance and Business Economics
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
701 Exposition Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
quadrini@usc.edu
1   Introduction

Sustained levels of income and growth rely on innovation and adoption of
new technologies, which in turn require the accumulation of human capital.
This is clearly visible in modern technologies—such as information technolo-
gies, biotechnologies and nanotechnologies—where skilled human capital or
knowledge is a factor of production highly complementary to physical cap-
ital. Because the owners of physical capital—‘investors’—are often distinct
from the owner of knowledge capital—‘innovators’—the design of contractual
arrangements are necessary to provide the right incentives.
    Several factors limit the enforceability of these arrangements. First,
knowledge capital can not be used as a collateral and innovators may quit the
firm to pursue other projects. Second, advance payments to the innovator
are not incentive compatible if the accumulation of knowledge from the inno-
vator requires effort. Third, once the innovation process has been completed,
the investor may renege on the payments promised to the innovator.
    The severity of these contractual frictions depend on the value that knowl-
edge capital has outside the firm. This value may be curtailed by several bar-
riers. One barrier acts through the imposition of restrictions to the creation
of new firms which typically have more incentive to innovate than incumbent
firms. Another barrier is a tight enforcement of covenants, precluding inno-
vators to use their acquired knowledge in a different firm. A similar barrier
is a stringent system of intellectual property rights.
    The evolution of the computer industry exemplifies these effects. As
Bresnahan & Malerba (2002) emphasize, such an industry has gone through
different technological stages (from the main frames to PCs and the Inter-
net). Knowledge in this particular industry was geographically spread among
many countries including those in Europe. Yet, the United States has been
persistently the industry leader. According to them, such dominance can be
explained by “...the existence of a large body of technical expertise in uni-
versities and the generally supportive environment for new firm formation in
the United States”, Bresnahan & Malerba (2002, page 69).
    While lower barriers to business start up may have favored the computer
leadership of the United States, the different enforcement of covenants—
and informational linkages across firms—may have determined the shift of
regional leadership within the United States. As argued by Saxenian (1996),
Gilson (1999) and Hyde (2003), Silicon Valley dominates over Route 128 due
to a Californian legal and social tradition of not enforcing post-employment

                                      1
covenants, resulting in high labor mobility and knowledge spillovers.
    This paper formalizes these ideas and addresses the question of whether
competition for innovators affects income levels through the accumulation of
knowledge. We use a dynamic general equilibrium model where innovators
can not be bound to the firm and therefore their mobility is determined
by other legal and social barriers. Our main result is that the degree of
competition for knowledge capital is a determinant factor for innovation when
neither the investor nor the innovator can commit to long-term contracts.
    The intuition for these findings is simple. Competition for knowledge cap-
ital creates an outside value for the innovator that is used as a threat against
the investor’s attempt to renegotiate the promised payments. Barriers to
entry or mobility reduce the outside value and, in absence of commitment
from the investor, they reduce the incentive of the innovator to accumulate
knowledge. Without barriers, innovators may even over-accumulate knowl-
edge to keep the outside value high. An incumbent firm could prevent the
over-accumulation by making advance payments. However, advance pay-
ments are not incentive-compatible if contracts are not enforceable also for
the innovator. It is in this sense that the double-side limited commitment
plays a central role.
    Our results are first illustrated in a simple two-stage model which is then
extended to a dynamic infinite horizon set-up. The parametrization of the
model allows us to quantify the contribution of the cost of business start-up in
generating cross-country income inequality. We then show that other barriers
to mobility, such as the strict enforcement of covenants, can be incorporated
in the model to account for regional differences.
    The paper relates to three strands of literature. First is the labor litera-
ture that studies the accumulation of skills within the firm (e.g., Acemoglu
(1997), Acemoglu & Pischke (1999), Acemoglu & Shimer (1999)). In this lit-
erature, higher outside values worsen the hold-up problem and lead to lower
accumulation of skills. In our framework, instead, higher outside values in-
crease human capital investment.
    Second is the growth literature, starting with the pioneering work of
Romer (1990, 1993), that studies the economics of ideas and the link be-
tween competition and growth (e.g., Greenwood & Jovanovic (1990), Aghion
& Griffith (2005), Boldrin & Levine (2006)). Whether free entry enhances
innovation has been a major topic of research and debate. Most of the liter-
ature has focused on market structure and product market competition. In
particular, on the ability to gain market shares and appropriate the returns

                                       2
to R&D, as in Aghion, Bloom, Blundell, Griffith, & Howitt (2005). More
closely related to our work is Aghion, Blundell, Griffith, Howitt, & Prantl
(2004). They show—both, theoretically and empirically—that ‘firm entry’
spurs innovation in technologically advanced sectors as firms try to ‘escape
competition’ while Acemoglu, Aghion, & Zilibotti (2002) show that barriers
to entry are especially costly for economies closer to the technology frontier.
We focus on the less studied—but we think, empirically relevant—dimension
of ‘human capital’ competition. By emphasizing the role of barriers to mo-
bility, our work also relates to the literature that, building on the work of
economic historians (e.g., Mokyr (1990)), emphasizes the role of barriers to
riches in slowing growth (Parente & Prescott (2002)).
    The third branch of literature is on dynamic contracts with enforcement
constraints, as in Marcet & Marimon (1992). A common assumption in this
literature is that default or repudiation leads to market exclusion, while in our
framework barriers to mobility matter precisely because there is no market
exclusion (Kocherlachota (1996) and Cooley, Marimon, & Quadrini (2004)
are exceptions). Many of the existing papers conclude that a stronger com-
mitment enhances income and growth. In our framework, instead, income
and growth can be enhanced with specific forms of limited commitment.

2       Cross-country evidence on barriers to business start-up

Before describing the theoretical framework, we present here some cross-
country data suggesting a relation between the cost of business start-up—
that in our theory acts as a barrier to knowledge mobility—and cross-country
income. Our theory is broader than simply capturing the impact of barriers
to business start-up. Here we focus on these particular data because of its
availability.
   A recent publication from the World Bank (2005) provides data on the
quality of the business environment for a cross-section of countries, including
proxies for the barriers to business start-up. There are three main variables.
The first is the ‘cost to start a new business’. This is the average pecuniary
cost needed to set-up a corporation in the country, in percentage of the
country per-capita income.1 The second proxy is the ‘number of bureaucratic
    1
    The normalization of the cost of business start-up by the level of per-capita income
better captures the importance of barriers to business start-up than the absolute dollar
cost. What is relevant is the comparison between the cost of business start-up and the



                                           3
procedures’ that need to be filed before starting a new business. The third
proxy is the average ‘length of time’ required to start a new business.
    Figure 1 plots the level of per-capita GDP in 2004 against these three
indicators, where all variables are in log. All panels show a strong negative
correlation indicating that the set-up of a new business is more costly and
cumbersome in poor countries.
    The cost of business start-up is also negatively correlated with economic
growth. To show this, we regress the average growth in per-capita GDP
from 2000 to 2004 (the five more recent years) to the cost of business start-
up. We also include the 1999 per-capita GDP to control for the initial level of
development. We would like to emphasize that the goal of these regressions
is not to establish a causation but only to highlight the key correlations that
motivate our study. The estimation results, with t-statistics in parenthesis,
are reported in Table 1.

                Table 1: Cost of business start-up and growth.

                                                         Initial         Cost
                                        Constant       Per-Capita     of Business
                                                          GDP          Start-Up


                   Coefficients           15.55          -1.16           -1.04
                   t-Statistics           (5.01)        (-3.81)         (-4.92)

                   R-square               0.150
                   N. of countries         140

                NOTES: Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate in
                per-capita GDP for the five year period 2000-2004. Initial Per-
                Capita GDP is the log of per-capita GDP in 1999. The cost of
                business start-up is in percentage of the per-capital Gross National
                Income as reported in Doing Business in 2005 (also in log)



    As can be seen from the table, the cost of business start-up is negatively
associated with growth even if we control for the level of economic develop-
ment. Therefore, countries with lower barriers to entry tend to experience
faster growth. This finding is robust to the choice of alternative years to
compute the average growth rate. The other proxies for barriers to entry—
specifically, the number of procedures and the time required to start a new
value of creating a business. Although the dollar cost is on average higher in advanced
economies, the value of a new business is also likely to be higher.

                                                   4
Figure 1: Barriers to business start-up and level of development.

                                     coef = -.56164471, se = .03931568, t = -14.29

                                3


                                             USA         NOR     IRL
  Log of Per-Capita GDP, 2004




                                2                CAN
                                               GBR        ISL     AUTCHE  NLD
                                                                         BEL
                                               SWE FIN AUS HKG
                                                   FRA         DEU      JPN ITA
                                                  SGP                       ESP
                                      NZL                       ISR
                                                                       SVN
                                                                       CZE KOR GRC
                                                                          PRT
                                                                               HUN
                                                                SVKEST                     SAU
                                1                          LTULVA    MUS  HRV POL
                                                                          ARG
                                                                        CHL
                                                               RUS      BWAMEX  CRI URY
                                                                               MYS
                                                                ROM
                                                                  THA  BRA
                                                                       BGR
                                                                       TUN        TUR
                                                                   IRN
                                                                     KAZ TON    PANDOM
                                                                                 COL
                                                                                BLR   BIH
                                                                        MKD NAM
                                                                        UKR      DZA
                                                                          CHNWSM FJI
                                                                            VEN      PER        LBN
                                                                                                 SLV
                                0                                 ARM
                                                                                   ALBJOR
                                                                          AZE PHL SYR
                                                                        LKA                   GUY
                                                                                                   PRY
                                                                     JAM MAR         ECUGTM EGYIDNNIC
                                                                                          IND
                                                                     SAS GEO              VUT
                                                                                          HND
                                                                                   PNG VNM
                                                                                         LSO       BOL
                                                                  MNG KGZLAO  PAK           GHA MRT
                                                                                           SDN       GIN KHM
                                                                                                    CMR    TCD AGO
                                -1                                          UZB
                                                                             MDA       SLB BGD SENHTITGO
                                                                                           NPL UGACIV
                                                                                              MOZ BFA    RWA
                                                                                       KENNGA ERIBEN  CAF
                                                                                                     MLI COG
                                                                             ZMB        MDG            YEM NER SLE
                                                                                          ETH
                                                                                                      BDI    ZAR
                                -2                                                                  TZA
                                                                                                  MWI




                                -3
                                     -5      -4      -3     -2     -1      0     1     2      3                      4   5
                                                   Cost of Business Start-Up (% Per-Capita Income)


                                     coef = -1.2520486, se = .20305668, t = -6.17

                                3


                                                          IRL
                                                          NOR   USA
  Log of Per-Capita GDP, 2004




                                2    CAN          DNK     BEL       CHE NLD
                                                                ISL GBR          AUT
                                     AUS          FIN
                                                  SWE           HKG                    JPN
                                                                    SGP FRA      DEU
                                                                                  ITA
                                                                                     ESP
                                     NZL                        ISR
                                                                                 SVN     KOR    GRC
                                                                                       PRT
                                                                                     CZE
                                                                    HUN
                                                                    EST          SVK        SAU
                                1                                   MUS LVA LTUCHLPOL HRV       ARG
                                                                            RUSMYS     CRI
                                                                                 MEX BWA
                                                                                       URY
                                                                ROM         THA        BGR         BRA
                                                          TON           KAZ TUR
                                                                        PAN IRNTUN   DOM COL
                                                                                          BIH     BLR
                                                                                     NAM    MKD
                                                                                              DZA
                                                                             FJI            VEN UKR
                                                                    LBN WSM          PER SLVCHN
                                0                                           GUY
                                                                                       ALB
                                                                                       JOR
                                                                                       PHL
                                                                                     ARM        GTM
                                                                                                   PRY
                                                                MAR JAM     LKA               AZE
                                                                                     EGY SYR ECU
                                                                            NIC           IDN
                                                                            GEO
                                                                            VUTSAS     IND
                                                                                            HND BOL
                                                                            PNGLSO VNM
                                                                                     KHM GHA
                                                                                       MRT
                                                                                       PAK GINAGO     TCD
                                                                           MNG   LAO
                                                                            KGZUZB
                                                                            BGD      SDN CMR
                                -1                              SLB              SEN MDA HTITGO
                                                                                                   UGA
                                                                        NPL            CIV
                                                                                 RWA          MOZ
                                                                            BENNGA   CAF BFAERI
                                                                                            KEN
                                                                                            MLI
                                                                    ZMB    COG
                                                                        ETH      SLE MDG YEMNER
                                -2                                                     BDI ZAR
                                                                                     MWI    TZA




                                -3
                                     -1.5           -1         -.5         0           .5         1                      1.5
                                                         Number of Procedures to Start a Business



                                     coef = -.6620499, se = .11058464, t = -5.99

                                3


                                                    USA         NOR        IRL
  Log of Per-Capita GDP, 2004




                                2           CAN     ISL
                                                    DNK       NLD FIN   CHE AUT  BEL
                                      AUS                     HKG
                                                                ITASWEGBR DEU JPN
                                                      SGP FRA
                                                               NZL               ISR ESP
                                                                         KOR       GRC     SVN
                                                                                    CZE PRT
                                                                                   HUN
                                                                            SVK EST         SAU
                                1                                     LVA    LTU
                                                                               POL
                                                                             CHL
                                                                                ARG    HRV
                                                                                      MUS
                                                                                RUS URYMEX CRI BWA
                                                                               MYS
                                                              ROMTUN            THA IRN                   BRA
                                                           TUR         PANKAZ BGR
                                                                                TON COL   BIH DOM
                                                                                                BLR
                                                                            DZA UKR MKDFJI        NAM VEN
                                                                                       CHN WSM PER
                                                                                      LBN
                                                                                    SLV
                                0                                          ARM EGY
                                                                                    ALB
                                                                                  JOR
                                                                                   GTM PHL
                                                                                      GUY
                                                                                               PRY
                                                           JAMMAR                       LKA ECU
                                                                                      SYR             AZE
                                                                                     NIC                  IDN
                                                                        GEO        VUTVNM
                                                                                   SAS        IND
                                                                                        BOL HND LSO
                                                                                          PNG
                                                                           PAK                   KHM
                                                                                                GHA
                                                                                               TCD
                                                                                                MRT      AGO
                                                                       MNG
                                                                         KGZ       SDN GIN
                                                                                  CMR
                                                                                 BGD
                                                                                 UZB                          LAO
                                -1                                               SLB
                                                                               MDA
                                                                                  UGACIV
                                                                                          SEN
                                                                                         TGO                   HTI
                                                                         NPL
                                                                        RWA           BFA                 MOZ
                                                                 CAF            BEN NGA
                                                                                     MLI KEN      ERI
                                                                                 ZMB         COG
                                                                                  MDG
                                                                                 NER
                                                                             SLEETH         YEM
                                -2                                               TZABDI                   ZAR
                                                                                 MWI




                                -3
                                     -3             -2            -1          0        1           2                     3
                                                         Time to Start a Business (Number of Days)




                                                                                5
business—are also negatively correlated with growth but they are not statis-
tically significant at conventional levels.
    To summarize, the general picture portrayed by the data is that economic
development and growth is negatively associated with the cost of starting a
business. We have presented simple correlations which, of course, do not
imply causation. In the following section we present a model where barriers
to entry and, more generally, to knowledge capital mobility, lead to lower
income and growth. We will return to the cross country data presented here
in the quantitative analysis of Section 6.

3   The model

There are two types of agents in the economy: a continuum of ‘investors’ of
total mass m > 1 and a continuum of ‘innovators’ of total mass 1. Therefore,
innovators are in short supply relatively to investors. Investors own all the
physical capital, kt , and innovators are the only holders of knowledge capi-
tal, ht . The lifetime utilities for investors and innovators are, respectively,
P∞       t     P∞      t
  t=0 β ct and    t=0 β (ct − et ), where ct is consumption and et is the effort to
accumulate human capital or knowledge as specified below.
    Innovators do not save. This assumption should be interpreted as an
approximation to the case in which innovators discount more heavily than
investors. Risk neutrality implies that the equilibrium interest rate is equal
to the intertemporal discount rate, that is, r = 1/β − 1.
    Firms are owned by investors who need the management and innovation
skills of innovators. We will use the terms ‘investor’ and ‘firm’ interchange-
ably throughout the paper. The production function is:
                                   yt = zt1−α ktα
where zt is the level of technology and kt is the capital chosen at time t − 1.
    The variable zt changes over time as the firm adopts new technologies.
The key assumption is that the implementation of more advanced technolo-
gies requires higher knowledge. An innovator with knowledge ht has the
ability to implement and run any technology zt ≤ ht .
    The investment in knowledge, ht+1 −ht , requires effort from the innovator.
Because of possible leakage or spillover effects, we allow the effort to depend
on the economy-wide knowledge Ht . The effort cost function is denoted by:
                               et = ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; Ht )

                                         6
which is strictly decreasing in Ht and ht , strictly increasing and convex in
ht+1 , and satisfies ϕ(ht , ht ; Ht ) > 0. It is further assumed that the function
is homogeneous of degree ρ > 1. With this restriction the model generates
only long-term differences in income levels, and therefore, this is a semi-
endogenous growth model as in Jones (1995). The analysis can be easily
extended to ρ = 1, in which case we would have long-term growth differences.2
    Physical capital is technology-specific. When the firm innovates, only part
of the existing capital is usable with the new technology. Capital obsolescence
increases with the degree of innovation. This is formalized by assuming that
the depreciation rate increases with the size of the innovation, that is,
                                                zt+1
                                                       
                                       δt = δ ·
                                                 zt
    Because of capital obsolescence, there is an asymmetry between incum-
bent firms—whose capital depreciates with the adoption of more advanced
technologies—and new firms that, without capital in place, have greater in-
centive to innovate (Arrow’s ’replacement effect’).
    Firms remain productive with probability p. Whether a firm survives
is revealed after the investment in knowledge. This assumption guarantees
that, after the investment, the mass of innovators is larger than incumbent
(surviving) firms. This will avoid some technical issues as we will emphasize
later. To facilitate the analysis we first assume that p is very close to 1 and,
in the characterization of the individual problems, we will ignore it. The
general case with any value of p will be characterized in Appendix G.

Competitive structure and barriers: In each period there is a wal-
rasian market for innovators. The market opens twice: before and after the
accumulation of knowledge. Both incumbents and new firms can participate.
The effective competition for innovators created by potential new firms is
limited by different types of barriers. For the moment, we consider only bar-
riers to business start-up. The analysis of other barriers, such as the strict
enforcement of covenants, will be conducted in Section 7 with similar results.
   2
    The model can be interpreted as a detrended version of an economy that grows at the
exogenous rate dictated by the worldwide knowledge. Let H t be the worldwide knowledge
growing at rate ḡ, with the effort cost function, et = ϕ̃(ht , ht+1 ; Ht , H t ), homogeneous of
degree 1. After normalizing all variables by H t , the effort cost function can be rewritten
as ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; Ht ), which is homogeneous of degree ρ < 1.



                                               7
    Barriers to entry are modeled as a deadweight cost, τ · ht+1 , proportional
to the initial level of knowledge ht+1 . We would like to emphasize that the
key results of the paper are robust to alternative specifications of the entry
cost. Our choice is only motivated by its analytical convenience.3

4   One-period model

Before studying the general model with infinitely lived agents, we first con-
sider a simplified version with only one period, which provides an easier
intuition for the key results of the paper. The analysis of the infinite horizon
model, however, is still important because it allows us to derive the initial
conditions endogenously as steady state values and, more generally, it is bet-
ter suited for the quantitative application of Section 6.
    There are two stages: before and after the investment in knowledge. The
states at the beginning of period are h0 and k0 . After making the investment
                                                             α
decisions, h1 and k1 , the firm generates output y1 = z11− k1α in the second
stage. Because z1 = h1 , the output can also be written as y1 = h11−α k1α .
In this simple version of the model we assume that physical capital fully
depreciates after production. The innovator receives a payment w at the end
of the period, and therefore, after the choice of h1 . Payments before the
choice of h1 are not incentive-compatible because of the limited enforcement
of contracts for the innovator. With only one period, we can abstract from
discounting and ignore the leakage or spillover effects.
    The timing of the model is as follows: The firm starts with initial states
h0 and k0 . At this stage the innovator decides whether to stay or quit the
firm. If the innovator quits, she can be hired either by an incumbent firm or
by a new firm (funded by a new investor). If the innovator decides to stay,
she will choose the new knowledge h1 , implement the technology z1 = h1 and
the investor provides the funds to accumulate the new physical capital k1 .
After the investment decision, the firm pays w. At this stage the innovator
can still quit, but she cannot change the level of knowledge h1 . The investor
is the residual claimant of the firm’s output.
   3
     For example, we could assume that the cost is proportional to the initial capital
kt+1 or to the initial output h1−α  α
                               t+1 kt+1 or to the discounted flows of outputs. The basic
theory and results also apply when the entry cost is a fixed payment. The assumption
of proportionality allows for a continuous impact of τ while a fixed cost would have an
impact only after it has reached the prohibitive level.



                                           8
4.1   Equilibrium with one-side limited commitment
We first characterize the equilibrium when at least one of the parties, either
the investor or the innovator, commit to the contract. The commitment of
one party is sufficient for the implementation of the optimal investment. As
we will see, it is the limited commitment of both parties (double-side limited
enforcement) that induces a deviation from the optimal investment. We start
with the characterization of the equilibrium when only the investor commits.
It will then be trivial to show that this is also the allocation when contracts
are enforceable for both parties or for the innovator only.
     With investor’s commitment, all variables are chosen at the beginning of
the period to maximize the total surplus, subject to the enforcement con-
straints for the innovator. Let D(h0 ) be the repudiation value for the in-
novator before choosing h1 and D(hc
                                      1 ) the repudiation value after choosing
h1 . These functions are endogenous and will be derived below as the values
that the innovator would get by quitting the firm. From now on we will use
the hat sign to denote the functions that are defined after the investment in
knowledge (second stage). The participation of the innovator requires that
the value of staying is greater than the repudiation value before and after
the knowledge investment, that is,

                                   w − ϕ(h0 , h1 ) ≥ D(h0 )
                                               w ≥ D(h
                                                     c
                                                        1)

   As we will show, the second constraint is always satisfied if the first
constraint is satisfied. Therefore, in the derivation of the optimal policy, we
can neglect the second constraint and write the optimization problem as:
                        (                         "            !#                      )
                                                         h1
             max            − ϕ(h0 , h1 ) − k1 + 1 − δ ·            k0 +   h11−α k1α       (1)
            h1 ,k1 ,w                                    h0

                   s.t.

              w − ϕ(h0 , h1 ) ≥ D(h0 )
                               "            !#
                              h1
            −w − k1 + 1 − δ ·                     k0 + h11−α k1α ≥ 0
                              h0
where the second constraint is the participation condition for the investor.

                                              9
    A quick glance at the optimization problem reveals that the investment
choices are independent of the payment w. The value of w is determined by
the division of the surplus, as specified below.
    To determine the repudiation value before the choice of h1 , we have to
solve for the optimal investment when the innovator quits the firm. The
innovator could be hired by an incumbent or a new firm, whoever makes the
best offer. Because an incumbent firm never offers more than a new firm, it
becomes relevant to determine the offer made by a potential entrant. This
is derived from the contractual problem solved by a new firm, that is:
                                   (                                            )
           S(h0 ) =     max            − ϕ(h0 , h1 ) − τ h1 − k1 +   h1−α
                                                                      1   k1α       (2)
                       h1 ,k1 ,w


                              s.t.

                         w − ϕ(h0 , h1 ) ≥ D(h0 )

                       −w − τ h1 − k1 + h1−α
                                         1   k1α ≥ 0
    Because of competition among potential entrants, an innovator that quits
for a new firm will get the whole surplus generated by the new firm, that is,
S(h0 ). This implies that D(h0 ) = S(h0 ) and, if the innovator stays with the
incumbent firm, the payment w must be at least ϕ(h0 , h1 ) + S(h0 ). Formally,
the participation constraint in problem (1) becomes w − ϕ(h0 , h1 ) ≥ S(h0 ).
    Problems (1) and (2) show the different incentive to invest for an incum-
bent versus a new firm. On the one hand, new firms do not have any physical
capital and innovations do not generate capital obsolescence. On the other,
they must pay the entry cost τ h1 , which discourages knowledge and capital
accumulation. This is clearly shown by the first order conditions in problems
(1) and (2), with respect to h1 . These can be written as:
                                   !α                                 !
                         k1                                     k0
                 (1 − α)                 = ϕh1 (h0 , h1 ) + δ ·                     (3)
                         h1                                     h0
                                   !α
                         k1
                 (1 − α)                 = ϕh1 (h0 , h1 ) + τ                       (4)
                         h1
where the subscripts denote derivatives. The left-hand-side terms are the
marginal productivity of knowledge. The right-hand-side terms are the mar-
ginal costs. For an incumbent firm, the marginal cost derives from the effort

                                             10
incurred by the innovator plus the obsolescence of physical capital. For a
new firm the obsolescence cost is replaced by the entry cost.
   Let hOld
          1   be the optimal knowledge investment of an incumbent (old) firm
      N ew
and h1      the optimal investment of a new firm. The following proposition
formalizes the relation between barriers to entry and knowledge investment.

Proposition 1 The knowledge investment of a new firm, hN       1
                                                                 ew
                                                                    , is strictly
decreasing in the entry cost τ and there exists τ̄ > 0 such that hN1
                                                                     ew
                                                                        = hOld
                                                                            1 .

Proof 1 The first order condition for the choice of k1 is α(k1 /h1 )α−1 = 1
for both incumbent and new firms. Using this condition, (3) and (4) become:
                                                            !
                              α                        k0
                  (1 − α)α   1−α   = ϕh1 (h0 , hOld
                                                1 )+δ·
                                                       h0
                             α
                  (1 − α)α 1−α = ϕh1 (h0 , hN
                                            1
                                              ew
                                                 )+τ

The proposition follows directly from these two conditions.              Q.E.D.

    In equilibrium there is no entrance of new firms at the beginning of the
period and the investment in knowledge is h1 = hOld1 . The potential entrance
of new firms only affects the payment received by the innovator. In the
second stage there will be the entrance of new firms because some incumbent
firms exit (although the number is negligible because p ' 1). However, the
level of knowledge cannot be changed at this stage.
    Before continuing we show that the equilibrium investment does not
change if both parties (or the investor only) commit. Because hOld    1  maxi-
mizes the total surplus, this must also the equilibrium investment if both
parties commit to the contract. The same result applies if it is the innovator
who commits. In this case the investor can renege the promised payments
after the investment in knowledge. However, this problem can be solved by
making the payment w before the investment in knowledge. As long as the
contract is enforceable for the innovator, there is no risk that she runs away
with the cash or she does not exercise the effort to accumulate knowledge.

4.2   Equilibrium with double-side limited commitment
We want to show first that, when the investor can not commit to fulfill his
promises, he will renegotiate the contract after the choice of h1 . To see this,

                                        11
we must derive the value that the innovator would get by quitting the firm
when her knowledge has already been chosen to be h1 . This is the surplus
generated by a new firm, hiring the innovator, defined as:
                                                                          
                    S(h
                    b
                       1 ) = max                 − τ h1 − k1 + h11−α k1α                  (5)
                                     k1 ,w


                                             s.t.

                                      w ≥ D(h
                                          c
                                             1)



                                     −w − τ h1 − k1 + h1−α
                                                       1   k1α ≥ 0

      Because of competition, the innovator gets the whole surplus, that is,
D(h
c
    1 ) = S(h1 ). An incumbent firm will renegotiate the promised payment
           b
w if this is higher than S(h
                         b   ). The renegotiation threat after the accumula-
                                 1
tion of knowledge is credible because the firm can always replace the current
innovator with other innovators. This could be either an innovator still em-
ployed by an incumbent (surviving) firm, or an innovator who separated from
an exiting firm. Because in the second stage there are only p < 1 firms that
are still alive but the mass of innovators is 1, innovators are in the long side
of the market (relatively to the number of incumbent firms). This implies
that they only get the reservation value.4
    Based on the above discussion, we have that the innovator will receive
w = S(h
      b
          1 ) and the total utility from staying with the firm is:

                       −ϕ(h0 , h1 ) + w = −ϕ(h0 , h1 ) + S(h
                                                         b
                                                            1)                            (6)

   If instead the innovator quits at the beginning of the period, she will get
the surplus S(h0 ) generated by the new firm, that is,
                                                      
        S(h0 ) = max        − ϕ(h0 , h) + S(h)
                                          b                = −ϕ(h0 , hN
                                                                      1
                                                                        ew     b N ew )
                                                                           ) + S(h1       (7)
                   h

    Equations (6) and (7) show that the value of quitting at the beginning
of the period, S(h0 ), is greater than the value of staying, as long as h1 6=
hN
 1
   ew
      . Therefore, the innovator will quit unless the firm agrees to the same
  4
    We have ignored this probability in the contractual problem because we are looking
at the limiting case of p ' 1. The analysis with p < 1 will be done in Appendix G.

                                                  12
knowledge investment chosen by a new entrant firm, that is, h1 = hN
                                                                  1
                                                                    ew
                                                                       . In
this way the innovator keeps the repudiation value high and prevents the
firm from renegotiating.5

Proposition 2 Suppose that all firms have the same initial states (k0 , h0 ).
Then there is a unique equilibrium with aggregate knowledge H1 = hN
                                                                  1
                                                                    ew
                                                                       .

Proof 2 See Appendix A.

    Because hN1
                ew
                   is decreasing in τ (see Proposition 1), the accumulation
of knowledge decreases with the cost of entry. Therefore, with double-side
limited enforcement, there is a negative correlation between barriers to entry
and the accumulation of knowledge.
    To summarize, greater competition (lower barriers to entry) leads to
higher investment in knowledge. Because the investment is determined by
the optimality condition of new firms, such level is not necessarily efficient
for incumbent firms. In particular, if τ is small, incumbent firms accumulate
too much knowledge. The presence of spillovers, however, may make the
higher investment socially desirable. We will re-introduce the spillovers in
the analysis of the infinite horizon model.

Remarks: There are two points to be emphasized. First, the importance
of p < 1. If p was equal to 1, we would have the same number of inno-
vators as incumbent firms in the second stage. This may lead to multiple
equilibria. Each firm would renegotiate if all other firms renegotiate. But
each firm would not individually renegotiate if all other firms do not renego-
tiate because there are no innovators willing to move for a lower pay. The
assumption of a positive probability of exit, although small, eliminates this
multiplicity because there is at least one innovator who separated from the
original firm and is willing to accept a lower payment.
    The second point is that output sharing is equivalent to promised pay-
ments. Thus, the assumption of limited enforcement for the investor also
applies to the promise of a share of output.
   5
    This proves that, if the enforcement constraint for the innovator is satisfied at the
beginning of the period, it is also satisfied after the investment in knowledge.




                                           13
5     The infinite horizon model

In this section we generalize the model to an infinite horizon set-up. We
first characterize the equilibrium with commitment and then we turn to the
case of double-side limited commitment. The comparison between these two
environments clarifies the importance of double-side limited enforcement for
barriers to entry to affect the accumulation of knowledge. To present the
results more compactly, we relegate most of the technical analysis and proofs
to the appendix.
    Before continuing, it will be convenient to define the gross output func-
tion, inclusive of undepreciated capital, as follows:
                                 "                  !#
                                             ht+1
                π(ht , kt , ht+1 ) = 1 − δ ·             kt + h1−α
                                                               t   ktα      (8)
                                              ht

In writing this expression we assume that the firm uses the best technology
implementable by the innovator, that is, zt = ht . It is easy to show that the
choice of zt < ht is never optimal.

5.1    Equilibrium with one-side commitment
We start characterizing the environment where only the investor commits.
As in the one-period model, the equilibrium allocation with investor’s com-
mitment is equivalent to the allocation achieved when the innovator commits
(with or without commitment from the investor). What changes the equilib-
rium outcome is the limited commitment of both.
    The analysis of the infinite horizon model will concentrate on steady state
equilibria. Therefore, in the analysis that follows we will ignore the aggregate
states as an explicit argument of the value functions.
    Although in equilibrium there is no entrance of firms (more precisely the
number of firms entering is negligible), we still need to solve for the dynamics
of a new firm in order to determine the outside or repudiation value for
the innovator. Even though the analysis is limited to steady states, newly
created firms do experience a transition to the long-term level of physical
and knowledge capital.
    Let V (ht ) be the repudiation value for the innovator at the beginning
of the period, before investing in knowledge. This is the value that an in-
novator with knowledge ht would receive by quitting the current employer


                                       14
and switching to a new firm. Similarly, let Vb (ht+1 ) be the value of quit-
ting after the investment in knowledge, and therefore, after exercising effort.
The optimization problem solved by a new firm that hires an innovator with
knowledge capital h0 at the beginning of period 0 is:
                                              ∞                                    
                                                        t
                                              X
       V (h0 ) =            max                     β wt − ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H)                             (9)
                     {wt , kt+1 , ht+1 }∞
                                        t=0   t=0

                            subject to

       ∞         h                                  i
             β j−t wj − ϕ(hj , hj+1 ; H) ≥ V (ht ),
       X
                                                                                            for t > 0
       j=t
                ∞            h                                    i
                       β j−t wj − ϕ(hj , hj+1 ; H) ≥ Vb (ht+1 ),
                X
       wt +                                                                                for t ≥ 0
               j=t+1
                                   ∞          h                                      i
                                         β t π(ht , kt , ht+1 ) − wt − kt+1 ≥ 0
                                   X
       −τ h1 − w0 − k1 +
                                   t=1



    The optimal contract maximizes the value for the innovator, subject to the
enforcement constraints for the innovator (the first two conditions) and the
participation constraint for the investor (non-negative profits). The problem
is also subject to a non-negative constraint for wt .
    For an innovator hired by a new firm at time 0, after the investment in
knowledge, the value of the contract is:
                                                                 ∞
                                                  (                                              )
                                                                            h                i
                                                                        t
                                                                 X
        Vb (h1 ) =               max                w0 +               β wt − ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H)       (10)
                         {wt , kt+1 , ht+2 }∞
                                            t=0                  t=1

subject to the same constraints as problem (9).
    The key difference respect to the problem solved by a new firm entering
at the beginning of the period, is that the effort to accumulate knowledge
has already been exercised and h1 is given at this point. Hence, the current
flow of utility for the innovator is only w0 . This also explains why the choice
of knowledge starts in the next period.
    Appendix B derives the first order conditions for problem (9). Because
of the entry cost and the obsolescence of physical capital, the optimality
conditions in the entry period, that is, t = 0, is different from the optimality


                                                            15
conditions in subsequent periods. The first order conditions at t = 0 are:

          V (ht ) ≤ wt − ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) + βV (ht+1 )                                   (11)

          βπ2 (ht+1 , kt+1 , ht+1 ) = 1                                                  (12)
                                      h                                              i
          τ + ϕ2 (ht , ht+1 ; H) = β π1 (ht+1 , kt+1 , ht+2 ) − ϕ1 (ht+1 , ht+2 ; H) (13)

where subscripts denote derivatives.
    The first condition says that the value of quitting the current employer
cannot be bigger than the current flow of utility plus the discounted value
of quitting next period. The second condition equalizes the gross marginal
return of capital to its marginal cost, which is 1. The last condition equalizes
the marginal cost to accumulate knowledge to the discounted value of its
return (greater production and lower cost of future knowledge investment).
    The first order conditions after entering, that is, for t > 0, are similar to
the ones derived above with the exception of condition (13), which becomes:
                                            h                                               i
−π3 (ht , kt , ht+1 )+ϕ2 (ht , ht+1 ; H) = β π1 (ht+1 , kt+1 , ht+2 )−ϕ1 (ht+1 , ht+2 ; H)
                                                                                        (14)
    Conditions (13) and (14) show the asymmetry between new and incum-
bent firms. While the marginal benefit from investing in knowledge (the
right-hand-side) is the same, the marginal cost (the left-hand-side) differs.
For new firms this includes the entry cost, τ . For incumbent firms the entry
cost is replaced by the depreciation of physical capital, −π3 (ht , kt , ht+1 ).
    We can now characterize the steady state equilibrium. Because in equi-
librium there is no entrance, all firms have the economy-wide knowledge H.
The convergence to the economy-wide average is the result of the spillovers
in the accumulation of knowledge. Because of this, firms with lower than
average knowledge tend to invest more. Thanks to the complementarity of
knowledge and physical capital, all firms accumulate the economy-wide level
of physical capital. The values of H and K are determined by conditions
(13) and (14) after imposing the steady state conditions, that is:

          βπ2 (H, K, H) = 1                                                              (15)
                                                                                    
          −π3 (H, K, H) + ϕ2 (H, H; H) = β π1 (H, K, H) − ϕ1 (H, H; H) (16)

                                            16
    Appendix C shows that the steady state values of H and K are unique.
After solving for H and K, we can then solve for the steady state payment
w. This requires us to solve for the whole transition experienced by a ’new
firm’, as characterized by the first order conditions (11)-(14). Even if in
equilibrium there are neither quitting innovators nor entrance of firms, the
value of w depends on the value of a new firm V (H).
    Conditions (15) and (16) also reveal that the entry cost τ does not affect
the steady state values of K and H. We will see in the next section that this
does not hold when there is limited commitment also from the investor.6

5.2    Equilibrium with double-side limited commitment
Let’s start with the enforcement constraints imposed on the previous prob-
lem with investor’s commitment. These constraints, before and after the
investment in knowledge, can be written as:
             ∞         h                     i
                   β j−t wj − ϕ(hj , hj+1 ; H) ≥ V (ht )
             X
                                                                                    (17)
             j=t
              ∞        h                     i
                   β j−t wj − ϕ(hj , hj+1 ; H) ≥ −ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) + Vb (ht+1 )
             X
                                                                                    (18)
             j=t


    Appendix B shows that V (ht ) > −ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) + Vb (ht+1 ). This implies
that the investor has an ex-post incentive to renegotiate the promised pay-
ments. That is, the lack of credibility of the one-period economy is recurrent
in the infinite horizon economy
    Let hN  ew
          t+1 = f (ht ) be the investment in knowledge chosen by a new firm
in the entry period, when the initial knowledge of the innovator is ht and the
investor does not commit to the contract. The next proposition establishes
that, with double-side limited commitment, incumbent firms choose the same
knowledge investment as new firms.

Proposition 3 With double-side limited commitment, the knowledge invest-
ment chosen by an incumbent firm is equal to the knowledge investment cho-
sen by a new firm, that is, hOld    N ew
                             t+1 = ht+1 = f (ht ).

   6
    As we will show in Appendix G, when p is not arbitrarily close to 1, the steady state
with investor’s commitment does depend on τ . In this case the limited enforcement from
the investor amplifies the negative effects of barriers to entry.


                                           17
Proof 3 See Appendix D.

    Since the firm can renegotiate the promised payments after the investment
in knowledge, the innovator would not stay unless the firm agrees to the same
knowledge investment chosen by a new firm. In this way, the innovator keeps
the outside value high and prevents the firm from renegotiating.
    Let J(ht ) be the repudiation value for the innovator when neither the
investor nor the innovator commit to the contract. Furthermore, let J(hb
                                                                          t+1 )
be the corresponding value after the investment in knowledge. Given the
above proposition, the optimization problem for a new firm, started at t = 0,
can be written as:
                                              ∞       h                     i
                                                    β t wt − ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H)
                                              X
          J(h0 ) =            max                                                               (19)
                        h1 ,{wt , kt+1 }∞
                                        t=0   t=0

                               subject to

          ∞         h                                 i
                β j−t wj − ϕ(hj , hj+1 ; H) ≥ J(ht ),
          X
                                                                                    for t ≥ 0
          j=t
                                      ∞         h                               i
                                              β t π(ht , kt , ht+1 ) − wt − kt+1 ≥ 0
                                      X
          −τ h1 − w0 − k1 +
                                       t=1

          ht+1 = f (ht ),                                  for t > 0

    Notice that only the initial knowledge h1 is chosen in this problem. Future
values are determined by the investment policy of future new firms, that is,
ht+1 = f (ht ). We have not included the enforcement constraint after the
investment in knowledge since it is already imbedded in f (ht ).
    The solution to this problem involves a non-trivial fixed point problem.
First, as with the previous problem, the enforcement constraints involve the
outside value J(ht ), which is derived from the optimization problem solved
by a new firm. Second, the policy function f (ht ), which is taken as given by
an incumbent firm, is also the policy function obtained as the solution of the
same optimization problem. Solving for endogenous participation constraints
is relatively new in the literature since they are often imposed exogenously
by assuming autarky values.
    A detailed characterization of the solution is given in Appendix E. It
should be noticed that conditions (11) and (12) derived in the environment

                                                      18
with investor’s commitment, are also valid in the case with double-side lim-
ited commitment. The optimality condition for the accumulation of knowl-
edge, however, is different. For new firms this is given by:
                             (
                                                                                       
 τ + ϕ2 (ht , ht+1 ; H) = β π1 ht+1 , kt+1 , f (ht+1 ) − ϕ1 ht+1 , f (ht+1 ); H
                                                                                     )
                                     h                             i
                                 + π3 ht+1 , kt+1 , f (ht+1 ) + τ f1 (ht+1 ) (20)

    For incumbent firms there is no optimality condition for the investment
in knowledge since they take as given the investment policy f (ht ).
    Imposing the steady state conditions ht = ht+1 = H and kt = kt+1 = K,
conditions (12) and (20) become:


         βπ2 (H, K, H) = 1                                                               (21)
                                 (
                                                                          
         τ + ϕ2 (H, H; H) = β π1 H, K, f (H) − ϕ1 H, f (H); H
                                                                                     )
                                                     h                         i
                                              +f1 (H) π3 H, K, f (H) + τ                 (22)

    Differently from the case in which the investor commits to the contract,
these two conditions are no longer sufficient to determine the steady state
values of H and K. The unknown function f (H) also need to be determined.
This requires us to solve for a fixed point problem. Denote by h0 = ψ(h; f )
the policy function that solves problem (19), for given f . The policy function
satisfies the first order condition (20) and in equilibrium f (H) = ψ(H; f ).
    Because incumbent firms innovate at the same rate as new firms, condi-
tion (20) also determines the investment in knowledge of incumbent firms.
Therefore, in order to determine whether the lack of commitment leads to
higher or lower investment in knowledge, we have to compare condition (20)
to the optimality condition for the investment in knowledge when the investor
commits to the long-term contract, that is, condition (14).
    Let H C be the steady state knowledge in the economy in which the in-
vestor commits, and H N C the steady state knowledge without commitment.
We then have the following proposition:


                                         19
Proposition 4 Suppose that f1 (H) ≤ 1. Then the steady state value of
H N C is strictly decreasing in τ and there exists τ̄ > 0 such that H N C > H C
for τ < τ̄ and H N C < H C for τ > τ̄ .

Proof 4 See Appendix F.

     Notice that the proof is based on the assumption that f1 (H) ≤ 1, that
is, the derivative of the policy function at the steady state equilibrium is not
greater than one. We have checked this condition numerically. Therefore,
when contracts are not enforceable for both parties, neither for the innova-
tor nor for the investor, the start-up cost is harmful for the accumulation
of knowledge. With low barriers, the economy experiences a higher level
of income than in the economy with commitment. This could be welfare
improving if there are spillovers in the accumulation of knowledge.

6       Quantitative application

In this section we use the model to quantify the contribution of the cost of
business start-up to generate cross-country income inequality. In the quanti-
tative application we focus on the ‘cost of business start-up’ because of data
availability. It should be clear, however, that our theory is more general and
applies to other barriers that affect the mobility of knowledge.
    We calibrate the economy to the United States and then we ask how much
of the cross-country income gaps from the United States can be accounted by
the observed cost of business start-up. The discount factor, β, the production
parameter, α, and the depreciation parameter, δ, are calibrated to replicate
the following moments: an interest rate of 5 percent, a capital income share
of 33 percent and a capital-output ratio of 3. This implies β = 0.9524,
α = 0.33 and δ = 0.06. Notice that the three moments are invariant to the
entry barrier τ , and therefore, they are constant across countries.7
    7
    While it is easy to see the mapping between the first two moments and the first
two parameters (β = 1/(1 + r) and α = rK/Y ), less obvious is the mapping between
δ and the capital-income ratio. From condition(12), evaluated at the steady, we have
βπ2 (H, K, H) = β[1 − δ + α(K/H)α−1 ] = 1. Given the output function Y = H 1−α K α ,
the capital-output ratio can be written as K/Y = (K/H)1−α . Using this expression to
eliminate K/H in the previous condition we get β[1 − δ + α/(K/Y )] = 1. Therefore, after
choosing β and α, the parameter δ is uniquely determined by the capital-output ratio.



                                          20
   The effort cost function is derived from the accumulation equation for the
stock of knowledge, which is assumed to take the form:
                                                              ν
                              ht+1 = (1 − φ)ht + Htθ e1−θ
                                                      t

where Ht is the average level of knowledge, et is the effort cost to accumulate
knowledge and φ is the depreciation rate. The parameter ν < 1 captures the
return to scale in the accumulation of knowledge and θ < 1 the leakage or
spillover effects. Inverting we get the cost function:
                                                                        1
                                                 [ht+1 − (1 − φ)ht ] (1−θ)ν
                     et = ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; Ht ) =                θ
                                                           Ht1−θ
which is homogeneous of degree ρ = (1 − θν)/(1 − θ)ν.
    The depreciation of knowledge results from working directly with the
stationary version of the model, detrended by the rate of worldwide knowl-
edge. The parameter φ is then approximately equal to the exogenous rate
of growth.8 Assuming that the economy grows at 1.8 percent per year, we
set φ = 0.018. This is about the average growth rate in per-capita GDP
experience by the US during the last century.
    The values of the other two parameters, θ and ν, are more controversial.
Manuelli & Seshadri (2005) uses a similar specification of the investment
function, within an overlapping generation model, but without externalities.
In order to generate some key properties of the life-time profile of earnings,
they choose a return to scale of 0.93. This is also the value estimated by
Heckman, Lochner, & Taber (1998). We use this value to calibrate ν based
on the assumption that there is sufficient intergenerational transmission of
human capital.9 For the baseline parametrization we assume no externalities,
   8
     The original (undetrended) function for the accumulation of knowledge is ht+1 = ht +
  1−ν
H t (Htθ e1−θ
          t   )ν , where H t is the worldwide knowledge, external to an individual country,
which grows at the constant rate ḡ. Normalizing all terms by H t , the investment function
becomes ht+1 = (1 − φ)ht + A(Htθ e1−θ t  )ν , where φ = ḡ/(1 + ḡ) ' ḡ and A = 1/(1 + ḡ).
Because A acts as a rescaling factor, we can set A = 1.
   9
     In Manuelli & Seshadri (2005) the cost of human capital investment has two com-
ponents: time and expenditures. Our specification does not distinguish between these
components and the investment cost is captured by the single variable e. However, this
does not alter in important ways the main properties of the model. As Manuelli and
Seshadri show, the key parameter to replicate the life-time earning profile is not the rel-
ative importance of the two inputs but the return to scale parameter. Notice that the
depreciation rate φ = 0.018 is also equal to the value chosen by Manuelli and Seshadri.

                                             21
that is, θ = 0, which is the predominant assumption in the applied literature.
The sensitivity analysis will clarify the importance of these two parameters.

6.1   Results
Figure 2 plots the values of per-capita GDP and start-up costs for different
countries, and the values predicted by the model. As can be seen from the
figure, the cost of business start-up captures a substantial amount of cross-
country income variability.

Figure 2: Cost of business start-up and output per-capita - Data and model.




   To compute the average cross-country income gap from the US captured
by the model, we compute the following index:
                                             |ŷi − yi |
                                       P
                                           i
                         Index = 1 − P
                                          i |yU S − yi |

where yi is the actual income of country i, ŷi is the income predicted by
the model, given the observed cost of business start-up, and yU S is the US

                                     22
income. The model has been normalized so that it replicates the US income,
that is, ŷU S = yU S . The index is 1 if the model replicates perfectly the actual
cross-country incomes, that is, ŷi = yi . It is zero if the cost of business
start-up has no impact on the equilibrium income, that is, ŷi = yU S . For
the baseline calibration the index is 0.51. Therefore, the model accounts for
about half of the cross-country income gap from the US.
    Next we show the sensitivity of the results to ν and θ. Table 2 reports the
average income gap accounted by the model for alternative values of these
parameters. The model captures a higher proportion of gaps when the return
to scale is high and the externality is low. The results are especially sensitive
to the return to scale parameter. When ν is close to 1, the model generates
about 70 percent of the income gaps. In the limiting case of constant returns,
as in Lucas (1988) and Jovanovic (2004), there would be persistent growth
differences (endogenous growth), and therefore, unbounded gaps. But even
for small returns to scale, as in Parente & Prescott (2002) where ν = 0.6,
the model accounts for a non-negligible fraction of cross-country income gaps
(about 10 percent).

           Table 2: Average income gap accounted by the model.
                                        Value of ν
                             0.97   0.93 0.90 0.80        0.70   0.60
              Value of θ

                  0.0        0.68   0.51    0.42   0.26   0.18   0.13

                  0.1        0.66   0.48    0.40   0.25   0.17   0.12

                  0.2        0.64   0.46    0.37   0.23   0.15   0.11

                  0.3        0.62   0.43    0.35   0.21   0.14   0.10

                  0.4        0.59   0.40    0.32   0.19   0.12   0.09



   We have also calculated the ‘socially optimal’ steady state level of output,
that is, the output resulting from solving the planner’s problem. This differs
from the competitive output because of the externality. The steady state
values of H and K in the planner allocation are found by solving the first



                                           23
order conditions:

      βπ2 (H, K, H) = 1
                                          
      ϕ2 (H, H; H) − π3 (H, K, H) = β π1 (H, K, H) − ϕ1 (H, H; H)
                                                                                 
                                                                     −ϕ3 (H, H; H)

    These are similar to conditions (15) and (16) except for the additional
term ϕ3 (H, H; H) in the second equation. This term captures the externality
taken into account by the planner but ignored by the atomistic agents.
    Table 3 reports the ‘competitive’ output as a fraction of the ‘socially
optimal’ output, when there are no barriers to entry. A value greater than 1
means that there is over-accumulation of knowledge compared to the socially
optimal level. As expected, this arises when the splillovers are small or zero,
that is, θ ' 0. In this case moderate barriers to business start up would be
welfare improving. On the other hand, values smaller than 1 mean that there
is under-accumulation of knowledge, compared to the social optimum. In this
case barriers to entry are always suboptimal while moderate subsidies could
improve welfare. As can be seen from the table, the under-accumulation of
knowledge arises for moderate spillovers.

Table 3: Steady state output when contracts are not enforceable and there
are no barriers to entry. Numbers are relative to the socially optimal output.
                                       Value of ν
                            0.97   0.93 0.90 0.80           0.70   0.60
              Value of θ

                    0.0     1.81   1.28       1.18   1.08   1.04   1.03

                    0.1     0.80   0.92       0.95   0.99   1.00   1.00

                    0.2     0.41   0.71       0.80   0.92   0.96   0.98

                    0.3     0.25   0.58       0.70   0.88   0.94   0.97

                    0.4     0.17   0.51       0.64   0.84   0.92   0.96




                                          24
7   Covenants and other barriers to mobility

Other barriers to the mobility of innovators may have a similar effect in our
model as the cost of business start up. As we have discussed in the Intro-
duction, even within a similar legal and economic environment—resulting in
similar costs for business start up—there may be differences in other barriers.
Covenants is one of them. A covenant which is ex-post enforced prevents the
innovator from using the acquired knowledge if she moves to another firm.
    A natural way to model non-competitive covenants is by assuming that
a quitting innovator can use only a fraction ξ of the accumulated knowledge
in the new firm. This formulation also captures the case in which part of the
knowledge can not be used by the innovator due to the enforcement of IPR
if she does not have full control of the patent. To fix ideas, a more stringent
enforcement of covenants (or IPRs) is captured by a lower fraction ξ.
    To keep the presentation brief, we limit the analysis to the one-period
model. The extension to the infinite horizon will follow the same logic as the
analysis with entry costs. The problem solved by a new firm, started at the
beginning of the period, can be written as:
                                    (                                          )
             S(h0 ) =    max            − ϕ(h0 , h1 ) − k1 +   (ξh1 )1−α k1α       (23)
                        h1 ,k1 ,w


                               s.t.

                          w − ϕ(h0 , h1 ) ≥ D(h0 )

                        −w − k1 + (ξh1 )1−α k1α ≥ 0
   The problem solved by an incumbent firm is as in problem (1). The first
order conditions with respect to h1 , for incumbent and new firms, are:
                               !α                                     !
                         k1                             k0
                 (1 − α)       = ϕh1 (h0 , h1 ) + δ ·                              (24)
                         h1                             h0
                            !α
                         k1
                 (1 − α)       = ϕh1 (h0 , h1 ) · ξ α−1                            (25)
                         h1
   Because ξ < 1 and α < 1, the term ξ α−1 > 1. Therefore, the non-
competing covenants have the effect of increasing the cost of accumulating
knowledge and acts similarly to the entry cost τ . Proposition 1 becomes:


                                             25
Proposition 5 The knowledge investment of a new firm hN ew is strictly
increasing in ξ and there exists ξ¯ > 0 such that hN ew = hOld .

Proof 5 Using the first order condition for the choice of physical capital,
which is α(k1 /h1 )α−1 = 1 for both incumbent and new firms, the above first
order conditions can be rewritten as:
                                                               !
                              α
                                               Old        k0
                  (1 − α)α   1−α   = ϕh1 (h0 , h     )+δ·
                                                          h0
                             α
                  (1 − α)α 1−α = ϕh1 (h0 , hN ew )ξ −1

The proposition follows directly from these two conditions.              Q.E.D.

   All the results obtained in Section 4 trivially extend to the case of covenants
and other similar barriers to the mobility of knowledge.

8   Conclusion

We have developed a theory in which barriers to knowledge mobility affect the
accumulation of knowledge, and therefore, the level of income and growth.
The theory does not simply say that “competition enhances income and
growth”. It also shows that different forms of contract enforcement affect the
relation between competition, innovation and growth. In particular, when
both investors and innovators can not commit to long-term contracts, the rate
of innovation is determined by those firms that value innovation the most,
that is, start-up firms. As a result, high levels of innovation are associated
with low barriers to knowledge mobility. This leads to an overaccumulation
of knowledge which is suboptimal at the firm level but could be welfare
improving if there are spillovers.
    In a semi-endogenous growth model we have shown that barriers to busi-
ness start-up have the potential to explain significant cross-country income
differences. This is the first step to bring our theory to the data. We also
show that other barriers to knowledge mobility, such as strict enforcement of
Covenants or Intellectual Property Rights, can have similar effects, suggest-
ing a wide scope for the empirical application of the theory.




                                         26
Appendix

A    Proof of Proposition 2

We show that, if there is a positive measure of firms adopting the policy h1 = H1Old ,
then each of these firms will renegotiate the contract after the investment in knowl-
edge. Because in the second stage there will be at leat one unemployed innovator
with h1 = hOld
             1 , incumbent firms can use this innovator to replace the current one
and renegotiate the promised payments. Anticipating this, an innovators will stay
only if the firm agrees on h1 = hN  1
                                      ew .

    The next step is to show whether an individual firm deviates from the policy
h1 = hN 1
          ew when all firms adopt this policy. In this case there are no innovators

with h1 = hOld
             1   in the second stage, after the investment in knowledge. Because of
this, an individual firm is able to adopt the optimal policy h1 = hOld1   because all the
potential replacements have h1 = hN    1
                                           ew . Two cases are possible. If hN ew < hOld ,
                                                                            1        1
then none of the available replacements have the skills to run the new technology.
If hN
    1
      ew > hOld , the replacements have the ability to run the technology associated
             1
with hOld
       1 . However, they have to be paid more than the promised payment to the
incumbent innovator. Therefore, the threat of renegotiation is not credible.
    The only possible equilibrium is the one in which only one firm has h1 = hOld    1 .
                                               Old
Because this is the only firm with h1 = h1 , the absence of replacements with the
same skills allows the firm to make credible promises to the innovator. At the same
time, once there is one firm with h1 = hOld 1 , which provides a potential replacement,
a second firm will be unable to make a credible promise for the implementation of
the policy h1 = hOld
                   1 . This is enough to break the credibility of the promises made
by the second firm. Because there is a continuum of firms, the deviating firm is of
measure zero and its contribution to the aggregates is negligible.               Q.E.D.

B   First order conditions with investor’s commitment

We first prove the following lemma:

Lemma 1 The enforcement constraint ‘after’ the investment in knowledge is sat-
isfied if the enforcement constraint is satisfied ‘before’ the investment in knowledge.
Proof 1 The enforcement constraints can be rewritten as:
          ∞
          X          h                     i
                 β j−t wj − ϕ(hj , hj+1 ; H)    ≥ V (ht )
          j=t
          X∞         h                     i
                 β j−t wj − ϕ(hj , hj+1 ; H)    ≥ −ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) + Vb (ht+1 )
           j=t


                                               27
Therefore, to show that the second constraint is satisfied when the first constraint
is satisfied, it is enough to show that V (ht ) ≥ −ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) + Vbt (ht+1 ) for any
value of ht+1 . Because V (ht ) = maxh {−ϕ(ht , h; H) + Vb (h)}, we have that:
                              n                                 o
       V (ht ) = max − ϕ(ht , h; H) + Vb (h) ≥ −ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) + Vb (ht+1 )
                        h

for any ht+1 .                                                                                                 Q.E.D.

    Let’s consider now problem (9). Thanks to the above lemma we can ignore the
enforcement constraint after the investment in knowledge. Let γt be the Lagrange
multiplier associated with the enforcement constraint before the investment in
knowledge and λ0 the Lagrange multiplier associated with the participation con-
straint for the investor. The Lagrangian can be written as:
                   ∞
                   X           h                            i
        L =                 β t wt − ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H)
                   t=0
                                                                                              
                   ∞
                   X                 X∞           h                                   i       
               +            β t γt             β j−t wj − ϕ(hj , hj+1 ; H) − Vt (ht )
                                                                                              
                   t=0                   j=t
                                                         ∞
                         (                                                                                 )
                                                         X          h                                  i
                                                                t
               + λ0 −w0 − τ h1 − k1 +                          β π(ht , kt , ht+1 ) − wt − kt+1
                                                         t=1

    Define µt recursively as follows: µt+1 = µt + γt , with µ0 = 0. Using this
variable and rearranging terms, the Lagrangian can be written as:
         ∞
                   (                                                                               )
         X                                h                              i
 L =           β t (1 + µt+1 ) wt − ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) − (µt+1 − µt ) V (ht )
         t=0
                                                                        ∞
                                         (                                                                                 )
                                                                        X          h                                   i
                                                                               t
                              + λ0 −w0 − τ h1 − k1 +                          β π(ht , kt , ht+1 ) − wt − kt+1
                                                                        t=1

   This problem becomes recursive at any t > 0. Therefore, we can rewrite the
problem as follows:
                                (
                                         h                      i                          h                   i
    L = min max                      λ0 − w0 − τ h1 − k1 + (1 + µ1 ) w0 − ϕ(h0 , h1 ; H)                               (26)
               µ1 ≥0   w0 ≥0,
                       k1 ,h1
                                                                                                                   )
                                                                          − µ1 V (h0 ) + βW (µ1 , h1 , k1 )




                                                          28
with the function W is defined recursively as follows:
                                                  (
                                                       h                              i
    W (µt , ht , kt ) =     min        max        λ0 π(ht , kt , ht+1 ) − wt − kt+1           (27)
                          µt+1 ≥µt     wt ≥0,
                                     kt+1 ,ht+1
                                                                   h                      i
                                                       +(1 + µt+1 ) wt − ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H)
                                                                                              )
                                          −(µt+1 − µt )V (ht ) + βW (µt+1 , ht+1 , kt+1 )

for all t > 0.
    The first optimization problem (equation (26)) is the problem solved by a
new firm with initial state h0 and for a given λ0 . The lagrange multiplier λ0
is determined such that the participation constraint for the investor is satisfied.
Tighter is this constraint and higher is the value of λ0 . The second optimization
problem (equation (27)) is the one solved after entering. Therefore, this is the
problem solved by an incumbent firm that starts with states µt , ht and kt .
    Taking derivatives in problem (26) gives:

                 V (ht ) ≤ −ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) + wt + βV (ht+1 )                                (28)
                 1 + µt+1 ≤ λ0                                                                (29)
                 βπ2 (ht+1 , ht+1 , kt+1 ) = 1                                                (30)
                 λ0 τ + (1 + µt+1 )ϕ2 (ht , ht+1 ; H) = βW2 (µt+1 , ht+1 , kt+1 )             (31)

for t = 0 and with the envelope term given by:

W2 (µt , ht , kt ) = λ0 π1 (ht , kt , ht+1 ) − (1 + µt+1 )ϕ1 (ht , ht+1 ; H) − (µt+1 − µt )V1 (ht )

    The first order conditions in problem (27) are (28)-(30) and

   −λ0 π3 (ht , kt , ht+1 ) + (1 + µt+1 )ϕ2 (ht , ht+1 ; H) = βW2 (µt+1 , ht+1 , kt+1 )       (32)

    As emphasized above, the value of λ0 depends on the tightness of the partic-
ipation constraint for the investor. Assume that a new firm can choose h1 < h0
without any cost. This is equivalent to assuming that the innovator choose to
destroy part of the knowledge. Then we can prove that the investor is able to
break even if the contract chooses the unconstrained sequence of h. This implies
that λ0 = 1 and, from condition (29), µt = 0 for all t. Using this and substituting
the envelope term, conditions (28), (30), (31) and (32) become (11)-(14). Q.E.D.




                                                      29
C   Steady state equilibrium when the investor commits

Proposition 6 There is a unique steady state equilibrium in which all firms have
the same knowledge H and physical capital K.

Proof 6 Consider condition (16), which we rewrite here as follows:

          ϕ2 (H, H; H) + βϕ1 (H, H; H) = π3 (H, K, H) + βπ1 (H, K, H)

     The right-hand-side term remains constant for any value of H. In fact, taking
into account the functional form of π (see equation (8)), we have that π3 (H, K, H) =
−δ(K/H) and π1 (H, K, H) = δ(K/H) + (1 − α)(K/H)α . These two terms only
depend on the ratio K/H. From condition (15) we have that βπ2 (H, K, H) =
β[1 + α(K/H)α−1 ] = 1, which uniquely determines the ratio K/H.
     Let’s look now at the left-hand-side term. Because ϕ is homogenous of degree
ρ > 1, the derivatives ϕ1 and ϕ2 are homogeneous of degree ρ − 1. Therefore, the
left-hand-side term can be written as
                                            h                       i
         ϕ2 (H, H; H) + βϕ1 (H, H; H) = ϕ2 (1, 1; 1) + βϕ1 (1, 1; 1) H ρ−1

Because ρ > 1, this term is strictly increasing in H, converges to zero as H → 0
and to infinity as H → ∞. Therefore, there exists a unique value of H that solves
this condition. The uniqueness of H then implies the uniqueness of K. Q.E.D.



D   Proof of Proposition 3

Suppose that the knowledge investment chosen by a new firm is different from the
one chosen by an incumbent firm. Denote by hN          ew     Old
                                                     t+1 and ht+1 the investment of
                                                      N ew
new and incumbent firms, respectively. Because ht+1 solves the problem Vt (ht ) =
maxht+1 {−ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) + Vbt (ht+1 )}, we have that:

                       Vt (ht ) > −ϕ(ht , hOld        b Old
                                           t+1 ; H) + Vt (ht+1 )

if hOld     N ew
    t+1 6= ht+1 . But then constraints (17) and (18) cannot be both satisfied.
Therefore, the only feasible solution is ht+1 = hN ew
                                                 t+1 .                Q.E.D.




                                          30
E     Derivation of the first order condition (20)

Following the same steps of Appendix B, we can show that in a steady state
equilibrium, problem (19) can be reformulated as:
                                (
                                      h                            i            h                           i
      L = min max                 λ0 − w0 − τ h1 − k1 + (1 + µ1 ) w0 − ϕ(h0 , h1 ; H)                               (33)
               µ1 ≥0   w0 ≥0,
                       k1 ,h1
                                                                                                                )
                                                                       − µ1 J(h0 ) + βW (µ1 , h1 , k1 )

with the function W is defined recursively as follows:
                                                    (
                                                          h                                     i
     W (µt , ht , kt ) =         min max              λ0 π(ht , kt , f (ht )) − wt − kt+1                           (34)
                                µt+1 ≥µt   wt ≥0,
                                           kt+1
                                                                            h                               i
                                                               +(1 + µt+1 ) wt − ϕ(ht , f (ht ); H)
                                                                                                                )
                                                    −(µt+1 − µt )J(ht ) + βW (µt+1 , f (ht ), kt+1 )

for all t > 0.
    The first order condition with respect to h1 in problem (33) gives:

                       λ0 τ + (1 + µ1 )ϕ2 (h0 , h1 ; H) = βW2 (µ1 , h1 , k1 )                                       (35)

with the envelope condition given by:
                                                                                     
    W2 (µt , ht , kt ) = λ0 π1 ht , kt , f (ht ) + λ0 π3 ht , kt , f (ht ) f1 (ht )                                 (36)
                                                                                                     
                            −(1 + µt+1 )ϕ1 ht , f (ht ); H − µt+1 ϕ2 ht , f (ht ); H f1 (ht )
                            −(µt+1 − µt )J1 (ht ) + βW2 (µt+1 , ht+1 , kt+1 )f1 (ht )

   With limited enforcement, condition (35) must be satisfied at any point in
time. Substituting this condition in (36), we get:
                                                                                                     
       W2 (µt , ht , kt ) = λ0 π1 ht , kt , f (ht ) − (1 + µt+1 )ϕ1 ht , ft (ht ); H
                                                                       h                          i
                                    −(µt+1 − µt )J1 (ht ) + λ0 π3 ht , kt , f (ht ) + τ f1 (ht )

    Also in this case we can prove that the unconstrained investment in knowledge
capital allows the investor to break-even. Therefore, λ0 = 1 and µt = 0. Using
this result and substituting the envelope in (35) we get condition (20).   Q.E.D.


                                                              31
F   Proof of Proposition 4

In the steady state without commitment, potential new firms start with the same
knowledge H as incumbents firms. Because H = f (H), condition (22) can be
written as:
                         h                           i           h                 i
 τ + ϕ2 (H, H; H) = β π1 (H, K, H) − ϕ1 (H, H; H) + βf1 (H) π3 (H, K, H) + τ

which determines the steady state knowledge for incumbent and new firms when
the investor does not commit (double-side limited enforcement).
    This condition must be compared to the optimality condition that determines
the steady state knowledge when the investor commits to the contract (one-side
limited enforcement). This is given by equation (16), which we rewrite as:
                             h                            i
            ϕ2 (H, H; H) = β π1 (H, K, H) − ϕ1 (H, H; H) + π3 (H, K, H)

    The homogeneity of degree ρ of the cost function ϕ implies that the derivatives
are homogeneous of degree ρ − 1. Therefore, the above two conditions can be
rewritten as:
    h                            i
        ϕ2 (1, 1; 1) + βϕ1 (1, 1; 1) H ρ−1 = βπ1 (H, K, H) + βf1 (H)π3 (H, K, H) (37)
                                               h          i
                                        − τ 1 − βf1 (H)
    h                            i
        ϕ2 (1, 1; 1) + βϕ1 (1, 1; 1) H ρ−1 = βπ1 (H, K, H) + π3 (H, K, H)        (38)

Because ρ − 1 > 0, the left-hand-side terms are strictly increasing in H, converge
to zero as H → 0 and to infinity as H → ∞. We further observe that, as shown
in the proof of Proposition 6, the terms π1 and π3 only depend on the ratio K/H.
This term is uniquely pinned down by condition (12), which is the same for both
economies. Therefore, π1 (H, K, H) and π3 (H, K, H) do not change as H changes.
    Consider first the case in which the start-up cost is zero, that is, τ = 0. If
f1 (H) ≤ 1, as postulated in the proposition, the term βf1 (H) < 1. Because
π3 (H, K, H) < 0 and βf1 (H) < 1, the right-hand-side of (37) is bigger than the
right-hand-side of (38) for a given H. This implies that the value of H in the first
equation must be bigger than in the second, that is, H N C > H C . Notice that,
without capital obsolescence, π3 (H, K, H) = 0. Therefore, conditions (37) and
(38) are indistinguishable if τ = 0.
    Let’s consider now the case in which τ > 0. This variable only affects condition
(37). Because βf1 (H) < 1, then an increase in τ reduces the right-hand-side of
(37). The reduction in the left-hand-side term then requires a lower value of H.
For a sufficiently large τ , the steady state level of knowledge declines to the point
in which H N C < H C .                                                         Q.E.D.

                                          32
G    The role of barriers when the probability of survival is p < 1

We keep the assumption that the survival of the firm is observed after the invest-
ment in knowledge. Therefore, the level of ht+1 is predetermined for new firms.
The physical capital, however, is chosen after the realization of survival. This is not
essential for the properties of the equilibrium but it simplifies its characterization.
    If an incumbent firm survives, the innovator receives wt and stays with the
current employer. If the firm exits, the innovator is hired by a new firm and
receives the lifetime utility Vb (ht+1 ). We can then define the pseudo utility flow
for the innovator as follows:

            U (ht , ht+1 , wt ; H) ≡ −ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) + pwt + (1 − p)Vb (ht+1 )

    The contracting problem with investor’s commitment is similar to (9) af-
ter making the following changes: the term wt − ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) is replaced with
U (ht , ht+1 , wt ; H); future flows are discounted by pβ; the firm pays wt + kt+1 only
in case of survival.
    After making these changes, we repeat the steps used in Appendix B for the
case with p = 1. The first order conditions for a new firm at t = 0 are:

        V (ht ) ≤ −ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) + pwt + (1 − p)Vb (ht+1 ) + pβV (ht+1 )                   (39)
        1 + µt+1 ≤ λ0                                                                         (40)
        βπ2 (ht+1 , kt+1 , ht+1 ) = 1                                                         (41)
        λ0 τ + (1 + µt+1 )ϕ2 (ht , ht+1 ; H) =
                          (1 + µt+1 )(1 − p)D
                                            b 1 (ht+1 ) + pβW2 (µt+1 , ht+1 , kt+1 )          (42)

with the envelope term given by:

W2 (µt , ht , kt ) = λ0 π1 (ht , kt , ht+1 ) − (1 + µt+1 )ϕ1 (ht , ht+1 ; H) − (µt+1 − µt )V1 (ht )

    The first order conditions for t > 0 (incumbent firm) are (39)-(41) and

           −λ0 π3 (ht , kt , ht+1 ) + (1 + µt+1 )ϕ2 (ht , ht+1 ; H) =
                              (1 + µt+1 )(1 − p)Vb1 (ht+1 ) + pβW2 (µt+1 , ht+1 , kt+1 ) (43)

    Also in this case the investor breaks even when the contract chooses the un-
constrained knowledge. Therefore, λ0 = 1 and µt = 0. With all µ set to 0, the
function W is the surplus generated by an incumbent firm. Using this, the sur-
plus generated by a new firm, after the investment in knowledge and after the
realization of survival, can be written as:

                   Vb (ht ) = −τ ht+1 − kt+1 − wt + βW (1, ht+1 , kt+1 )

                                               33
from which we have Vb1 (ht+1 ) = −τ + βW2 (1, ht+1 , kt+1 ). Therefore, conditions
(42) and (43) can be rewritten as:
                                                                                                   
    (1 − p)τ + τ + ϕ2 (ht , ht+1 ; H) = β π1 (ht+1 , kt+1 , ht+2 ) − ϕ1 (ht+1 , ht+2 ; H)(44)
                                                               
    (1 − p)τ − π3 (ht , kt , ht+1 ) + ϕ2 (ht , ht+1 ; H) = β π1 (ht+1 , kt+1 , ht+2 )
                                                                                                
                                                                    −ϕ1 (ht+1 , ht+2 ; H) (45)

    The conditions for the accumulation of knowledge when the investor commits
to the contract are similar to the corresponding conditions derived earlier (see (13)
and (14)), with the exception of the constant term (1 − p)τ . The most important
difference respect to the case with p = 1 is that now the entry cost affects negatively
the steady state value of H even if the investor commits to the contract.
    Higher values of p (higher survival) increase the steady state value of knowledge
because it reduces the term (1 − p)τ . This corresponds to a reduction in the
marginal cost of accumulating knowledge for both new and incumbent firms.
    When both parties are unable to commit, the optimization problem can be
written as in (19), once we replace wt − ϕ(ht , ht+1 ; H) with U (ht , ht+1 , wt ; H),
discount future flows by pβ, and take into account that the firm pays wt + kt+1
only in case of survival. The first order condition for the accumulation of knowledge
of a new firm (t = 0) can be written as:
                                             (
                                                                        
    (1 − p)τ + τ + ϕ2 (ht , ht+1 ; H) = β π1 ht+1 , kt+1 , f (ht+1 )
                                                                                            )
                                                     h                              i
           −ϕ1 ht+1 , f (ht+1 ); H + f1 (ht+1 ) π3 ht+1 , kt+1 , f (ht+1 ) + τ                  (46)

which differs from (20) only in the constant term (1 − p)τ .
    Let H C be the steady state level of knowledge when the investor commits and
H N C the steady state level when the investor does not commit. Proposition 4 can
be reformulated as follows:

Proposition 7 Assume p ∈ (0, 1). The steady state values of H C and H N C are
both strictly decreasing in τ . Moreover, there exists τ̄ > 0 such that H N C > H C
for τ < τ̄ and H N C < H C for τ > τ̄ .

    Barriers to entry affect the accumulation of knowledge even when the investor
commits to the contract. However, their negative impact is stronger with double-
side limited commitment. The proof of the proposition, which is omitted for
economy of space, uses the same logic as in the proof of Proposition 4.

                                              34
References

Acemoglu, D. (1997). Training and innovation in an imperfect labor market.
    Review of Economic Studies, 64 (3), 445–64.

Acemoglu, D., Aghion, P., & Zilibotti, F. (2002). Distance to frontier, selec-
    tion, and economic growth. CEPR Discussion Paper #3467.

Acemoglu, D. & Pischke, J. (1999). The structure of wages and investment
    in general training. Journal of Political Economy, 107 (3), 539–72.

Acemoglu, D. & Shimer, R. (1999). Holdups and efficiency with search fric-
    tions. International Economic Review, 40 (4), 827–50.

Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., & Howitt, P. (2005). Com-
     petition and innovation: an inverted U-relationship. Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 120 (2), 701–28.

Aghion, P., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., Howitt, P., & Prantl, S. (2004). Firm
     entry, innovation and growth: theory and micro evidence. Unpublished
     manuscript. Institute for Fiscal Studies & Harvard University.

Aghion, P. & Griffith, R. (2005). Competition and Growth: Reconciling
     Theory and Evidence. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Anton, J. J. & Yao, D. A. (1994). Expropriation and inventions: appropriable
     rents in the absence of property rights. American Economic Review,
     84 (1), 190–209.

Baccara, M. & Razin, R. (2004). Curb your innovation: corporate conser-
     vatism in the presence of imperfect intellectual property rights. Un-
     published manuscript, New York University.

Boldrin, M. & Levine, D. (2006). Against Intellectual Monopoly. Electronic
     version, http://www.econ.umn.edu/ mboldrin/aim.html.

Bresnahan, T. F. & Malerba, F. (2002). The value of competitive innovation
     and U.S. policy toward the computer industry. In Bai, C.-E. & Yuen,
     C.-W. (Eds.), Technology and the New Economy, chap. 2, pp. 49–93.
     MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.



                                     35
Cooley, T. F., Marimon, R., & Quadrini, V. (2004). Aggregate conse-
     quences of limited contracts enforceability. Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, 111 (4), 421–46.

Gilson, R. J. (1999). The legal infrastructure of high technology industrial
     districts: silicon valley, route 128, and covenants not to compete. New
     York University Law Review, 74 (3), 575–629.

Greenwood, J. & Jovanovic, B. (1990). Financial development, growth, and
     the distribution of income. Journal of Political Economy, 98 (5), 1076–
     1107.

Heckman, J., Lochner, L., & Taber, C. (1998). Explaining rising wage in-
    equality: explorations with a dynamics general equilibrium model of
    labor earnings with heterogeneos agents. Review of Economic Dynam-
    ics, 1, 1–58.

Hyde, A. (2003). Working in Silicon Valley: Economic and Legal Analysis of
     a High-Velocity Labor Market. Sharpe, M.e., Inc., Armonk, New York.

Jones, C. I. (1995). R&D - Based models of economic growth. Journal of
     Political Economy, 103 (4), 759–84.

Jovanovic, B. (2004). The product cycle and inequality. Unpublished Man-
     uscript, Department of Economics, New York University.

Kocherlachota, N. R. (1996). Implications of efficient risk sharing without
     commitment. Review of Economic Studies, 63 (4), 595–609.

Lucas, R. E. (1988). On the mechanics of economic development. Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 22, 3–42.

Manuelli, R. & Seshadri, A. (2005). Human capital and the wealth of nations.
    Unpublished manuscript, University of Wisconsin in Madison.

Marcet, A. & Marimon, R. (1992). Communication, commitment and growth.
     Journal of Economic Theory, 58 (1), 219–249.

Mokyr, J. (1990). The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Eco-
    nomic Progress. Oxford University Press, New York.



                                    36
Parente, S. L. & Prescott, E. C. (2002). Barriers to Riches. MIT Press,
     Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Romer, P. M. (1990). Endogenous technological change. Journal of Political
    Economy, 98 (1), 71–102.

Romer, P. M. (1993). Two strategies for economic development: using ideas
    and producing ideas. World Bank Economic Review, 7 (1), 63–91.

Saxenian, A. (1996). Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon
     Valley and Route 128. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massa-
     chusetts.

World Bank (2005). Doing Business in 2005: Removing Obstacles to Growth.
     World Bank, Washington.




                                    37
