                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                A THEORY OF DEMAND SHOCKS

                                            Guido Lorenzoni

                                         Working Paper 12477
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12477


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




An earlier version of this paper circulated under the title: "Imperfect Information, Consumer Expectations,
and Business Cycles." I gratefully acknowledge the useful comments of Marios Angeletos, Olivier
Blanchard, Ricardo Caballero, Michele Cavallo, Mark Gertler, Veronica Guerrieri, Christian Hellwig, Steve
Morris, Nancy Stokey, Laura Veldkamp, Ivan Werning, Mike Woodford and seminar participants at MIT,
University of Virginia, Ohio State University, UCLA, Yale, NYU, Ente Einaudi-Rome, the Minnesota
Workshop in Macro Theory, Columbia University, Boston College, University of Michigan, University of
Cambridge, LSE, UCL, NBER EFG, Northwestern, Boston University. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Guido Lorenzoni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Theory of Demand Shocks
Guido Lorenzoni
NBER Working Paper No. 12477
August 2006
JEL No. E32, E40, D58, D84

                                            ABSTRACT


This paper presents a model of business cycles driven by shocks to consumer expectations regarding
aggregate productivity. Agents are hit by heterogeneous productivity shocks, they observe their own
productivity and a noisy public signal regarding aggregate productivity. The shock to this public
signal, or "news shock," has the features of an aggregate demand shock: it increases output,
employment and inflation in the short run and has no effects in the long run. The dynamics of the
economy following an aggregate productivity shock are also affected by the presence of imperfect
information: after a productivity shock output adjusts gradually to its higher long-run level, and there
is a temporary negative effect on inflation and employment. A calibrated version of the model is able
to generate realistic amounts of short-run volatility due to demand shocks, in line with existing
time-series evidence. The paper also develops a simple method to solve forward-looking models
with dispersed information.


Guido Lorenzoni
MIT Department of Economics
E52-251C
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
glorenzo@mit.edu
1        Introduction

A common idea, both in the business community and in policy circles, is that changes in
consumer and investor expectations have a causal eﬀect on cyclical fluctuations. In an old-
fashioned keynesian model a shift in consumer expectations would be captured by a “demand
shock,” simply added as an exogenous disturbance to the IS equation. Existing empirical
work in this tradition shows that a sizeable fraction of output volatility can be attributed to
demand shocks, and, in informal discussions, traces these shocks to changes in private sector
expectations.1 However, two questions remain open: is it possible to build a consistent general
equilibrium model that features these types of demand shocks, and, if so, what restrictions
does the theory impose on the economy’s response to them?
        In this paper I address these questions by building a model where the fundamental source of
uncertainty are long-run shifts in aggregate productivity, which are not directly observed by the
agents in the economy. Consumers and firms form expectations based on noisy public sources
of information, summarized by a public signal. The noise component in this signal, or “news
shock,” causes aggregate mistakes in agents’ expectations about productivity. These mistakes
lead to deviations of output from its natural level, which have the typical features of aggre-
gate demand shocks. They have a temporary nature and they generate positive comovement
between output, inflation and employment. On the other hand, actual productivity shocks,
in this environment, have the features of aggregate supply shocks. They generate negative
comovement both between output and inflation, and between output and employment.
        Next, I turn to the restrictions that this theory imposes on equilibrium behavior. If demand
shocks are caused by aggregate mistakes about productivity, then there must be a relation
between the volatility due to actual productivity shocks and the volatility due to temporary
mistakes. As a matter of fact, for each level of volatility in productivity shocks, the theory
places an upper bound on the amount of short-run volatility that demand shocks can generate.
This leads to the question: can the model generate a realistic fraction of demand-driven output
volatility? To address this issue, I calibrate the model, look at its implications for the variance-
decomposition of output at various horizons, and compare it with existing identified VAR
studies. This exercise shows that the model can produce time series with around 30% of
    1
    See Blanchard and Watson (1987), Shapiro and Watson (1988), Blanchard and Quah (1989), Gali (1992).
Note that most studies identify this type of demand shocks separately from monetary shocks and shocks to
government expenditure.




                                                   1
short-term volatility due to demand shocks. This is in line with existing evidence, based either
on long-run restrictions or on sign restrictions on output and price responses. The crucial
parameter that determines the relevance of demand shocks is the precision of the public signal.
When the public signal is either too precise or too imprecise, demand shocks play only a small
role. In the first case, the economy converges immediately to the full information equilibrium,
in the second case, agents tend to disregard public signals. The empirical success of the model
depends on choosing an intermediate level for the signal precision.
   The model introduces heterogeneous productivity shocks in an island economy à la Lucas
(1972). Agents observe productivity in their own island and a noisy public signal of the
aggregate level of productivity. The model features households of consumers-producers and
monopolistic competition. Each period, the household sets the price of his own good and
the consumer travels to the other islands to buy the goods produced there. As households
accumulate price and quantity signals they learn the aggregate productivity level, and, absent
further shocks, the economy converges towards its full information equilibrium.
   The “supply side” of the model is familiar. As in the classic papers by Phelps (1969) and
Lucas (1972), agents confound aggregate and relative price movements and this explains why
increases in nominal spending have non-neutral eﬀects. The novel element of the model is the
“demand side,” that is, the determination of nominal spending by optimizing consumers in an
environment with imperfect information. Each consumer believes, correctly, that equilibrium
output will gravitate towards the full information equilibrium, determined by average pro-
ductivity. This will determine the spending of other consumers, and, thus, aﬀect his expected
income. However, the latter also depends on the productivity of the sector where the consumer
works. If this sector is relatively less productive than the rest of the economy, the relative price
of its output would be higher and sales will be lower. Due to these two forces, the consumer’s
income expectations end up being an average between his expectation about aggregate pro-
ductivity and his observation of local productivity. Therefore, equilibrium output will be a
weighted average of perceived and realized productivity. The analysis in the paper shows how
the model parameters determine the relative weights of perceived and realized productivity,
and, hence, the eﬀects of news shocks on output.
   The main obstacle to studying news shocks in a model with imperfect information is the
analysis of forward-looking consumer behavior. I approach the problem by studying a log-
linear approximation of the optimal consumption policy. This does not eliminate the problem


                                                 2
of infinite regress that arises in models where agents “forecast the forecasts of others,” identified
in Townsend (1983). However, it reduces it to a problem of characterizing an infinite sequence
of average first moments of agents’ beliefs. Therefore, the paper also develops a tractable
method to study business cycle models with imperfect information.
      The paper is related to two recent strands of literature. First, Woodford (2002), Mankiw
and Reis (2002), and Sims (2003), have renewed attention to imperfect information and limited
information processing as causes of sluggish adjustment in prices and other macroeconomic
variables.2 On the other hand, a rich literature, starting with Morris and Shin (2002), has
emphasized that, in environments with strategic complementarities and imperfect information,
public sources of information can cause persistent deviations of economic variables from their
“fundamental” value.3 This paper puts together ideas from these two literatures to build
a theory of demand shocks. On the one hand, imperfect information causes sluggish price
adjustment and allows for demand shocks to have non-neutral eﬀects. On the other hand, the
presence of a public signal on productivity introduces a source of non-fundamental demand
shocks.
      An alternative take on the idea of cycles driven by expectational mistakes, is to focus on
mistakes by the monetary authority. This idea has been developed in models with sticky prices,
assuming that the central bank has imperfect information about the economy’s fundamentals.4
This paper takes a diﬀerent but complementary approach, by focusing on the private sector
mistakes and making stark simplifying assumptions about monetary policy. The integration
of optimal monetary policy in an environment with news-driven demand shocks is pursued in
a companion paper.5
      There is a growing empirical and theoretical literature that studies the eﬀect of news on
macroeconomic fluctuations, including Cochrane (1994), Danthine, Donaldson, and Johnsen
(1998), Beaudry and Portier (2004 and 2006) and Jaimovich and Rebelo (2005). This literature
has focused on news about the future. This is, in part, due to the fact that, in representative
agent models, there is always perfect information about current productivity. The theoretical
work in this area has shown that it is not easy, in a neoclassical environment, to obtain standard
  2
    See also Hellwig (2005), Milani (2005), Nimark (2005), Adam (2006), Bacchetta and Van Wincoop (2006),
Maćkowiak and Wiederholt (2006).
  3
    See Hellwig (2002), Angeletos and Pavan (2004), Amato, Morris and Shin (2005), Bacchetta and Van
Wincoop (2005), Allen, Morris and Shin (2006).
  4
    See Aoki (2003), Orphanides (2003), Reis (2003), Svensson and Woodford (2003, 2005), Tambalotti (2003).
  5
    Lorenzoni (2006).



                                                    3
comovements in consumption, investment, and hours, following a news shock. The problem,
which was early recognized by Barro and King (1984), is that if the current technological
frontier is unchanged, high expected future TFP will lead to reduced investment and to a
reduction in hours worked.6 This paper takes a diﬀerent course, and explores the idea that the
current aggregate state of the economy is uncertain. The relation between these two approaches
is further discussed in the conclusions.
        There is a vast literature that studies cycles due to shifts in expectations in models with
increasing returns and multiple equilibria.7 There are some common elements and some diﬀer-
ences between that literature and the approach in this paper. Both stress the role of comple-
mentarities in consumption decisions. In models with increasing returns this complementarity
is purely technological. In my approach, the complementarity is due to the permanent-income
behavior of consumers: an increase in aggregate spending increases the expected income of all
consumers. This complementarity explains why expected productivity, and not just realized
productivity, determine aggregate consumption.8 On the other hand, the approach based on
multiple equilibria is silent about the sources of expectations-driven fluctuations, relying on
pure shifts in beliefs. The approach followed here, instead, focuses on deriving theory-based re-
strictions on the behavior of demand shocks, exploiting the fact these are related to uncertainty
about long-run changes in productivity.
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. In Section 3 I derive the
main qualitative predictions of the model. Section 4 contains the calibration and variance-
decomposition exercise. Section 5 concludes.


2        The model

The setup is a model of monopolistic competition with heterogeneous productivity shocks
and an island structure à la Phelps-Lucas. Individual productivity is given by the sum of
an aggregate productivity shock and an idiosyncratic shock. Agents only observe individual
productivity and a noisy public signal of aggregate productivity.
        The economy is populated by a continuum of households indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. Each
    6
     Beaudry and Portier (2004) and Jaimovich and Rebelo (2005) show possible resolutions of this problem,
the first based on a model of economies of scope, the second based on adjustment costs in the investment rate,
and preferences that exhibit a weak short-run wealth eﬀect on labor supply.
   7
     See references in Benhabib and Farmer (1999).
   8
     The latter type of complementarity, sometimes called an “aggregate demand externality,” only matters
when price adjustment is sluggish and changes in nominal spending are non-neutral.


                                                      4
household is located on a diﬀerent island and is made of two agents: a consumer and a producer.
There are two type of commodities. A durable good, H, in fixed supply, and a continuum of
perishable specialized goods, each produced in a diﬀerent island. The durable good produces a
flow of services each period and can be transported across islands. It will be used as commodity
money, and will be called “money” from now on.
       Each period t a subset Jit ⊂ [0, 1] of specialized goods is selected randomly for each con-
sumer i. The subset Jit represents his consumption basket. The consumer travels to the
islands producing the goods in his basket and exchanges money for the specialized goods pro-
duced there. The random assignment of consumers to islands is necessary to generate noisy
price signals. The details are described in Appendix A.
       The essential ingredients of the model are: (i) unobservable aggregate productivity shocks,
(ii) partially revealing prices and quantities, (iii) variable velocity of circulation of money. The
island structure of the model delivers the first two features. The latter feature is necessary in
order to allow for demand shocks with a fixed money stock.9 The presence of a single asset,
money, that gives a flow of services is a way of obtaining variable velocity, while keeping the
simplest possible financial structure. Note that the model is formally equivalent to a model
with fiat money and real balances in the utility function. However, a setting with commodity
money allows for a more natural description of the trading protocol.

       Preferences and technology. Household preferences are represented by the utility func-
tion                                       "∞                           #
                                            X
                                                  t
                                       E         β u (Cit , Xit , Nit ) ,
                                           t=0
where
                                                                               1
                         u (Cit , Xit , Nit ) = log Cit + α log Xit +             N 1+η ,
                                                                             1 + η it
Cit is a composite good defined below, Xit is consumption of services of the durable good, and
Nit are hours worked in the production of good i.
       The composite consumption good is a standard CES aggregate including all the varieties
produced in the islands visited in period t:
                                                      µZ       σ−1
                                                                        ¶    σ
                                                σ                           σ−1
                                             − σ−1              σ
                                   Cit = m                    Cijt dj             ,
                                                        Jit
   9
    In the Lucas (1972) model, as in the recent versions of Woodford (2002) and Hellwig (2005), the cash-in-
advance constraint is always binding. Therefore, the only type of shocks to nominal spending that are allowed,
are exogenous shocks to money supply.


                                                       5
with σ > 1, where Cijt is the consumption of good j by consumer i, and m is the measure of
Jit , which is constant.
       The production function on island i is linear and is given by

                                                 Yit = Ait Nit .

The productivity parameters Ait are diﬀerent across islands and are the fundamental source
of uncertainty in this economy.
       There is a fixed stock H̄ of money in the economy. Each period the household starts with
the initial stock Hit . Consumers carry Hit to the islands they visit and transfer Hit − Xit to
the local producers. The rest, Xit , produces services which generate the utility flow α ln Xit .
The money used in transactions, Hit − Xit , does not produce any service at date t.10 Money
is stored one for one from period t to period t + 1.

       Uncertainty. Let ait denote the log of Ait . The variable ait has an aggregate component,
at , and an idiosyncratic one,     it ,

                                                 ait = at +      it .
                                                            R1
The cross sectional distribution of        it   satisfies   0    it di.   The aggregate component at follows
the random walk:
                                                at = at−1 + ut .

The aggregate productivity shock ut is the fundamental aggregate shock in this economy. It
would be straightforward to add a deterministic component to productivity growth. To save
on notation, I normalize it to zero.
       At the beginning of each period, agents observe a public signal

                                                  st = at + et .

The noise component, et , is the “news shock” which will be at the center of the analysis. The
aggregate shocks ut and et are independent, serially uncorrelated, and normally distributed
                               ¡        ¢
with zero mean and variances σ 2u , σ 2e . For each agent i, the idiosyncratic shock, it , is
also normal, with zero mean and variance σ 2 , serially uncorrelated, and independent of the
aggregate shock.
  10
    The only role of this assumption is to ensure that the cash-in-advance constraint is never binding, so that
linearization methods can be employed.



                                                        6
       Finally, there is a “sampling shock,” ζ it , which determines a bias in the composition of the
consumption basket of consumer i. Namely, average productivity in the islands in Jit is equal
to at + ζ it . The sampling shock is i.i.d., normally distributed with variance σ 2ζ .

       Trading and information. The only trades allowed in this economy are spot trades of
goods for money. At the beginning of period t, producer i observes ait and st , sets the price
of his good, Pit , and stands ready to deliver any quantity of the good at that price.11 This is
the “pricing stage,” or stage I.
       After prices are set, consumer i travels to the islands in Jit and observes the prices of
the goods produced there. Then, he chooses the consumption vector {Cijt }j∈Jit , trades, and
enjoys the services of the money not used for transactions, Xit , where
                                               Z
                                  Xit = Hit −     Pjt Cijt dj.
                                                                Jit

This is the “trading stage,” or stage II. Consumers do not communicate with producers during
the trading stage, so consumers do not know the quantity traded in the home island when they
are making their spending decisions.
       At the end of the period, the consumer returns to his island and observes the quantity sold
by the producer, Yit . The stock of money at the end of the period is given by the money in
the hand of the consumer, plus the money accumulated by the producer. Thus, the household
budget constraint at date t is:
                                                       Z
                                   Hit+1 = Hit −               Pjt Cijt dj + Pit Yit .
                                                         Jit

The pattern of trade across islands is represented in Figure 1.12

       Equilibrium. Consider the vector zt , which summarizes the history of past aggregate
shocks:
                                       zt = hat , st , at−1 , st−1 , ...a0 , s0 i .

Let Z be the set of possible histories zt . Let μit be a probability measure on Rt−1 . It repre-
sents the beliefs of consumer i on the vector of realized productivity levels hat−1 , ...a0 i, at the
beginning of period t, before the current shocks are realized. Three objects will be used to
  11
     As usual in models of price setting, I assume that the size of the shocks is small, so that it is always optimal
to produce the quantity demanded.
  12
     The price index P it , used in the figure, is defined below.



                                                            7
Islands that buy in i at t




                                  Consumers spend
Island i                          PitYit

      Consumer and                                    Final balance
      producer                                        H it + Pit Yit − Pit C it
      observe st and ait.
      Set price Pit.



  Islands that sell to i at t       Consumer spend
                                    Pit C it




                                Figure 1: Timeline.




                                        8
define a symmetric rational expectations equilibrium. First, an individual pricing policy rule,
which takes the form Pit = P (Ait, Hit , μit ). Second, a consumption policy rule, which takes
                ¡                      ¢
the form Cit = C Ait , Hit , P it , μit , where the price index P it is defined as:
                                               µZ                 ¶    1
                                                                      1−σ
                                     P it =           Pjt1−σ dj             .                   (1)
                                                Jit

Third, a sequence of cross-sectional distributions for money holdings and beliefs, described by
the CDF G (Hit , μit ; zt ) for each zt ∈ Z.
    A symmetric rational expectations equilibrium is given by a pair P and C, and a sequence of
distributions G, that satisfy two conditions: optimality and consistency. Optimality requires
that the policy rules are optimal for the individual household, taking as given the cross sectional
distributions G and the fact that all other households follow P and C. Consistency requires
that, for each state zt+1 that follows zt , the cross sectional distribution G (.; zt+1 ) is derived
from the distribution G (.; zt ) using the individual law of motion for money holdings implied
by P and C, and using rational updating of agents’ beliefs. The details of the equilibrium
construction are in Appendix A.


3     News shocks, output and prices

In this section I analyze the equilibrium determination of output, prices and employment, first
in the case of full information and then in the case of imperfect information.

3.1    Full information

First, consider the simplest case, with no heterogeneity. Productivity is equal across islands,
σ 2 = 0, and, in a symmetric equilibrium, prices are identical across islands. In this case the
economy boils down to an economy with a representative consumer and full information about
current productivity. Given the assumption of log preferences and the absence of capital,
employment is constant in equilibrium and output is proportional to aggregate productivity.
All the proofs for this section are in Appendix B.




                                                      9
Proposition 1 In the representative agent case equilibrium output, employment and prices
are:                                    µ         ¶    1             µ         ¶    1
                                            σ−1       1+η                σ−1       1+η
                              Yt = At                       , Nt =                       ,
                                             σ                            σ
                                                     1 − β H̄
                                            Pt =                .
                                                   1 − β + α At

    The equilibrium price level Pt is inversely related to the productivity level At . Since the
supply of money is fixed, when the supply of specialized goods increases their relative price
falls. Given the assumptions made about preferences, Pt adjusts so as to keep a constant
velocity of circulation, Pt Yt /H̄.13
    Consider now the richer case where idiosyncratic uncertainty is present, i.e. σ 2 is positive,
but maintain the assumption of full information about current shocks. Under a log-linear
approximation, the following proposition shows that the aggregate behavior of the economy
is the same as in the representative agent case. From now on, I will use lowercase variables
to denote the logarithm of the corresponding uppercase variable. Also, to simplify notation, I
will omit constant terms when there is no risk of confusion.

Proposition 2 Under full information about current shocks aggregate output and prices, in
log-linear approximation, are:

                                               yt = at ,

                                               pt = −at .

    The proof of this result provides a useful introduction to the case of imperfect information.
Under full information, output is fully determined by the optimal pricing condition. The first
order condition for price setting can be written, in log-linear terms, as:

                                  pit − pit = −ait + cit + η (yit − ait ) .                               (2)

For an individual agent, pit − pit reflects the relative price of his output in terms of his con-
sumption basket. This equation can be interpreted as follows: the household sets his target
relative price pit −pit proportional to his marginal cost, measured in terms of consumption. His
  13
     The presence of a stochastic trend in Pt , inversely related to aggregate productivity growth, is a minor
nuisance associated to the assumption of constant money supply. The predictions regarding surprise inflation
are robust to diﬀerent scenarios for money growth. Section 4 shows that these predictions survive in a model
with a stationary price level. The case of constant money supply, on the other hand, has clear advantages in
terms of exposition.


                                                        10
marginal cost depends negatively both on his productivity, ait , and on his expected marginal
rate of substitution between consumption and leisure, captured by − (cit + η (yit − ait )).
       Aggregating both sides of (2), one obtains:

                                                0 = (1 + η) (yt − at )                                           (3)

and the first result follows. In the full information equilibrium, when agents set their price, pit ,
they perfectly forecast the price of their consumption basket. Moreover, the average relative
price across all agents in the economy must be zero (in log-linear approximation). This, given
the structure of the model, implies that output responds one for one to productivity.14
       Summing up, when shocks are fully observed, output is determined by the supply side of the
model and is completely independent of demand dynamics. The demand side only determines
equilibrium prices. The consumer Euler equation can be written as:
                                                                         £     ¤
                            cit = Et [cit+1 ] + ξ (hit − pit − cit ) + Et pit+1 − pit .                          (4)

where ξ is a positive constant, which depends on β and α.15 The term ξ (hit − pit − cit ) on
the right-hand side captures the service flow of money, as a fraction of nominal spending. The
         £    ¤
term Et pit+1 − pit captures the expected real interest rate, which is equal to the inverse
of expected inflation. Note that the relevant rate of inflation is individual specific, given the
diﬀerences in consumption baskets across agents.
       Aggregating both sides of (4) gives:

                                  at = Et [at+1 ] − ξ (pt + at ) + Et [pt+1 ] − pt ,                             (5)

where I use the result that output is equal to productivity and the assumption of constant
money supply. Substituting the candidate equilibrium prices on the right-hand side, the last
three terms cancel out. The equilibrium price path has the property that: (i) the service flow
of money is a constant fraction of nominal spending, (ii) the average expected real rate is
constant.16 Given that output is a random walk, the real rate is equal, up to a constant factor,
to the “natural interest rate” for this economy.
  14
     The same result holds if agents are restricted to observe only the aggregate shock at at the pricing stage,
but not the productivity shocks in the islands they will visit. In this case, agents can still perfectly forecast the
average price and the average consumption, and aggregating across agents still gives (3).
  15
     The expression for ξ is:
                                                   1−β α+1−β
                                              ξ=                    .
                                                     β       α
  16
       In fact, this is the only stationary price path consistent with (5).


                                                           11
3.2      Imperfect information

Turning to imperfect information, I now focus on a limit case that illustrates well the central
mechanism of the model. Consider the case where idiosyncratic uncertainty is large with
respect to the volatility of the innovations in aggregate productivity. That is, let the ratios
σ 2 /σ 2u and σ 2ζ /σ 2u approach infinity. At the same time, keep the ratio σ 2e /σ 2u constant, that is,
consider a fixed precision of the public signal st . Then, the relative precision of the private
signals observed by each agent –individual productivity levels and prices– becomes very
small. Therefore, agents put a very small weight on their private information when forecasting
aggregate variables. In the limit, their forecasts of aggregate variables are identical and are
solely based on the public signal st .17
       In equilibrium, at the end of each period t, agents learn the aggregate productivity shock
by observing their current sales. This happens because, by observing st and yit , the household
is able to infer exactly the shocks ut and et .18 Due to this result, at−1 is common knowledge
across agents at t, and agents only need to form expectations about the current shock ut .
Denote “public expectations” at time t as EtP [.] ≡ E [.|st , at−1 ]. The following proposition
characterizes the equilibrium.

Proposition 3 Let σ 2 /σ 2u = σ 2ζ /σ 2u = ∞ and σ 2e /σ 2u < ∞. Then, equilibrium output and
prices satisfy:
                                              ¡             ¢ ¡              ¢
                                  yt = at + λ EtP [at ] − at − pt − EtP [pt ]                                (6)
                                         λ+η ¡ P              ¢
                       pt − EtP [pt ] =         Et [at ] − at                                                (7)
                                        1 + ησ
where λ ∈ (0, 1). The public expectation of aggregate output and prices in the current and
future periods are:

                               EtP [yt+j ] = EtP [at ] for j = 0, 1, ...      ,

                               EtP [pt+j ] = −EtP [at ] for j = 0, 1, ...         .

       The constant λ is a function of all the model parameters, α, β, η and σ.19 In the remainder
of this section I will discuss various properties of λ.
  17
     Furthermore, given the high dispersion of price signals, expectations are, in the limit, the same at the
pricing and at the trading stage. Note that private shocks still matter for pricing and consumption decisions at
the individual level, and agents do not have common information regarding individual variables, like ait or pit .
Agents only agree on their expectations about aggregates.
  18
     This is a general result which does not depend on linearization nor on the assumption of large values for
σ /σ2u and σ2ζ /σ2u . See Appendix A, p. 28.
 2
  19
     See the proof of Proposition 3, in Appendix B.


                                                       12
   In this simple case, the responses of output, prices and employment are fully determined
by two variables: realized productivity, at , and the error in the public forecast of aggregate
productivity, at − EtP [at ]. The latter determines both the price surprise pt − EtP [pt ], and the
output gap yt − at .

3.2.1   Price and output responses

The expression for the public expectation of aggregate productivity is:
                                                              σ 2u
                                  EtP [at ] = at−1 +                 (ut + et ) .              (8)
                                                       σ 2u   + σ 2e
Substituting (8) in (6) and (7) gives the equilibrium responses of output and prices to the
underlying shocks, ut and et . The next proposition gives a characterization of these responses.

Proposition 4 Under the assumptions of Proposition 3, in equilibrium:
(i) a positive news shock, et > 0, increases output and employment, leads to a positive price
surprise and to a negative output surprise;
(ii) a positive productivity shock, ut > 0, increases output, reduces employment, leads to a
negative price surprise and to a positive output surprise.

   To gain some intuition for these results, it is useful to go back to the optimality conditions
at the pricing and at the consumption stage. Consider the eﬀects of a positive news shock
et . The public expectation of productivity increases, while actual productivity is unchanged.
Under imperfect information, the Euler equation becomes:
                                                                          £     ¤
                       cit = EitII [cit+1 ] + ξ (hit − pit − cit ) + EitII pit+1 − pit ,       (9)

where EitII [.] denotes the expectation of agent i at the trading stage. For the moment, fo-
cus on future expected consumption and leave aside the last three terms on the right-hand
side. Expectations about current productivity aﬀect expected future productivity, which will
determine future income. Moreover, they aﬀect the location of the demand curve faced by
producer at date t, which determines current income and, thus, individual money balances at
the beginning of period t + 1. Therefore, high expected productivity tends to increase expected
future consumption.
   Consider now the optimal pricing condition in the case of imperfect information:
                                                                   ¡                 ¢
                         pit − EitI [pit ] = −ait + EitI [cit ] + η EitI [yit ] − ait ,       (10)

                                                      13
where EitI [.] denotes the expectation at the pricing stage.20 When expected productivity is
higher than actual productivity, for producer i, he tries to increase the relative price of good
i. There are two reasons for this: high expected output shifts up the demand curve faced by
producer i, and high expected output leads to higher consumption by household i and, thus,
to higher marginal costs in terms of consumption. As all agents are trying to increase their
relative price, they end up increasing the absolute price level above their common target. Their
common mistake results in a positive surprise in the price level. This mechanism is closely
related to the mechanism in Phelps (1969) and Lucas (1972), where agents confound absolute
and relative price changes.
       Going back to the demand side, note that a positive price surprise tends to dampen the
response of aggregate consumption through its eﬀects on the expected real rate, as shown by
equation (9).21 This happens because a positive price surprise is associated to an increase
in the real rate perceived by consumers. This follows from three observations: (i) agents’
expectations about the current and the future aggregate price level are the same, (ii) at the
pricing stage, they observe exactly their own price, and, (iii) at the consumption stage, they
observe exactly the price of their consumption basket. The total response of output to a news
shock depends both on the eﬀect on expected income, discussed above, and on the eﬀect on
the expected real rate. Proposition 4 shows that the first eﬀect always dominates.
       This decomposition of the eﬀects of a news shock has a formal counterpart in the expression
for the coeﬃcient ψe , which represent the equilibrium response of output to et :
                                      µ             ¶
                                             λ+η        σ 2u
                                ψe ≡ λ −                       .                                                (11)
                                            1 + ση σ 2u + σ 2e

The term λ captures the eﬀect of et on expected income, while the term − (λ + η) / (1 + ση)
captures the eﬀect of et on the expected real interest rate. In the next sub-section, I will discuss
the eﬀect of the various model parameters on ψ e .
       Consider now the eﬀects of a productivity shock ut . This shock increases both actual
productivity, at , and the public expectation about it, EtP [at ]. However, due to imperfect
information, the eﬀect of ut on EtP [at ] is smaller than the eﬀect on at .22 Therefore, EtP [at ]−at
is negative when ut > 0, and gives a negative price surprise. This happens because the
  20
     Both (9) and (10) are derived in the general case, and do not use the assumption of large idiosyncratic
shocks.
  21
     The term ξ (hit − pit − cit ) does not add insight to the intuition. In fact, when β → 1 this term is negligible.
  22                             σ2
       See (8) and note that   σ2
                                  u
                                     2   < 1.
                                u +σ e




                                                         14
expected upward shift in the demand curve faced by each producer is smaller than the realized
productivity increase, and, thus, producers try to reduce their relative prices. On the quantity
side, consumption increases given that both expected income increases and the expected real
rate decreases. To derive the response of employment I need to determine whether the total
eﬀect on output is larger or smaller than one. Proposition 4 shows that the eﬀect on output is
smaller than one and employment decreases temporarily after a positive productivity shock.23

3.2.2      The eﬀect of news shocks

I turn now to the determinants of ψ e , defined in (11), which represents the response of output to
news shocks. Consider first the eﬀect of increasing the discount factor β. The next proposition
shows that as β approaches 1, the response of output to news increases and reaches its maximum
value for β = 1.

Proposition 5 The response of output to the news shock is bounded above by:
                                                     σ−1       σ 2u
                                         ψ̄ e ≡ η                      ,                                  (12)
                                                    1 + ση σ 2u + σ 2e

and limβ→1 ψ e = ψ̄ e .

       As consumers become more patient, their spending becomes more responsive to productiv-
ity expectations. Consider the average household with                   it   = 0. After a positive news shock,
expected current income increases less than expected future income. This is because household
i, observing his lower productivity today, increases the price of good i, and expects to sell less
than other households. In the future, household i expects his productivity to catch up with
the average level and the own price eﬀect goes away. As agents become more patient they tend
to respond more to future income, and, thus, they respond more to expected productivity.
       Consider now the eﬀect of the parameters σ and η on the response of output to news.
Remember that σ is the elasticity of demand and η is the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of
labor supply. It is useful to decompose the eﬀects of these parameters in two parts. First,
keeping λ constant, the parameters σ and η, aﬀect the response of the price surprise. Second,
the parameters aﬀect the parameter λ.
       Consider again the average household, with            it   = 0, after a positive news shock. Producer
i thinks his productivity, ait , is lower than expected aggregate productivity, Et [at ], and tries
  23
    The result that an increase in productivity leads to a temporary reduction in employment in an environment
with imperfect information has been independently derived by Kawamoto (2004).


                                                        15
to increase his relative price. However, the optimal price response to a perceived productivity
diﬀerential will be smaller if the elasticity of demand, σ, is higher or if the elasticity of labor
supply, 1/η, is lower. At the aggregate level this implies that an aggregate productivity mistake
will have smaller eﬀects on the price surprise. A smaller price surprise also means a smaller
eﬀect on the expected real rate, and thus a bigger response of consumption to the positive
increase in expected income. In conclusion, for a fixed λ, an increase in σ and η reduces the
price surprise, and increases the eﬀect on output.
         This is related to the notion that η and σ aﬀect the degree of strategic complementarity in
pricing. Through this channel, a higher degree of strategic complementarity in pricing increases
the output response to demand disturbances, as it is common in the neo-keynesian literature.24
         However, changes in σ and η also aﬀect the parameter λ, which determines the endogenous
response of consumption. Consider the case of σ. Under realistic assumptions about parame-
ters, λ is a decreasing function of σ.25 The intuition for this is the following. Consider again
the average household, after a positive news shock. Producer i is trying to increase his relative
price. A higher elasticity σ implies that his total sales will respond more to the relative price
increase.26 Therefore, the agent expected income responds less to the news shock. This means
that a higher σ induces consumers, in the aggregate, to respond less to news shocks. That is,
this mechanism tends to decrease λ.
         Therefore, in general, the relation between the parameters σ and η and the coeﬃcient ψ e
is ambiguous. In numerical examples with realistic parameter values, the first eﬀect tends to
dominate, and an increase in σ and η tends to increase ψ e . This is further illustrated in the
dynamic simulations below.


4         Equilibrium dynamics

In this section I use numerical simulations to analyze the dynamic responses of output, em-
ployment and prices, and to address a basic quantitative question: what fraction of output
volatility can be explained by news shocks? In particular, I look at the ability of the model to
replicate the variance decompositions obtained in existing empirical studies.
         In order to perform this quantitative exercise, I modify the model assumptions to obtain a
    24
     See the discussion in Chapter 3 (§1.3) of Woodford (2003).
    25
     In general, depending on parameters, λ can be either decreasing or increasing in σ, the same is true for η.
  26
     In part, this eﬀect is undone by the endogenous change in the optimal price: with higher elasticity the agent
will increase his price less. For realistic parameter values the direct eﬀect dominates.



                                                       16
more realistic behavior for nominal prices and to allow for interesting learning dynamics. The
details of the model, together with a description of the computational method used, are in
Appendix C. Here, I will give a brief overview of both.
       On the model side, it is useful to eliminate the mechanical relation between productivity
and the price level, which is due to the assumption of constant money supply. To do that,
I assume that the stock of money in the hands of each household grows over time, and that
the growth rate of the aggregate money stock is the same as that of aggregate productivity. I
also introduce a random component in individual money growth, so that agents cannot infer
aggregate productivity growth from observing it. Furthermore, the model, as it is, has no
learning dynamics and, thus, no propagation mechanism. The observation of output at the
end of date t, yit , together with the observation of st at the beginning of the period, fully
reveals the past shocks ut and et to each household. To introduce learning dynamics in the
model, I assume that each producer is also hit by a local demand shock, nit , which determines
the measure of consumers purchasing good i. The shock nit adds noise to the agents’ signals
and implies that households learn gradually about the underlying aggregate shocks. Once
more, the details can be found in Appendix C.
       To compute the equilibrium I need to find the coeﬃcients of the relation between aggregate
quantities and prices and the state zt . To solve for optimal individual behavior, I apply
a method of undetermined coeﬃcients, together with a Kalman filter to solve the agents’
                                                                                                   (T )
inference problem. The state space is approximated using the truncated state vector zt                    =
{at , st , ..., at−T , st−T }. For T suﬃciently large the choice of T does not aﬀect the results.27
       The parameter β is set equal to 0.99, so the time period can be interpreted as a quarter.
The value of η is set to 0.33, corresponding to a Frisch labor elasticity of 3, and the value
of σ is set to 7.5, which implies a mark-up of around 15%. Both values are in the range of
those used in existing DSGE studies with monopolistic competition and price rigidities. The
parameter α is set equal to 0.01 in the benchmark parametrization. This preference parameter,
together with β = 0.99, implies that the money-to-output ratio in steady state is equal to 2.
Considering that the durable good is the only form of financial wealth in the economy, this
does not seem an unreasonable parametrization.28
       It remains to choose values for the variance of the shocks. For a variance decomposition
exercise, in a linearized model, the choice of σ u is merely a normalization, and I set σ u = 0.1.
  27
       Typically 35 periods are suﬃcient for the parameterizations presented.
  28
       Moreover, as β is close to 1, the results presented are not sensitive to the choice of α.


                                                          17
For the noise in the public signal I choose a benchmark value of σ e = 0.62. The precision of
the public signal, 1/σ 2e , is the crucial variable that will determine the importance of demand
shocks. Therefore, in the following, I will consider a range of values for σ e and look at their
implications for short-run output volatility. The main role of the idiosyncratic shocks in the
model is to prevent full information revelation. Therefore, I calibrate their variance in order
to obtain a realistic speed of learning in the economy. I measure the speed of learning in
terms of the number of periods agents take to learn about a permanent productivity shock. In
                      R1
particular, let at|t ≡ 0 Eit [at ] di, denote the average expectation about current productivity.
The average speed of learning is measured by the number of periods it takes for at − at|t
to fall by a factor of 1/2, after a permanent productivity shock ut , i.e., by the half-life of
the average expectational error. I choose a speed of learning of 4 periods (one year).29 The
historical experience with major shifts in productivity growth is that they have typically been
recognized by professional economists and central bankers with a lag of at least two years. On
this basis, this parametrization seems a reasonable starting point.

4.1       Dynamic responses

Figure 2 shows the responses of output, employment and prices to the fundamental shock, ut ,
and to the news shock, et .30 The last panel illustrates the dynamics of the average expectational
                                                            R1
error regarding aggregate output, yt − yt|t , where yt|t ≡ 0 Eit [yt ] di.
       The qualitative responses are analogous to the ones obtained in Proposition 4 for the model
with no learning dynamics. The qualitative behavior of output and inflation is consistent with
the evidence from identified VARs, e.g. Shapiro and Watson (1988) and Gali (1992, Table
III). Namely, following the news shock both output and inflation increase, while following
a productivity shock output increases, while inflation decreases. Furthermore, the negative
response of employment to the permanent technology shock is consistent with the evidence
presented in Gali (1999) and Francis and Ramey (2003). Recently, there has been substantial
controversy regarding this empirical finding and more generally regarding the use of VAR
evidence with semi-structural identification assumptions.31 This controversy has highlighted
  29
       In the benchmark calibration this corresponds to:

                                             σ = σ ζ = σn = σ v = 5.

I have experimented with diﬀerent sets of values for these four parameters. For a given speed of learning,
aggregate behavior does not seem to depend on the specific values chosen for the four parameters.
  30
     For both, I report the response to a one-standard-deviation shock.
  31
     See Christiano, Eichenbaum and Viguﬀson (2003), Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2004), Gali and Rabanal


                                                           18
                0.1                                        0.04

               0.08
                                                           0.02
           y t 0.06                                   nt
                                                               0
               0.04
                                                           -0.02
               0.02

                  0                                        -0.04
                       0   5        10        15                   0   5    10     15


               0.04                                        0.05

               0.02
          pt                                       y t-y t|t
                  0                                            0

               -0.02

               -0.04                                       -0.05
                       0   5        10        15                   0   5    10     15




Figure 2: Impulse responses of prices, output, employment and the output surprise.
Solid line: response to productivity shock. Dashed line: response to news shock.




                                                   19
the need of a theory-based rationale for identification assumptions. The present model has the
advantage of being consistent with the identification in a large body of empirical work.32
    Finally, news shocks are associated to negative output surprises, while fundamental shocks
to positive output surprises. This is an additional testable restriction of the model, which can
potentially be taken to the data, using survey data to estimate yt|t .

4.2    Comparative dynamics

The analysis in Section 3 shows that the model parameters aﬀect the economy response to
the two shocks by determining: (i) the response of spending to expected productivity changes,
(ii) the degree of strategic complementarity in pricing. Here, I show that these observations
extend to the model considered here. Figure 3 illustrates the eﬀect of changing β from 0.99
to 0.95. The top two panels report the benchmark impulse responses, for comparison. As
discussed in sub-section 3.2.2 the parameter β is determinant for the response of consumption
to expected productivity. A reduction in β, by shortening the horizon of the consumers, reduces
the response of spending to expected changes in productivity. As a consequence, news shocks
have a smaller eﬀect, both in terms of prices and in terms of quantities.
    Figure 4 shows the responses of prices and output for diﬀerent levels of σ. In the top two
panels I report the results for the benchmark level σ = 7.5 and in the bottom two panels
those for σ = 15. A higher level of elasticity of substitution increases the degree of strategic
complementarity in pricing, it reduces the response of prices to both shocks, it increases the
response of output to a news shock and reduces the response of output to a fundamental shock.

4.3    How much short-run volatility can news shocks generate?

The structure of the model imposes a bound on the fraction of output volatility that can be
explained by the news shock. If the public signal is very noisy agents would put little weight
on it, while if the signal is very precise the economy would converge very fast to the full
information equilibrium. In both cases, the news shock would only explain a small fraction
of output volatility. Therefore, the question I address here is whether intermediate levels of
signal precision can generate realistic values for the fraction of output volatility explained by
the demand shocks.
(2004).
  32
     In particular, the model is consistent both with long-run restrictions à la Blanchard and Quah (1989), and
with sign restrictions, used e.g. in Blanchard (1989) and Canova and De Nicolo (2002).



                                                      20
                0.1                                      0.04

                                                         0.02
          yt                                        pt
               0.05                                         0

                                                         -0.02

                 0                                       -0.04
                      0    5              10   15                0   5              10   15
                               β = 0.99                                  β = 0.99

                0.1                                      0.04

                                                         0.02
          yt                                        pt
               0.05                                         0

                                                         -0.02

                 0                                       -0.04
                      0    5              10   15                0   5              10   15
                               β = 0.95                                  β = 0.95



Figure 3: Changing the discount factor.
Solid line: response to productivity shock. Dashed line: response to news shock. Shocks as in Figure 3.




                                                    21
                0.1                                     0.04

                                                        0.02
          yt                                       pt
               0.05                                        0

                                                        -0.02

                 0                                      -0.04
                      0   5             10    15                0   5             10   15
                              σ = 7.5                                   σ = 7.5

                0.1                                     0.04

                                                        0.02
          yt                                       pt
               0.05                                        0

                                                        -0.02

                 0                                      -0.04
                      0   5             10    15                0   5             10   15
                              σ = 15                                    σ = 15



Figure 4: Changing the elasticity of substitution σ.
Solid line: response to productivity shock. Dashed line: response to news shock.




                                                   22
                   0.1                                        0.1



             yt                                         yt
                  0.05                                       0.05




                    0                                          0
                         0    5               10   15               0    5               10   15
                                  σ e = .05                                  σ e = .3

                   0.1                                        0.1



             yt                                         yt
                  0.05                                       0.05




                    0                                          0
                         0    5               10   15               0    5               10   15
                                  σ e = .6                                   σ e = 1.5




Figure 5: Signal precision and output responses.
Solid line: response to productivity shock. Dashed line: response to news shock.


      Figure 5 illustrates the eﬀects of changing the precision of the signal (i.e. changing σ e ) on
the dynamic response of output to the two shocks.33 The first panel shows that if the public
signal is very precise, the news shock has very small and temporary eﬀects. Moving to the
second and third panel, the eﬀect of the news shock increases. However, in the fourth panel
the noise becomes so large that the eﬀect on impact of the news shock tends to decrease. On
the other hand, as the quality of the signal deteriorates agents take a longer time to learn the
long-run equilibrium, and the eﬀect of the news shock becomes more persistent.
      Table 1 summarizes the model implications in terms of the fraction of output volatility
explained by the news shock at diﬀerent horizons. For comparison, the last column reports
the values obtained by Gali (1992) (Table IV), where the empirical counterpart to the news
shock and the productivity shock are, respectively, the “IS shock” and the “supply shock.”
      The first column reports the variance decomposition for the benchmark parameters. The
 33
      Note that each panel reports the response to a one-standard-deviation shock.


                                                        23
model appears able to generate demand-driven short-run volatility in line with empirical ob-
servations, both for output and for prices. The two main results from this table are: (a) it
is possible to choose σ e so that the news shock generates 30% of output volatility on impact;
(b) if one chooses σ e to generate this amount of short-run volatility, then the news shock ex-
plains 15% of output volatility at a one-year horizon, i.e., around 3/4 of the observed output
volatility due to demand shocks at the same horizon (19%). Result (a) is not obvious given the
non-monotonicity of the relation between σ e and short-run volatility discussed above. This is
illustrated in columns (ii) and (iii) which show that, if I move away from an intermediate range
for σ e , I obtain lower demand-driven volatility. Result (b) clearly depends on the choice of the
learning speed. This is illustrated in column (iv). In the benchmark calibration I set σ equal
to 5, in order to obtain a learning-time of 4 quarters. If I reduce σ to 1, column (iv) shows that
the learning time falls to 3.4 quarters and the eﬀect of the news shock drops considerably.34
Summing up, with a learning time of one year, the pure eﬀect of learning dynamics is able to
generate demand shocks that are both sizeable and persistent.
      Notice that, in order to obtain a learning time of 4 quarters, I have to assume a very high
volatility for idiosyncratic shocks, namely shocks 50 times larger than aggregate productivity
shocks. This extreme assumption is needed for two reasons. First, to keep the model tractable, I
have assumed that all shocks are i.i.d., so that every agent collects a large sample of independent
observations in a short amount of time. Allowing for a more realistic autocorrelation structure
for the shocks would slow down learning and introduce an additional source of persistence.
Second, the model structure is very simple, and, in particular, prices are a very good signal of
aggregate expectational mistakes. Introducing monetary shocks uncorrelated to productivity,
or other sources of nominal volatility, would confound the inference problem of the agents. This
would allow me to obtain the same learning speed with more realistic levels of idiosyncratic
volatility. At this stage, large idiosyncratic shocks are a stand-in for all the unmodelled sources
of uncertainty that complicate the learning problem of actual consumers. Further work is
needed to address more explicitly these sources of uncertainty and assess their relevance. One
possible avenue to consider, is to model the idiosyncratic noise as due to costly information
processing, rather than to actual noisy observations, as in the limited attention approach of
Sims (2003).
 34
      Here I am changing the value of σ , keeping the other idiosyncratic variances constant.




                                                       24
          Table 1. Variance decomposition
                               i          ii                  iii         iv            Gali (1992)
                          σ e = .62   σ e = .3            σ e = 1.5   σ e = .62
                           σ =5       σ =5                 σ =5        σ =1
          Output
           1 quarter             0.30      0.27                0.19         0.22                0.31
           2 quarters            0.24      0.19                0.15         0.17                  –
           5 quarters            0.14      0.09                0.10         0.09                0.19
           10 quarters           0.07      0.03                0.05         0.04                0.10
          Prices
           1 quarter             0.53      0.58                0.34         0.52                0.37
           2 quarters            0.53      0.58                0.33         0.52                  –
           5 quarters            0.52      0.58                0.32         0.52                0.52
           10 quarters           0.52      0.58                0.30         0.52                0.51
          Learning time           4.0        2.1                6.9          3.4
           Note: The table reports the fraction of forecast volatility explained by the et shock.
           Last column from Table IV in Gali (1992).




5        Concluding remarks

In this paper I have derived the basic implications of a model of demand shocks based on
misperceptions about aggregate productivity. In particular, I have focused on the fraction
of output volatility that is explained by demand shocks. Further restrictions can be derived
and tested. One could be more specific about the information in the public signal st , and
test the model implications in terms of the economy’s response to this signal. For example,
one can focus on the information contained in publicly released macroeconomic statistics.
Rodriguez Mora and Schulstald (2006) present evidence showing that aggregate consumption
responds more to public announcements regarding GNP, than to actual movements in GNP.35
This evidence is clearly consistent with the model presented here. Moreover, recent work
by Beaudry and Portier (2006) shows that the stock market can be used as a measure of
aggregate expectations about future productivity. The model in this paper does not fit well with
the identification strategy in their paper, given that it only allows for permanent technology
    35
    The authors look at the eﬀect on aggregate consumption of changes in public statistics regarding GNP,
including both the series representing the initial data release and the series for the revised data, which are
published later but which are more precisely measured. In this way, they can identify a positive eﬀect due to
the noise included in the initial data release.



                                                     25
shocks.36 Adding to the model news about the future, would make it possible to compare its
implications with their evidence. This extension could also be useful to assess the relation
between the identification approach in Beaudry and Portier (2006) and the approach based on
aggregate demand/aggregate supply shocks.37 Finally, one can exploit the fact that consumers’
average expectations will reflect the underlying observed signals, and test the theory using
information from consumer surveys data. Recent work by Barsky and Sims (2006) pursues
this approach, using data from the Michigan Survey of Consumers.38
       The results of this paper raise a number of questions about what determines the information
collected by consumers, and what determines the overall precision of the information they
acquire. Veldkamp (2006) and Hellwig and Veldkamp (2006) consider models where the decision
to acquire information is treated explicitly. They show that, in environments where there
are gains from coordination, agents tend to acquire similar pieces of information, and thus
the potential for coordinated mistakes is bigger. Therefore, the role for demand shocks may
actually be magnified when the information structure is endogenous. On the other hand,
Maćkowiak and Wiederholt (2006), focus on endogenous information processing, in a price
setting with limited attention. They show that the level of aggregate volatility aﬀects the
amount of attention agents devote to the shocks in their local markets and to aggregate shocks.
Here I have assumed that agents observe their local shock with perfect precision, while they
observe the aggregate shock with noise. The results in Maćkowiak and Wiederholt (2006) oﬀer
a microfoundation for this assumption. At the same time, they show that this assumption may
be sensitive to changes in macroeconomic uncertainty.




  36
     Beaudry and Portier (2006) focus on shocks to expectations about future TFP, which are orthogonal to
current TFP shocks. Clearly, such shocks are not present if productivity is a random-walk.
  37
     Conceptually, the two approaches simply diﬀer in terms of the orthogonal decomposition of the shocks
                            the decomposition ´(ut , et ), which leads to a standard keynesian identification. An
they adopt. Here I focus on ³
                                            σ2
alternative decomposition is ut + et , ut − σu2 et , which separates the “information shock” ut + et , captured by
                                              e
the innovation in st . This second decomposition is closer to the identification in Beaudry and Portier (2006).
   38
      Namely, they try to identify both an information shock –corresponding to ut + et in the current model–,
and an animal spirit shock – corresponding to the news shock et in the current model. When unemployment
is not included in the VAR, they find a significant relation with consumer confidence measures for the first type
of shock, but not for the latter. When unemployment is included, instead, their evidence is also consistent with
a significant relation between the news shock and consumer confidence.


                                                       26
Appendix
A. Definitions and linearization
This appendix contains the details of the model which are not in the main text, a formal definition of
rational expectations equilibrium, and a definition of the notion of log-linear equilibrium that is used
as an approximation.

Consumption baskets
                                                                                        ³            ´
                                                                                                  2
The consumption basket Jit is selected so that the distribution {   jt : j ∈ Jit } is N  ζ it , σ  |ζ . The
                                                                        ³      ´
sampling shock for consumer i, ζ it , is drawn from a distribution N 0, σ 2ζ . The sampling shocks
         R1
satisfies 0 ζ it di = 0. The variances σ 2 , σ 2ζ and σ 2|ζ satisfy

                                                 σ2 = σ 2ζ + σ 2|ζ .

 This ensures that the cross sectional distribution of productivity shocks observed by consumers is
identical to the distribution across producers.

Equilibrium
Price and demand indexes. To define a rational expectations equilibrium it is useful to define two
functions, which give the price and demand indexes associated to the triple hP, C, {G}i.
    The price index function P (ζ it , zt ) gives the price index for a consumer with sampling shock ζ it .
This price index is derived substituting the individual pricing rule P (eait , Hit , μit ) in expression
                                                                                                 ³       (1) and  ´
integrating using the distribution G (Hit , μit ; zt ) for Hit and μit , and the distribution N at + ζ it , σ 2|ζ
for the productivity shocks ait .
    The demand index function D (zt ) gives the constant in the demand curve faced by the producer.
The demand for good i by consumer j is:
                                                                   σ
                                               Cjit = Pit−σ Cjt P jt .

Aggregating across consumers gives Yit = Pit−σ D, where D is the demand index
                                                Z
                                                       σ
                                          D = Cit P it di.

Substitute
  ¡           Cit and P it on¢the right-hand side, using the individual consumption rule
C eait , Hit , P (ζ it ; zt ) , μit and the price index function
                                                           ³     ´derived above. Integrate using the distribution
                                                                                                      ¡      ¢
G (Hit , μit ; zt ) for Hit and μit , the distribution N 0, σζ for the sampling shock ζ it , and N 0, σ 2 for
                                                               2

the productivity shock ait . This gives the function D (zt ).
    Optimality and consistency. The household problem is to set prices and consumption to maximize
expected utility, subject to the constraints:

                                         Yit   =    Pit−σ D (zt ) ,
                                         Yit   =    Ait Nit ,
                                         Xit   =    Hit − P it Cit ,
                                      Hit+1    =    Hit − P it Cit + Pit Yit ,
                                        P it   =    P (ζ it , zt ) ,


                                                        27
and to the measurability constraints reflecting the information available to consumers at each stage.
Optimality requires that P and C are a solution to this optimization problem.
     The beliefs of household i at the pricing stage, μIit , are given by the bayesian update of μit based
on the observation of Ait . The beliefs at the trading stage, μII                                 I
                                                                         it , are the update of μit based on
P it = P (ζ it , zt ). The end-of-period beliefs μit+1 of household i at the end of the period are the update
of μII
     it based on the observation of Dt = D (zt ).
     Incidentally, the fact that Dt is a function of zt can be used to show that, in equilibrium, quantity
observations fully reveal the aggregate productivity shock. In Section 4, instead, I introduce local
demand shocks nit , and the demand for producer i will be enit D (zt ). This assumption prevents full
revelation in equilibrium.
     The consumption and pricing rule, together with the bayesian updating rules described above define
an individual law of motion that, for each pair Hit and μit , and each realization of   ¡ the shocks ut , et¢, it
and ζ it , gives us Hit+1 and μit+1 . The consistency requirement asks that G Hit+1 , μit+1 ; zt+1 is
derived from G (Hit , μit ; zt ) using this law of motion and the exogenous distributions of it and ζ it .

Log-Linearization
In order to study the equilibrium I resort to log-linearization. The choice of a linear approximation is
dictated by the presence of imperfect information. In the original non-linear form the inference problem
of the agents is daunting. In linear form, the Kalman filter can be used and recursive methods can be
applied to characterize the equilibrium.
    In a linear equilibrium aggregate output and prices, yt and pt , are:

                                                   pt   = φzt ,                                             (13)
                                                   yt   = ψzt ,                                             (14)

where φ and ψ are two vectors of coeﬃcients. The solution of the model requires solving a fixed point
problem to find the coeﬃcients φ and ψ that are consistent with optimality, belief rationality and
consistency.
    To use linearization methods in presence of imperfect information, requires an extra assumption.
Namely, I assume that the agents in the model also use a linear model when drawing inferences from
prices and quantity observations. In particular they use the model:

                                             pit    = φzt + φζ ζ it ,
                                      yit + σpit    = (ψ + σφ) zt + nit ,

where pit is the log of the price index for agent i, and yit + σpit is the log of the demand index for
agent i, and φζ is a coeﬃcient to be determined in equilibrium. Here, to be general, I allow for local
demand shocks, nit , as in the model of Section 4 (see Appendix C). Note that, apart from using a linear
approximation, consumers use the correct model of the economy, i.e. they use values of φ and ψ and
φζ that are consistent with equilibrium behavior.
    When agents use a linear model, their beliefs about the state zt are normally distributed and
their dynamics can be characterized using the Kalman filter. Then, the state vector for the agent
decision problem is reduced to: the money balances and the first moment of his beliefs about zt . This
simplification of the state vector allows me to linearize the individual pricing and consumption rules
P and C. This rules can then be aggregated and the equilibrium is found as the solution of a fixed
point problem. Linearity helps in three dimensions: it simplifies the inference problem faced by each
individual, it simplifies the state space for individual decision rules, and it allows for aggregation of
individual decision rules.
    In the baseline model, studies in Section 3 agents learn the state zt at the end of period t. This
allows me to derive the equilibrium in closed form, these derivations are in Appendix B. In the extended
model of Section 4, instead, I have to keep track of the agents expectations regarding all past shocks.

                                                        28
In Appendix C I describe how to compute the linear individual decision rule in this case, and I derive
the steady-state cross sectional distributions of hit and Eit [zt ].
    Finally, a brief remark on an issue that arises when taking linear approximations in a non-stationary
model with imperfect information. The random walk for at makes the model non-stationary. Therefore,
when taking a log-linear approximation I need to normalize variables by At , e.g. set ĉit = ln (Cit /At ).
However, with imperfect information agents do not observe At , This means that, for example, in the
consumer first order conditions I will have Eit [ĉit ] and Eit [ĉit ] 6= ĉit . In order to recover agents’ decision
rules it is convenient to add and subtract at whenever an expression like Eit [ĉit ] appears, e.g.

                                        Eit [ĉit ] = cit − Eit [at ] + Eit [at ] .

In this way, I derive the first order conditions for consumption and prices, (9) and (10).

B. Proofs for Section 3
Proof of Proposition 1
The first order conditions for pricing and consumption are:
                                                         µ     ¶η
                                    1             σ    1   Yit    Yit
                                          Yit −                       = 0,
                                 P it Cit       σ − 1 Ait Ait     Pit
and                                                              ∙              ¸
                                    1             1                     1
                                          =α               + βEt                  .
                                 P it Cit    H̄ − P it Cit         P it+1 Cit+1
Substituting the conjectured equilibrium prices and quantities it is immediate to check that household
behavior is optimal.

Remark
A preliminary remark on the limit results in sub-section 3.2: analytical results can also be derived for
the case of finite values of idiosyncratic variances. Moreover, it is possible to show, by continuity, that
the behavior of the economy in the case of infinite idiosyncratic variances is indeed the limit of the finite
variances case. The details are available from the author.

Proof of Proposition 3
Begin with the following guess for aggregate prices and output:

                                         pt     = −at−1 + φu ut + φe et ,
                                         yt     = at−1 + ψ u ut + ψ e et ,

and guess that φ and ψ are such that

                                              EtP [pt ] = −EtP [at ] ,
                                              EtP [yt ] = EtP [at ] .

Using this guess, the expected demand curve faced by producer i is:

                                              Eit [yit ] = EtP [at ] − σpit .

The optimal pricing condition is (10) in the text. Substituting the expected demand derived above
gives
                             1                  1+η            η
                    pit =         (p + cit ) −        ait +        Eit [yt + σpt ] .
                          1 + ση it            1 + ση       1 + ση

                                                           29
For the individual policy rule for consumption use the conjecture
                                        cit + pit = bh hit + ba (ait − Eit [at ]) .                 (15)
The Euler equation (9), in the text, can be rewritten as
                                                                   £             ¤
                                    cit + pit = (1 − δ) hit + δEtII cit+1 + pit+1 ,
               αβ
where δ ≡   α+(1−β)2
                           ∈ (0, 1), while the agent budget constraint is, in log-linear terms:

                                        hit+1 = hit + θ (pit + yit − pit − cit ) ,                  (16)
             1−β
where θ ≡   α+1−β .
   Using the individual policy (15) the Euler equation becomes:
                                       pit + cit = (1 − δ) hit + δbh Eit [hit+1 ] ,
and, using the initial guesses, the budget constraint gives:
                                                  1+η                     (1 + η) (σ − 1)
                      Eit [hit+1 ] = hit − θσ            (pit + cit ) + θ                 ait +
                                                 1 + ησ                       1 + ησ
                                             1+η
                                         +θ        Eit [yt + σpt ] .
                                            1 + ησ
Putting together the last two equations gives the following two equations, that determine bh and ba :
                           µ                  ¶
                                      1+η
                            1 + δθσ         bh bh = 1 − δ + δbh ,                                 (17)
                                     1 + ησ
                           µ                  ¶
                                      1+η                  (1 + η) (σ − 1)
                             1 + δθσ        bh ba = δθ                     bh .                   (18)
                                     1 + ησ                    1 + ησ
The first equation can be rewritten as
                                                    δ σ (1 + η) 2
                                              θ                b = 1 − bh .                         (19)
                                                  1 − δ 1 + ησ h
This equation has a unique positive solution in (0, 1). The second equation is a linear equation that
gives ba .
    Aggregating the consumption equation across consumers and using the assumption of large idio-
syncratic shocks, gives:                    ¡              ¢
                                     yt = ba at − EtP [at ] − pt .                               (20)
Aggregating the optimal pricing condition gives
                                  1       ¡            ¢    1+η          η (σ − 1) P
                      pt     =        ba at − EtP [at ] −           at −          E [at ] =
                               1 + ση                      1 + ση         1 + ση t
                                            1 − ba + η ¡ P            ¢
                             = −EtP [at ] +              Et [at ] − at .
                                              1 + ση
With the definition
                                                        λ ≡ 1 − ba ,
this gives (7). Substituting in (20) gives (6).
    To prove that λ ∈ (0, 1) notice that, given that bh > 0 one obtains
                                             (1 + η) (σ − 1)            (1 + η) σ
                                      δθbh                   < 1 + δθbh
                                                 1 + ησ                  1 + ησ
which implies ba ∈ (0, 1) . Therefore, as long as bh and ba satisfy (17) and (18) the initial guesses are
verified and consumer behavior is optimal.

                                                            30
Proof of Proposition 4
The coeﬃcient ψ e was derived in the text, see (11). This coeﬃcient is positive as long as:

                                                    λσ > 1.                                             (21)

Using (17) and (18) λ can be written as a function of bh .

                                               σ − 1 (1 − δ) (1 − bh )
                                      λ=1−                             .
                                                 σ    1 − δ (1 − bh )

Substitute this expression in (21). After some algebra one obtains that (21) is satisfied if and only if
(σ − 1) bh > 0 which is satisfied as long as bh > 0.

Proof of Proposition 5
Consider equation (19), which determines bh . It is straightforward to show that limδ→1 bh = 0 which,
given (18) implies limδ→1 ba = 0. Moreover, the definition of δ gives limβ→1 δ = 1. Putting these results
together gives
                                              lim λ = 1,
                                                β→1

which proves the statement.

C. Assumptions and computational method for Section 4
Additional assumptions
The durable good in the hands of household i grows at the rate Rit . The household budget constraint
becomes:                                µ       Z                        ¶
                          Hit+1 = Rit+1 Hit −       Pjt Cijt dj + Pit Yit .
                                                       Jit

Let Rit = R0 exp (ut + vit ), where ut is the aggregate  ¡ productivity
                                                                 ¢          shock, and vit is an i.i.d. shock
to the individual rate of return, with distribution N 0, σ 2v . As usual, assume that the idiosyncratic
               R1
shocks satisfy 0 vit = 0.
     Furthermore, assume that producer i is visited by a subset of measure       R 1 of consumers equal to
exp (nit ). The variable nit is i.i.d., normal with variance σ 2n , and satisfies 0 enit di = 1.
     The equilibrium definition in Appendix A is easily adapted to this case. Note that the results in
Section 3 can be extended to the case of money growth, if one maintains σ 2n = 0 and the assumption
of large idiosyncratic shocks. Furthermore, one can show that, as β → 1, the behavior of output is the
same in the two cases. Analytical results for this case are available from the author.

Computation
Consider the linear equilibrium:

                                               pt    = φzt ,
                                               yt    = ψzt .

Given a vector of parameters (φ, ψ) I derive optimal decision rules. Using bayesian updating, I also find
the agents’ first-order expectations ¡regarding
                                            ¢ zt . The optimal decision rules can then be aggregated to
obtain a new vector of parameters φ0 , ψ 0 . I iterate this procedure until I find a fixed point.




                                                      31
Optimal decision rules. Write the individual decision rules in the following form:
                              pit    = qh hit + qa ait + qzI Eit
                                                              I
                                                                 [zt ] ,                                (22)
                              cit    = bh hit + ba ait + bp pit + bIz EitI
                                                                           [zt ] + bII II
                                                                                    z Eit [zt ] .       (23)

Let me write here the first order conditions, the budget constraint, and the demand for good i:
                                I                   I
                                                                 ¡ I             ¢
                        pit − Eit [pit ] = −ait + Eit [cit ] + η Eit [yit ] − ait ,
                                                                £              ¤
                             cit + pit = (1 − δ) hit + δEtII cit+1 + pit+1 ,
                                 hit+1 = hit + θ (pit + yit − pit − cit ) + rit+1 ,
                                    yit = yt + σ (pt − pit ) + nit .

Substituting the individual decisions rules and using the law of iterated expectations these four equations
become:
                                          1     £                              ¤ I
                        pit     =             { (1 + bp + ησ) φ + bIz + bII
                                                                         z + ηψ Eit [zt ] +
                                      1 + ησ
                                      bh hit + (ba − 1 − η) ait },

                                                                      II                II
                    pit + cit       = (1 − δ) hit + δ (1 + bp ) φAEit    [zt ] + δbh Eit   [hit+1 ] +
                                               II
                                                           ¡          ¢
                                      δba e1 AEit [zt ] + δ bIz + bII
                                                                   z    AE   II
                                                                             it [zt ] ,

                                II
                                                     ¡       II
                                                                                  ¢
                               Eit [hit+1 ] = hit + θ pit + Eit [yit ] − pit − cit ,
                                     II                    II
                                    Eit [yit ] = (ψ + σφ) Eit [zt ] − σpit ,

where e1 is the vector [1, 0, 0...].
   Substituting the linear rules on the left-hand side and matching coeﬃcients gives:
                                               1
                                qh     =           bh ,
                                            1 + ησ
                                               1
                                qa     =           (ba − 1 − η) ,
                                            1 + ησ
                                               1 £                                 ¤
                                qz     =            (1 + bp + ησ) φ + bIz + bII
                                                                             z + ηψ ,
                                            1 + ησ
and
                             1
              bh    =              [((1 − δ) + δbh ) + δbh θ (1 − σ) qx ] ,
                         1 + δbh θ
                             1
              ba    =              δbh θ (1 − σ) qa ,
                         1 + δbh θ
              bp    =    −1,
                             1
              bIz   =              δbh θ (1 − σ) qz ,
                         1 + δbh θ
                             1     £                                              ¡        ¢ ¤
             bII
              z     =               δ (1 + bp ) φA + δbh θ (ψ + σφ) + δba e1 A + δ bII   I
                                                                                    z + bz A .
                         1 + δbh θ
      For a given pair ψ and φ these equations can be solved for q and b. Notice that the parameters
qh , qa , bh , ba , bp can be determined separately, without knowledge of ψ and φ.


                                                              32
Bayesian updating. The learning problem of the individual agent can be solved recursively using
the Kalman filter. It is convenient to divide the filtering problem in three stages. The first two stages
correspond to the pricing and trading stages I and II. The last stage correspond to the time when
consumers return to their island of origin and observe the quantity sold at the end of period t. Denote
end of period expectations as Eit [.].
    The law of motion for the exogenous state zt is:
                                                         µ     ¶
                                                            ut
                                        zt+1 = Azt + B           .
                                                            et
                                                                                     [T ]
For computational purposes we will consider the truncated version of           zt , zt      = {at , st , ...at−T , st−T }.
In this case, A and B are:
                            ⎡                        ⎤         ⎡                  ⎤
                                    1 01×2T −1                    1             0
                          A=⎣       1 01×2T −1       ⎦, B = ⎣ 1                 1 ⎦.
                                I2(T −1) 02(T −1),2               0             0
Given φ and ψ I can derive the expressions for the Kalman filter for agent i. Agent i first observes the
vector of exogenous signals Sit , where
                                             ¡             ¢0
                                        Sit = ait rit st ,
then observes pit , and, finally, observes the quantity signal yit + σpit .
    The relation between the signals (Sit , pit , yit + σpit ) and the aggregate state zt is given by:
                                           Sit    = Gzt + F ( it , vit )0 ,
                                           pit    = φzt + φζ ζ it ,
                                    yit + σpit    = (ψ + σφ) zt + nit ,
where                                 ⎡         ⎤       ⎡     ⎤
                                       1 0 0 0            1 0
                                 G = ⎣ 1 0 −1 0 ⎦ , F = ⎣ 0 1 ⎦ ,
                                       0 1 0 0            0 0
and where φζ is the elasticity of the price index to the sampling shock ζ it , to be determined later.
   Let
                                                  ∙ 2       ¸
                                                    σ     0
                                        ΣV =                  ,
                                                     0 σ 2v
                                          Q = φ, R = ψ + σφ.
The agents expectations are given by
                                I
                              Eit [zt ] = Eit−1 [zt ] + C (Sit − Eit−1 [Sit ]) ,                                   (24a)
                               II          I
                                                        ¡       I
                                                                        ¢
                              Eit [zt ] = Eit [zt ] + L pit − Eit [pit ] ,                                         (24b)
                                           II
                                                          ¡       II
                                                                           ¢
                              Eit [zt ] = Eit  [zt ] + M qit − Eit   [qit ] .                                      (24c)
To derive the Kalman gains C, L, and M use the following definitions:
                                                        I
                          Ω = V arit−1 [zt ] , ΩI = V arit [zt ] , ΩII = V arit
                                                                             II
                                                                                [zt ] .
Then the Kalman gains are:
                                                                    −1
                                     C0     = (GΩG0 + F ΣV F 0 ) GΩ,                                               (25a)
                                              ¡                 ¢−1
                                     L  0
                                            = QΩI Q0 + φ2ζ σ 2ζ     QΩI ,                                          (25b)
                                        0
                                              ¡      0
                                                            ¢
                                                          2 −1
                                    M       = RΩII R + σ n        RΩII .                                           (25c)

                                                       33
The matrices Ω need to satisfy the equations:
                                                                                   −1
                                 = Ω − ΩG0 (GΩG0 + F ΣV F 0 ) GΩ,
                                 ΩI                                                                   (26a)
                                              ¡                 ¢−1
                             ΩII = ΩI − ΩI Q0 QΩI Q0 + φ2ζ σ 2ζ     QΩI ,                             (26b)
                                                ¡               ¢−1
                              Ω̂ = ΩII − ΩII R0 RΩII R0 + σ 2n      RΩII .                            (26c)

Using the law of motion of zt we obtain the steady state condition:

                                      V art [zt+1 ] = AΩ̂A0 + BΣB 0 = Ω,

where                                                 ∙                 ¸
                                                          σ 2u   0
                                                Σ=                          .
                                                           0     σ 2e
To solve for the matrices Ω I use iterations on the (26). Then the Kalman gains C, L and M are derived
from (25).

Fixed point. The average first order expectations can be expressed in terms of the current state as
                                  zt|tI = ΞI zt ,   zt|tII = ΞII zt ,           zt|t = Ξzt .

Using the updating equations and aggregating across consumers gives:

                          zt|t    = (I − M R) (I − LQ) (I − CG) Azt−1|t−1 +
                                    ((I − M R) ((I − LQ) CG + LQ) + M R) zt ,

which gives the following expression for Ξ,

                            Ξ = (I − M R) (I − LQ) (I − CG) AΞ +
                                ((I − M R) ((I − LQ) CG + LQ) + M R) ,

and similar expressions for ΞI and ΞII . These matrices are infinite dimensional. When using the
                     [T ]
truncated vector zt one finds finite dimensional matrices Ξ[T ] that approximate Ξ (more on this
                                                                                              [T ]
approximation below). This is the only step where the use of the truncated vector zt requires an
approximation.
    Having expressions for zt|tI and zt|tII in terms of the current state variable I can use the equilibrium
relations to obtain:

                                 φ0   = (qh + qa ) e1 + qz ΞI ,
                                 ψ0   = (bh + ba ) e1 + bp φ + bIz ΞI + bII
                                                                         z ΞII .

Moreover, consistency of the pricing rules with the price indexes requires φζ = ba .
     In order to evaluate the accuracy of the approximation due to the truncation of the state space, I
                                             [T ] [T ] I[T ] [T ] II[T ] [T ]
evaluate the distance between the vectors qz ΞI , bz ΞI , bz            ΞII and
 [T +k] [T +k] I[T +k] [T +k] II[T ] [T +k]
qz     ΞI     , bz    ΞI     , bz   ΞII , for a given k.

Cross-sectional dispersion. It is also possible to derive the equilibrium joint distribution of
money holdings and beliefs. Define the idiosyncratic component of agents’ expectations as

                                               Jit = Eit [zt ] − zt|t ,



                                                          34
and define JitI and JitII in a similar way. Use the relations (24) to obtain the following recursive expression
for the individual forecast errors:

                                        JitI   = (I − CG) AJit−1 + CF Vit ,
                                       JitII   = (I − LQ) JitI + Lζ it ,
                                        Jit    = (I − M R) JitII + M nit .

This gives the law of motion for the individual forecast errors:

                     Jit     = (I − M R) (I − LQ) (I − CG) AJit−1 +
                               + (I − M R) (I − LQ) CF Vit + (I − M R) Lζ it + M nit .

Define xit−1 ≡ hit − rit . The wealth dynamics are given by
                       £ ¡               ¢                                    ¤
             xit = θ (1 − σ) qz − bIz (I − CG) A + bII   z (I − LQ) (I − CG) A Jit−1 +
                           + [1 + θ (1 − σ) qx − θbx ] xit−1 + θbII
                                                                 z Lζ it + θnit
                             £ ¡               I
                                                 ¢          II
                                                                            ¤
                           + θ (1 − σ) qz − bz CF + θbz (I − LQ) CF Vit +
                           +θ ((1 − σ) qa − ba ) it + [1 + θ ((1 − σ) qx − bx )] vit .

Using the relations just derived one can write the joint dynamics of individual wealth and expectations
in matrix form as:                                             ⎛       ⎞
                               µ      ¶       µ         ¶          it
                                  Jit            Jit−1         ⎜ vit ⎟
                                        = W1              + W2 ⎜       ⎟
                                                               ⎝ nit ⎠ .
                                  xit            xit−1
                                                                  ζ it
The steady state distribution of Jit and xit is normal with variance-covariance matrix ΣJ,x = W1 ΣJ,x W10 +
W2 Σid W20 .




                                                          35
References

 [1] Klaus Adam, 2006, “Optimal Monetary Policy with Imperfect Common Knowledge,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics (forthcoming)

 [2] Franklin Allen, Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin, 2006, “Beauty Contests, Bubbles
    and Iterated Expectations in Asset Markets,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming

 [3] Jeﬀery Amato, Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin, 2002, “Communication and Mone-
    tary Policy,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 18, pp. 495-503.

 [4] George-Marios Angeletos and Alessandro Pavan, 2004, “Transparency of Information and
    Coordination in Economies with Investment Complementarities,” American Economic
    Review 94 (2).

 [5] Kosuke Aoki, 2003, “On the Optimal Monetary Policy Response to Noisy Indicators,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 50, pp. 501-523.

 [6] Philippe Bacchetta and Eric Van Wincoop, 2005, “Higher Order Expectations in Asset
    Pricing,” mimeo, Study Center Gerzensee.

 [7] Philippe Bacchetta and Eric Van Wincoop, 2006, “Can Information Heterogeneity Explain
    the Exchange Rate Determination Puzzle?” American Economic Review 96, pp. 552-576.

 [8] Robert J. Barro and Robert G. King, 1984, “Time-Separable Preferences and
    Intertemporal-Substitution Models of Business Cycles,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    99: 817-839.

 [9] Robert B. Barsky and Eric R. Sims, 2006, “Information Shocks, Animal Spirits, and the
    Meaning of Innovations in Consumer Confidence,” mimeo, University of Michigan.

[10] Susanto Basu, John G. Fernald, and Miles S. Kimball, 2001, “Are Technology Improve-
    ments Contractionary?”, Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper No.
    1986.

[11] Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier, 2001, “Exploring Pigou’s Theory of Cycles,” CEPR
    Discussion Paper No. 2996.




                                           36
[12] Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier, 2006, “Stock Prices, News and Economic Fluctuta-
    tions,” forthcoming American Economic Review.

[13] Jess Benhabib and R. E. A. Farmer, 1999, “Indeterminacy and Sunspots in Macroeco-
    nomics,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. Talor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1A, pp.
    387—448. New York: North-Holland.

[14] Olivier J. Blanchard, 1989, “A Traditional Interpretation of Macroeconomic Fluctua-
    tions,” American Economic Review 79 (5), pp. 1146-1164.

[15] Olivier J. Blanchard and Danny Quah, 1989, “The Dynamic Eﬀects of Aggregate Demand
    and Aggregate Supply Shocks,” American Economic Review 79 (4), pp. 655-673.

[16] Olivier J. Blanchard and Mark W. Watson, 1986, “Are Business Cycles All Alike?” in The
    American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change. R.J. Gordon, ed. Chicago: University
    of Chicago Press, pp. 123-56.

[17] Fabio Canova and De Nicolo, Gianni, 2002, “Monetary Disturbances Matter for Business
    Fluctuations in the G-7,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49 (6), pp. 1131-1159.

[18] V. V. Chari, Patrick J. Kehoe and Ellen R. McGrattan, 2004, “Are Structural VARs Useful
    Guides for Developing Business Cycle Theories?” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
    Working Paper 631.

[19] Lawrence Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Robert Vigfusson, 2003, “What happens
    after a Technology Shock?” mimeo.

[20] Jean-Pierre Danthine, John Donaldson, and Thore Johnsen 1998, “Productivity Growth,
    Consumer Confidence, and the Business Cycle,” European Economic Review 42, pp. 1113-
    1140.

[21] Neville Francis and Valerie Ramey, 2003, “Is the Technology-Driven Real Business Cycle
    Hypothesis Dead? Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations Revisited,” NBER Working Paper
    No. 8726.

[22] Jordi Gali, 1992, “How Well Does the IS-LM Model Fit Postwar U.S. Data?” The Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 107 (2), pp. 709-738.



                                            37
[23] Jordi Gali, 1999, “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology
    Schocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review, pp. 249-271.

[24] Christian Hellwig, 2002, “Public Announcements, Adjustments Delays and the Business
    Cycle,” mimeo UCLA.

[25] Christian Hellwig, 2005, “Heterogeneous Information and the Benefits of Public Informa-
    tion Disclosures,” mimeo UCLA.

[26] Christian Hellwig and Laura Veldkamp, 2006 “Knowing What Others Know: Coordination
    Motives in Information Acquisition,” mimeo NYU.

[27] Nir Jaimovich and Sergio Rebelo, 2005, “Can News about the Future Drive the Business
    Cycle?” mimeo, Northwestern University.

[28] Takuji Kawamoto, 2004, “Technology Shocks and the Role of Monetary Policy in the
    Beauty Contest Monetarist Model,” Bank of Japan Discussion Paper, 2004-E-10.

[29] Guido Lorenzoni, 2006, “Demand Shocks and Monetary Policy,” mimeo, MIT.

[30] Robert E. Lucas Jr.,1972, “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Eco-
    nomic Theory 4 (2), pp. 103-24.

[31] Robert E. Lucas Jr., 1975, “An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle,” Journal of
    Political Economy 83 (6), pp. 1113-1144.

[32] Bartosz Maćkowiak and Mirko Wiederholt, 2006, “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational
    Inattention,” mimeo, Humboldt University.

[33] N. Gregory Mankiw and Ricardo Reis, 2002, “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices: A
    Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    117, pp. 1295-1328.

[34] Fabio Milani, 2005, “Expectations, Learning and Macroeconomic Persistence,” mimeo,
    UC Irvine.

[35] Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin, 2002, “The Social Value of Public Information,”
    American Economic Review 92, pp. 1521-1534.



                                               38
[36] Kristoﬀer P. Nimark, 2005, “Calvo Pricing and Imperfect Common Knowledge: A Forward
    Looking Model of Rational Inflation Inertia,” ECB Working Paper No. 474.

[37] Athanasios Orphanides, 2003, “Monetary Policy Evaluation with Noisy Information,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (3), pp. 605-631.

[38] Edmund S. Phelps et al., 1969, Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation
    Theory, New York: Norton.

[39] Ricardo Reis, 2003, “Where Is the Natural Rate? Rational Policy Mistakes and Persistent
    Deviations of Inflation from Target,” Advances in Macroeconomics, B. E. Journals in
    Macroeconomics 3 (1).

[40] José V. Rodriguez Mora and Paul Schulstald, 2006, “Believing in Lies: Eﬀects of GNP
    Announcements on Fluctuations of GNP growth.” European Economic Review, forthcom-
    ing.

[41] Matthew D. Shapiro, Mark W. Watson, 1988, “Sources of Business Cycle Fluctuations,”
    NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1988, Vol. 3, edited by Stanley Fischer, pp.111-148. Cam-
    bridge, MA: The MIT Press.

[42] Christopher A. Sims, 2003, “Implications of Rational Inattention,” Journal of Monetary
    Economics 50 (3), pp. 665-690.

[43] Lars E.O. Svensson and Michael Woodford, 2003, “Indicator Variables for Optimal Policy,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (3), pp. 691-720.

[44] Lars E.O. Svensson and Michael Woodford, 2005, “Indicator Variables for Optimal Policy
    under Asymmetric Information,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, forthcom-
    ing.

[45] Andrea Tambalotti, 2003, “Optimal Monetary Policy and Productivity Growth,” mimeo,
    Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

[46] Robert Townsend, 1983, “Forecasting the Forecasts of Others, ”Journal of Political Econ-
    omy 91 (4), pp. 546-587.

[47] Laura Veldkamp, 2006, “Information Markets and the Comovement of Asset Prices,”
    Review of Economic Studies 73, pp.823-845.

                                             39
[48] Laura Veldkamp and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2006, “Learning Asymmetries in Real Busi-
    ness Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (4), pp.753-772.

[49] Michael Woodford, 2002, “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Eﬀects of Monetary
    Policy”, in P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, eds., Knowledge, Infor-
    mation, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps,
    Princeton: Princeton University Press.

[50] Michael Woodford, 2003, Interest and Prices, Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                             40
