                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   FIRST DO NO HARM?:
                            TORT REFORM AND BIRTH OUTCOMES

                                             Janet Currie
                                         W. Bentley MacLeod

                                         Working Paper 12478
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12478


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2006




We thank Lewis Kornhauser, Avraham Ronen and Katherine Sharkey for very helpful discussions
and Dan Carvell, Katherine Lo, Jacob Dy-Johnson and Ahmed Sangbana for their help in assembling
our data. Wanchuan Lin provided truly exceptional research assistance. The Center for Law, Economics,
and Organization at USC and the National Science Foundation provided financial support for this
research. We thank Paul Oyer, Chapin White, seminar participants at New York University, the Wharton
School, the Massachusetts Insitute of Technology, and the NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments.
We are of course, solely responsible for any errors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Janet Currie and W. Bentley MacLeod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
First Do No Harm?: Tort Reform and Birth Outcomes
Janet Currie and W. Bentley MacLeod
NBER Working Paper No. 12478
August 2006, May 2008
JEL No. I12,I18,K13

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the impact of tort reforms using U.S. birth records for 1989-2001. We make four contributions:
First, we develop a model that analyzes the incentives created by specific tort reforms. Second, we
assemble new data on tort reform. Third, we examine a range of outcomes. Finally, we allow for differential
effects by demographic/risk group. We find that reforms of the "deep pockets rule" reduce complications
of labor and C-sections, while caps on noneconomic damages increase them. Our results demonstrate
there are important interactions between incentives created by tort law and other incentives facing
physicians.


Janet Currie
International Affairs Building
Department of Economics
Columbia University - Mail code 3308
420 W 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jc2663@columbia.edu

W. Bentley MacLeod
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
bentley.macleod@columbia.edu
  While most tort reforms apply to all sorts of torts, much of the literature on tort reform has


focused on its eects on medical practice. In a seminal study, Kessler and McClellan (1996) explore


the impact of two broad classes of tort reform on medical costs and outcomes for a population of


elderly heart patients. They nd that tort reforms have no signicant eect on health outcomes,


while signicantly reducing medical costs. From this evidence they conclude that the practice of


defensive medicine is reduced in response to tort reform.


  We show that this does not appear to be true for at least one large and important class of cases -


child births in the United States. Child birth is an interesting example to study because it is one of


the most common medical procedures, and because obstetrics is thought to have been particularly


hard hit by malpractice concerns. For example, Bakalar (2005) argues that the recent run up in the


rate of Ceasarean sections in the U.S. (which reached 30 percent in 2004, up from approximately


20 percent in the 1980s) is driven primarily by fear of litigation.


  Using data from national vital statistics natality les on millions of individual births from 1989


to 2001, we ask whether specic tort reforms aect the types of procedures that are performed, and


the health outcomes of mothers and their infants. We focus on four of the most important reforms -


caps on punitive damages, caps on non-economic damages (pain and suering), reform of the rule of


joint and several liability (JSL, the so called deep pockets rule), and reforms of the collateral source


rule. The rst two types of caps are the most important examples of what Kessler and McClellan


(1996) call direct reforms, while the later two reforms correspond to what they call indirect reforms.


  Our analysis is informed by a model that allows physician error rates and procedure choices to


depend on the patient's condition. This is important because the right procedure will be evident


in many cases  it is in the marginal cases that the incentives created by tort reform may change


physician choices.   In addition, we introduce a new way to model JSL. The common law rule of


JSL allows patients to recover full damages from any one of several defendants. Reforms typically


state that the defendants cannot be sued for the full damages unless they are responsible for at

                                                   2
least a given minimum fraction of the harm. We model JSL reform as an increase in the correlation


between the care taken by physicians and the expected liability that they face.        We show that


reforms of this type lead physicians to take more care, while damage caps result in less care by the


physician.    Moreover, if a procedure is more risky than no procedure then caps are predicted to


increase procedure use, while JSL reform is predicted to reduce procedure use.


  Intuitively, if many doctors are performing procedures in marginal cases not because of fear of


liability but because the procedures are more protable and less time consuming than the alter-


natives,
           3 then these doctors may be more likely to perform these procedures when they are less


fearful of liability. On the other hand, under JSL reform doctors are held more accountable for their


own actions (and are less likely to be held liable for the torts committed by others). This results in


more care being taken and fewer procedures. This results in the testable prediction that the eect


of damage caps upon procedure use should be the opposite of the eect of reform to JSL.


  Our ndings are consistent with this model. We nd that reforms of JSL reduce induction and


stimulation of labor, C-sections, and complications of labor and delivery, while caps on non-economic


damages increase them. There is little evidence that increases in procedure use induced by damage


caps aect infant health, suggesting that the marginal procedures induced or discouraged by tort


reform have little impact on infant health.


  These results are robust to many changes in specication.       For example, we estimate models


separately for high risk patients since our model implies that physicians have less discretion in high


risk cases.   We also attempt to distinguish a class of complications that are not preventable by


physician eort, and nd that tort reform has no eect on these complications, while it reduces


other complications. We estimate models excluding one large state at a time (to see if results are


sensitive to the inclusion of one large state), and show that if anything our results are stronger if


we delete states with laws that applied only to medical practice. Finally, we estimate models with


leads and lags of the law changes. Because of a peculiarity in the law, laws turning on do not

                                                  3
have the same eect as laws which are turned o  because they are ruled unconstitutional. New


laws are not retroactive, while if a law is overturned, the new regime applies to cases begun under


the old regime. We exploit this asymmetry and show that leads of laws turning on have no eect,


while leads of laws turning o do have eects, as we expect. Lagged changes also sometimes have


eects, in a direction consistent with our model.


  The rest of the paper is laid out as follows.         Section II provides some necessary background


regarding tort reform and infant health. A theoretical analysis of tort reform appears in Section


III. Section IV describes the data, our empirical methods are described in Section V, results are


presented in Section VI, and conclusions follow in Section VII.




                                          II.   Background


  In his survey of the literature on tort reform, Holtz-Eakin (2004) concludes that the most con-


sistent nding is that caps on damages reduce the number of lawsuits, the value of awards made


as a result of lawsuits, and the number of payouts made by insurers relative to premiums.
                                                                                              4 Mello


(2006) draws similar conclusions in his review of the tort reform literature. Avraham (2006) uses


a national data base of medical malpractice payments and concludes that caps on non-economic


damages aect the size of observed payments.      However, an important issue in all of these studies


is that the probability that a tort is committed, a suit is le, and a payment is observed is likely to


depend on the underlying malpractice environment.


  High claims in turn are thought to lead to excessively high malpractice insurance premiums.
                                                                                                     5


But it is not clear why a doctor's eort level or choice of procedure would be strongly aected by


malpractice insurance premiums.     Doctors' premiums are not experience rated, but are set at the


specialty-area level. Hence, short of moving from a high premium area to another area, or leaving


their specialty entirely, there is little a doctor can do to aect her premiums.
                                                                                   6   Claims against


doctors seldom exceed the amount that they are insured for (Lawthers et al., 1992; Silver et al.
                                                    4
2006). Moreover, doctors can pass on the cost of malpractice insurance premiums in the form of


higher prices (Danzon, Pauly, and Kington, 1990).     Thus doctors generally face little nancial risk


from malpractice claims.


  One might wonder then, why doctors apparently care so deeply about the problem of legal


liability? There are many non-insurable costs involved in malpractice litigation.   In addition to the


psychic and time costs of a potential legal proceeding, there is a very real threat of harm to the


doctor's reputation. Any payment made on behalf of a physician to settle a claim of malpractice


must be registered in the federally-maintained National Practitioner's Data Base (NPDB). This


data bank can be searched by hospitals, other health care professionals, and in some cases, by


plaintis' lawyers.


  These facts about the malpractice insurance market suggest that doctors should care deeply about


their probability of being sued.   Hence, tort reforms are likely to aect doctor behavior primarily


by aecting the probability of a suit. Reforms that reduce payments in the event of a successful


suit may still be important however, because they are likely to reduce the probability that suits


are brought.   The important implication for empirical work on this subject is that the probability


of a suit can respond quickly to tort reform, while premiums will be aected by tort reforms only


with a relatively long and uncertain lag. (The mean time between an injury and the settlement of


a claim in the NPDB is 6 years). Hence, it is perhaps unsurprising that previous work focusing on


the eects of malpractice premiums on physician behavior have shown little eect.
                                                                                     7


  Holtz-Eakin oers a useful summary of the most common state-level tort reforms.        We focus on


the four most common, which can be dened as follows (see Bryan Garner, 1999):




   (1) Caps on non-economic damages: Non-economic damages cover items other than monetary


        losses, such as pain and suering.
                                                  5
   (2) Caps on punitive damages:      Punitive damages are awarded in addition to compensatory


        (economic and non-economic) damages in order to punish defendants for willful and wanton


        conduct.


   (3) Modications of the collateral-source rule:       Under the common law collateral-source rule


        (CSR), amounts that a plainti receives from sources other than the defendant (e.g. from


        their own insurance) may not be admitted as evidence in a trial.
                                                                           8


   (4) Modications of the joint-and-several liability rule: In a trial with more than one defendant,


        the rst step is to apportion blame for the harm. Under JSL, the plainti can then ask the


        deep pockets defendant to pay all of the damages, even if that defendant was responsible


        for only a small fraction of the harm.    This defendant can in turn initiate separate legal


        proceedings in order to get contribution from the other defendants. Thus, the onus is on


        the deep pockets defendant rather than the plainti to collect from the other defendants.


        In this paper we focus on modications of the common law rule such that a defendant had


        to be liable for at least 50 percent of the tort before they could be held responsible for 100


        percent of the damages.
                                  9




Table 1 shows information about the 25 states with changes in these tort laws between 1989 and


2001.   We are particularly interested in changes given that we will include county xed eects in


our modelhence, only changes in the laws are used to identify their eects.   Given the controversy


surrounding tort reform, and the urry of tort reform activity that occurred in the 1980s, it is


striking that changes to the tort system during the 1990s often involved turning tort reforms "o"


rather than "on".   Two states (Illinois and Ohio) passed packages of tort reforms only to nd that


the laws violated the state constitution and had to be removed two years later.    The fact that laws


turn on and o is useful for identication, and helps to ensure that we will not mistake general time


trends in outcomes for the eects of tort reform.
                                                    10
                                                    6
     Table 1 also indicates that most of the law changes were changes to general tort statutes and


were not aimed specically at medical malpractice. This point is important because it suggests that


most of these law changes were not motivated by things like pre-existing trends in C-section rates or


complications of labor and delivery. For example, if caps were passed in an eort to reduce C-section


rates, then caps might be viewed as a result of high C-section rates rather than as a potential cause


of high (or low) C-section rates. However, there is little evidence that most tort laws were passed


in response to specic developments in obstetrical practice, and most of the laws apply to all torts.


Indeed the movement towards tort reform gained impetus from the publicity attending the famous


case of the women who was severely burned by MacDonald's coee (Liebeck vs. MacDonald, 1992).


The many laws that were turned o  by state courts also assure the exogeneity of the law changes,


since these cases tended to revolve around the constitutionality of state statutes rather than any


desire on the part of courts to inuence obstetrical practice.


     Kessler and McLellan (2002, 2002b) extend their earlier work, with elderly heart patients and


further nd that managed care is a substitute for tort reform (both reduce procedure use without


aecting outcomes), and that tort reform reduces malpractice risks faced by physicians and has a


larger eect on diagnostic rather than therapeutic treatment decisions.    Our work builds on theirs


by considering the eects of specic tort reforms, rather than a composite indicator of "direct" or


"indirect" tort reform, using a dierent medical context (child birth), and more recent data.      As


we will show below, dierent types of reforms are likely to have quite dierent eects, and whether


tort reforms increase or decrease procedure use in any particular case is a matter to be determined


empirically.




A.   Procedure choice and physician incentives.         Most literature on procedure use in obstetrics


focuses on C-sections. There is a good deal of research showing that C-section rates are responsive


to physician incentives, and that American C-section rates are too high. A Healthy People 2010
                                                  7
goal is to reduce the rate of C-sections to 15 percent from the current 30 percent.       This gure


suggests that unnecessary C-sections contribute as much as four billion dollars a year in excessive


health care costs, as well as inicting unnecessary surgery on million of mothers.
                                                                                  11 Baicker, Buckles,


and Chandra (2005) nd that 75 percent of the geographical variation in C-section rates over the


1995 to 1998 period is not explained by dierences in risk factors, and that the marginal C-section


was performed on a medically less appropriate patient. They also nd that higher C-section rates


are not associated with improvements in infant health, a nding that is common in this literature.


One reason for high rates of C-sections is that fees for C-sections are roughly double fees for normal


deliveries. Keeler and Brodie (1993), Currie and Gruber (2001), Currie, Gruber and Fischer (1995)


and Gruber, Kim, and Mayzlin (1998) all show that physicians are responsive to the incentives


created by dierentials between fees for vaginal births and Caesarean births.


  It is important to stress that unnecessary C-sections do entail risks to mothers and infants.


Common problems include sponges or other medical equipment left inside the patient, infections,


and impairments to women's future fertility.          In Meador v.   Stahler and Gheridian (1993) a


Massachusetts woman won a $1.53 million verdict arguing that her physicians had not obtained


informed consent because they had not adequately explained the risks of the procedure. Ms. Meador


was bedridden for several years as a result of complications resulting from her surgery. Infants can


also be injured during C-sections. For example, in Bowen v. Hearn (1988) an infant was cut on the


cheek, while in Hurst v. Dougherty (1990) part of an infant's nger was accidentally amputated.


  The evidence suggests that C-sections are highly responsive to physician incentives and are a


good procedure to examine for evidence regarding the eects of tort reform. There has been little


attempt to look at other obstetrical procedures or maternal outcomes in the previous literature.


In addition to C-sections, we will focus on induction or stimulation of labor, the incidence of


complications of labor and delivery, and infant APGAR scores.        Induction/stimulation of labor is


an interesting procedure to look at in conjunction with C-sections because there is thought to be

                                                  8
a link between induction and unscheduled C-sections. Complications are a particularly interesting


outcome because, as we argue below, some complications may be avoidable by greater physician


eort, and because they represent real health costs. Finally, for our purposes APGAR scores are a


good measure of infant health outcomes.
                                            12 APGAR measures the state of the child at birth, and


could be inuenced by the choice of procedure, and the physician's actions at the time of delivery.




                 III.   Tort Law, Procedure Choice and Defensive Medicine


  This section introduces a model of the eect of tort reform on physician care and procedure


choice. The model extends the standard tort model by explicitly accounting for the fact that both


physician decision making and liability are functions of a patient's condition. Our focus is on the


ex ante   eects of tort reform - namely how changes in the law aect physician choices. In contrast,


much of the law and economics literature, particularly the literature on joint and several liability,


explores the eect of the law on the process of litigation. This literature deals with issues such as


when parties le suit, how the law aects settlements, and how juries measure damages (see Spier


(2007) for a comprehensive survey). This literature shows that the process governing the way that


a tort nally gets translated into a liability against a physician is extremely complex. But at the


moment, the data is simply not suciently rich to distinguish between these complex models.


  We focus instead on the eect of the law on physician choices at the time of service. We assume


that physicians do take liability into account, but in a very reduced form way that depends on


the net benets and costs of treatment. For the period of interest all tort suits are based on the


negligence standard.     Hence, a physician faces liability if and only if her behavior is found to be


negligent, that is below the community standard of care. As discussed in Arlen and MacLeod (2005),


even if a physician is careful, there is always a chance that he or she will make a mistake that can


give rise to liability. These error rates are a key feature of our model.
                                                   9
  We dene       α   as the probability that a physician makes an error that results in a potential tort


liability. Let   H(p, law, s) be the expected      liability given that the physician has made an error (hence


the   H   function also incorporates the fact that not all errors lead to liability). Liability is a function


of procedure choice,        p,   the law at the time of treatment,       law,   and the condition of the patient,     s.

Procedure choice is denoted by          p = P or N P, where p = P        indicates that the procedure is performed,


and   p = NP      indicates it is not performed. The procedures we observe in our data are Caesarean


sections and the induction or stimulation of labor and delivery. It is assumed that patient condition


is worse for higher    s, and hence s = 0 is the least complicated case (i.e.          a completely straightforward


natural delivery, with no harm likely to mother or child). Let              G(s) denote the distribution of patient

cases (the fraction of cases where patient condition            s0   is less than or equal to   s).

  The physician's preferences are assumed to have the form:




(1)                                 U (s, α, p, law) = B (s, α, p) − H (s, p, law) α,



  where     B(α, p, s) is the benet from treatment.       This includes the intrinsic reward from treating the


patient, any pecuniary rewards from treatment, and the opportunity cost of care,                      α.   The physician


chooses    α∗ (p, s, law),   to maximize her payo, where        α∗ is   uniquely characterized by:




(2)                                     0 = Uα = Bα (s, α∗ , p) − H(s, p, law).



  Let     U ∗ (s, p, law)   be the physician's payo given that she chooses the optimal error rate given


procedure choice, patient condition and current law.                 The physician chooses to do the procedure


if and only if it is preferred to no procedure (U
                                                           ∗ (s, P, law)    = U ∗ (s, N P, law)).     The procedure is


assumed to be needed for more serious cases and not needed for completely straightforward cases,


and it is also assumed that utility rises more quickly with                s   when a procedure is performed than

                                                           10
when it is not performed:




(3)                                    Us∗ (s, P, law) > Us∗ (s, N P, law),



for all   s = 0. Given that the procedure is unnecessary when s = 0, there is a unique patient condition

that is a function of the current law,   s̄(law), such that the physician is indierent between performing

the procedure and not performing:




(4)                              U ∗ (s̄(law), P, law) = U ∗ (s̄(law), N P, law),



When the patient has condition        s > s̄(law)   then the physician chooses to perform the proceedure.


Conversly, for    s < s̄(law)   no procedure is performed. Hence, the rate of procedure use increases


with a change in the law if and only this results in a fall in      s̄.

   Given this model, it is straightforward to demonstrate two propositions whose proofs are found


in the Appendix.




Proposition 1. Tort reform will increase the error rate if and only if the law decreases the liability
the physician incurs in the event of an error.


   This result follows from two eects.         First, conditional upon procedure choice, a decrease in


liability leads to less care and hence a higher error rate. In addition, for marginal proceedures, a


decrease in liability results in the rm making riskier proceedure choices. Together, this results in


a higher over all error rate.


   The eect of the law on procedure choice depends on the way that it eects the cuto value           s̄.

We make one additional assumption (a uniformity condition), which is that the eect of the law on


liability is independent of procedure choice and patient condition. In other words, conditional on


the state of the patient, a law that changes the liability in the event of an error has the same eect
                                                        11
whether the error occurred as a result of performing a procedure, or as a result of not performing


a procedure. Given this assumption we have:




Proposition 2. A legal change that increases physician liability will increase s̄ (and therefore de-
crease procedure use) if and only if the error rate when the procedure is chosen is higher than the
error rate when the procedure is not chosen.


     This result is quite intutitive. An increase in liability results in the physician making decision that


lower risk. Hence, the choice between performing the proceedure or not depends upon the relative


risks associated with the two choices. This result shows that by observing how physicians respond


to changes in liability provides information regarding the riskiness of a procedure. We detail how


this eect work for damage caps and JSL in the next two subsections.




A.    The Eect of Damage Caps.            Limits on damage caps are intended curb unnecessarily large


awards. One can see this in the context of our model. Suppose that the uniformity condition is


satised, and that conditional on an error occurring, the distribution of possible harm,                    h, is given by

the density and cumulative distributions         f (·)   and   F (·) .   Let   L̄   be a cap on damages, then expected


liability is given by:

                                       
                                            Z    L̄                          
                                   H L̄ =             l · f (h) dh + 1 − F L̄ L̄.
                                             0


     This is the expected payment for harms less than              L̄,   plus the payment      L̄   times the probability


that the cap is reached.     The marginal eect of the cap on liability is :



                                                           
(5)                                          HL̄ = 1 − F L̄ > 0.



This is positive, and therefore from propositions 1 and 2 it follows that reforms that reduce the


liability cap should result in a   increase in the error rate.       It is reasonable to assume that the error rate
                                                            12
is correlated with complications of delivery, and hence we would expect complications to increase


with caps.


     The eect on procedure choice is more complicated because it depends on the relative error rates


for each procedure choice at   s̄.    Again, if procedure use is relatively more risky than no procedure


for the patient with condition   s̄   then condition 5 and proposition 2 together imply that reductions


in the cap on damages will increase procedure use. We illustrate these eects in gure 1.




                                                Figure 1 Here




     Suppose we begin with a level of procedure choice as illustrated by point X. Now suppose there


is a decrease in liability. If this were to aect only cases with no procedure, then we have the utility


from no procedure rising, as illustrated by the dotted line, resulting in a decrease in procedure use to


point Y. Now, if there are also signicant errors when the procedure is performed, the the decrease


in liability results in the utility from carrying out the procedure rising to the dashed line in gure


1. If the increase in utility is sucient, then we can arrive at point Z, an increase in procedure use


relative to the starting point X.




B.   The Eect of Joint and Several Liability.             Under Joint and Several Liability the plainti


can recover from any individual who shares in the blame for the accident. Kessler and McClellan


(1996) call this an indirect reform because it does not directly constrain the level of damages.


Rather, it aects who is liable for damages. It is believed that this reform can reduce liability by


removing the incentive for plaintis to attempt to recover from the deep pocket when there is a


medical error.


     In practice, JSL means that if the physician makes a mistake during a delivery and the attending


nurse has some culpability, then the patient may sue the nurse's employer, usually the hospital, for
                                                      13
full damages. This is because unlike the physician, the nurse is an employee of the hospital, which is


the deep pocket in the case. Previous research has focused on the way JSL reform might aect the


litigation process. In a seminal study, Landes and Posner (1980) argue that the common law rule


of JSL approximates an ecient rule if there is contribution.
                                                                  13 Contribution means that the deep


pocket defendant who pays the plainti sues to collect from the other defendants in proportion to


the harm they have caused. In the absence of any transactions costs, the Coase theorem suggests


that parties would always achieve an ecient allocation of costs among themselves, and hence JSL


reform should have no eect.


  However, suit and settlement is a complex process, and as Kornhauser and Revesz (1989) and


Kornhauser and Klee (2007) have shown, the eect of JSL reform upon the        ex ante   incentive to take


care is complex. Depending on the structure of the available information, incentives to take care may


increase or decrease. The problem is similar to the question of how owners can provide incentives


to the managers of a rm. In the absence of transactions costs, the Coase theorem suggests that


owners of the rm should be able to write an ecient contract with management. In practice, as


Jensen and Meckling (1977) argue, owners cannot achieve the rst best. What they can do is to


reduce agency costs by more closely aligning rewards with compensation.


  This is exactly what JSL reform achieves.        It more closely aligns the risk of liability with the


tortfeasor's care level. We model this point by supposing that the common law rule causes spillover


eects on liability. More precisely, we suppose that the physician's legal liability is given by:




(6)                         H JSL (λ) = λH̄ D α∗ (λ) + (1 − λ) H̄ H αH ,



where   λ   captures the JSL regime. When    λ=1    then the physician is liable only for her own errors,


which have an expected value of    H̄ D .   In contrast, under JSL, there is a chance that the hospital


will pay for some or all of harm caused by the physician, in which case      λ < 1.   By symmetry, it is



                                                     14
also the case that the physician is liable for some of the harm caused by hospital employees. Even if


a nurse is mainly responsible for an error, the physician supervising her work will usually be named


in any suits arising from the error. It may also be the case that if a hospital resident is performing


a procedure, the senior attending physician will be sued for inadequate supervision (see Locke v.


Patchtman, 512 N.W.2dn 786 (Mich. 1994)).


  One cannot, either theoretically or empirically, assign a value to    λ.   Rather, we suppose that JSL


reform corresponds to an increase in       λ,   and therefore JSL reform results in
                                                                                       JSL > 0.
                                                                                      Hlaw        This is


exactly the opposite eect of a damage cap, and hence from the analysis above we conclude that


JSL reform should reduce complications of labor and delivery.


  With regard to procedure choice, if it is the case that there are already excessive C-sections, then


JSL reform should lead to a reduction in the C-section rate. This theory makes a clearly falsiable


prediction, namely that the eect of JSL reform should be opposite to the eect of caps.            This


prediction is consistent with Kessler and McClellan (1996) in that they nd that direct and indirect


reforms have opposite eects on expenditures, and sometimes on outcomes though this point is not


highlighted in their study.
                            14


  While we have emphasized the incentives faced by physicians in the preceding discussion, many


of our arguments also apply to hospitals.         In particular, with JSL reform, hospitals have strong


incentives to modify their practices in order to make it less likely that they will be judged responsible


for over 50 percent of the damages (and therefore potentially held liable for paying for 100 percent


of the damages). A recent Institute of Medicine report about the frequency of medical errors and


the relatively few hospitals that have taken systematic steps to reduce them suggests that the scope


for this type of response is large (IOM, 2006).
                                                    15


  Our simple model also leaves out the role of plainti 's lawyers ("ambulance chasers").           It is


possible that caps on damages and reforms of joint and several liability both make it less worthwhile


for plainti 's lawyers to bring a suit.   So the number of suits may fall.     As we discussed above, in

                                                         15
the case of damage caps, this will tend to reinforce the eect of the cap in reducing doctor's liability


risk.
        16   In the case of JSL reform, the fact that lawyers now have less incentive to bring suits is


oset by the fact that if they do sue, they will now have to go after the most responsible party,


which means that a suit against a physician is a more accurate indicator of competence, and hence


has a greater negative eect on their reputation. This later eect is formally captured in our model


because      H   includes all costs, including losses associated with a loss in reputation (see MacLeod


(2007) for a review of reputation models, and of how loss of reputation can be viewed as nancial


loss). Therefore, the liability risk faced by doctors may still increase, even if the number of suits


falls. We illustrate this eect in gure 2.




                                               Figure 2 Here




     As in gure 2, suppose that the level of procedure choice is illustrated by point X. Now suppose


there is an increase in liability, say due to JSL reform.      If this were to aect only cases with no


procedure, then the utility from no procedure falls, as illustrated by the dotted line, resulting in an


increase in procedure use to point Y. Now, if there are also signicant errors when the procedure is


performed, this results in the utility from carrying out the procedure falling to the dashed line in


gure 2. If the decrease in utility is sucient, then we can arrive at point Z, a decrease in procedure


use relative to the starting point X.




C.   Summary.        We have extended the standard model of deterrence created by the tort system to


allow for heterogeneity in patient condition. Consistent with the standard economic theory of tort


law, the theory we outline here predicts that with less liability physicians will exert less care (see


Landes and Posner, 1987 ; Shavell, 1987; and Danzon 2000 for exhaustive reviews). We have also


shown that if we view JSL reform from the perspective of agency theory, we can make unambiguous
                                                     16
predictions regarding the eect of JSL reform. We have also extended the previous literature by


exploring the impact of tort reform on procedure choice. The important point is that the impact of


tort reform depends on whether there is already excessive use of a procedure. Conversely, physician


responses to tort reform provide some evidence about whether there is an excessive use of procedures.


  Reforms reducing liability have a tendency to exacerbate an existing problem of excessive proce-


dure use. These results are summarized in the following chart:


        Chart 1: The Eect of Tort Reform on Physician Care and Cesarean Section Rates




                                        Complications        Population Mean     Ceasarean Section Rate



            Tort Reform              Given Health Status       Complications   If excessive   If not excessive



   Decreasing the Cap on Liability        Increase               Increase       Increases       Decreases



      Reforming the JSL Rule              Decrease               Decrease      Decreases         Increases




  Relative to the prior literature, the theory provides some additional falsiable predictions. Namely,


the eect of caps should be the opposite of JSL reform.            Also reforms that act like damage caps,


such as modifying the collateral source rule, will have eects similar to caps. Previous empirical


work has sometimes grouped several reforms together. This theoretical analysis suggests that such a


strategy may reduce the estimated eect of the law since some reforms work in opposite directions.


The results also highlight the importance of evidence.           A great deal of the existing work on tort


reform is based on the assumption that tort reform must either reduce unnecessary procedure use


or have no eect. We show that it is also possible for tort reform to increase procedure use.




                                                 IV.    Data


  Several previous studies of tort reform rely on data from the American Tort Reform Association


(ATRA), which has tracked reforms enacted after 1986, when it was founded. We employed several


law students to independently look up and record all state statutes that implemented tort reforms,
                                                        17
and any decisions that subsequently aected the status of these statutes (e.g. if the statute was


subsequently ruled unconstitutional). A major issue here is to determine the pre-1986 status quo.


That is, the ATRA might note that a state passed a tort reform in 1991, but not that it had passed


earlier tort reform legislation in 1984. Moreover, sometimes state legislatures codied practices that


were already established under common law, so that what appears to be a law change is not. The


ATRA also sometimes misses laws that were over-turned. We have also compared our data with


tort reform data independently collected by Ronen Avraham (2006), using Westlaw to clarify any


discrepancies. One reason for the disparate ndings in the literature may be that there are many


errors in existing data sets regarding tort law. Further information about the construction of this


data set and legal sources is available from the authors in an unpublished Appendix.


  Our primary data on outcomes comes from the Vital Statistics natality data. These data come


from birth certicates collected by each state and led with the National Center for Health Statistics.


Since the last revision of the standard birth certicate in 1989, Vital Statistics data has formed a


very rich repository of information about pregnancy risk factors, procedures performed at the time


of birth, and birth outcomes.


  We dene high risk using 17 dierent variables that indicate whether the mother suers from


conditions such as anemia, cardiac, or lung conditions; diabetes, herpes, eclampsia, or incompetent


cervix; previous large or preterm deliveries; renal failure; rh problems; uterine bleeding or other


medical risk factors.    Generally, these risk factors would be known to medical sta before the


delivery and would aect decisions about appropriate procedure use.         Our models predict that


doctors should have less discretion over high risk births, so that tort reforms should have smaller


eects in these cases.


  The birth certicate lists many possible complications of labor and delivery in a check list format.


Certain types of complications including breech delivery, cephalopelvic disproportion (baby's head


too big for mother's pelvis), cord prolapse (umbilical cord delivered prior to baby which may lead to

                                                  18
cord compression), placenta previa (placenta implanted too close to the cervical opening), abruptio


placenta (premature separation of the placenta from the uterus), and premature rupture of mem-


branes, are unlikely to be caused by the doctor's behavior at the time of delivery, while others such


as excessive bleeding, fetal distress, meconium, or anesthetic complications may be preventable in


many cases. We are certainly not arguing that any class of complication is always preventable, only


that it is useful to distinguish between those complications that are never preventable, and those


which are at least sometimes preventable.     If our model is correct, tort reform should have a larger


eect on potentially preventable complications while having little or no eect on complications that


could never be prevented.


  An additional problem is that complications could be mechanically related to C-sections, since


complications might be considered indications for C-section.     That is, a doctor may be unlikely to


perform a C-section without indicating on the birth certicate that there was some complication that


warranted such intervention. To address this concern, we examine complications for non-C-section


deliveries separately (though of course, this is a selected sample).


  The Vital Statistics data has a great deal of information about factors that might be expected


to inuence infant health.      We know the infant's parity (birth order) and gender as well as the


mother's education, race, age, marital status, and county of residence (which proxies for geographical


dierences in procedure use). We control for these variables in all of our models.


  The Vital Statistics data is linked to the tort data using the state, month, and year of birth (the


exact date of birth is not given in the public use Vital Statistics data). Table 2 presents means of


key outcome variables, tort variables, and control variables for the years 1989 to 2001.   Because the


data set is very large, we use a 10 percent random sample and include only states that experienced


a law change over the sample period.
                                        17


  The rst two columns of the rst panel of Table 2 compare the means for the full sample to


those for high risk children.     As expected, high risk children have higher rates of C-sections and

                                                   19
complications.   They are also somewhat more likely to be born to minority mothers.    The remaining


columns of the rst panel of Table 2 indicate that C-section rates and the incidence of complications


are slightly lower for births that took place in jurisdictions with a cap on non-economic damages.


However, the characteristics of mothers also vary across these jurisdictions.     For example, births


subject to caps were less likely to be to black or Hispanic women but more likely to be to women


deemed to be high risk in advance of the delivery.     Hence, dierences in the incidence of outcomes


might reect dierences in demographic characteristics. This simple comparison of means highlights


the importance of adequately controlling for other determinants of procedure use when examining


the impact of tort reform.


  The second panel of Table 2 shows the relationships between the dierent types of reforms that


we consider. It is clear that the reforms tend to move together, but it is equally clear that there are


no one-to-one relationships. For example, roughly 60 percent of births in jurisdictions with a cap


on non-economic damages were also potentially aected by a signicant reform of joint and several


liability laws. (Recall, a JSL reform is coded as signicant if the threshold for a defendant to be


held liable for 100 percent of the damages is at least 50 percent).    But only 30 percent of places


with such JSL reforms had also implemented a non-economic damages cap.            Whether the extent


to which laws are passed as a group is too great to tease out their separate eects is an empirical


matter that we will return to below.




                                            V.   Methods


  We explore the relationship between tort reform and outcomes using standard panel data methods.


Since our outcomes are relatively common and we include a large number of county xed eects in


our models, we rely on linear probability models. Our base model is specied as follows:
                                                  20
                  OU T COM Eit = a + b1 T ORTst + b2 XV ARit + b3 Y EAR

(7)                                     +b4 ST AT E ∗ T IM E + b5 COU N T Y + eit ,



  where OUTCOME represents a procedure or health outcome; TORT is a vector of indicators


for the tort reforms; XVAR is a vector of personal characteristics; YEAR is a vector of YEAR


indicators; STATE*TIME is a vector of state specic linear time trends; and COUNTY is a vector


of indicators for all of the counties that are identied in the Vital Statistics data (generally counties


with over 100,000 population, with balance of each state is treated as an additional county ); and


e is a random error term. The subscript i indicates that the variable is dened at the individual


level, while the subscript s indicates that it is dened at the state level, and t indicates that the


variable is time varying.


  XVAR includes controls for the child's gender and multiple births, indicators for whether the


mother is Hispanic, African American or other race, dummies for each parity from 1 to 4 and for


parity 5 or greater, dummies for the mother's education (<12, 12, 13-15, or 16+ years), dummies


for mother's age (19-24, 25-34, 35+), and mother's marital status. As discussed above, there are


large dierences in outcomes between demographic groups. Variables such as race may also interact


with tort reform, if for example, blacks and whites have dierent propensities to sue. Hence, it is


important to control for the variables in XVAR.


  The year indicators allow there to
                                       18 be systematic dierences over time, while the state-specic


time trends allow dierent states to be on dierent trajectories with respect to outcomes.       In fact,


these state-specic time trends turn out to be quite signicant in models of C-sections, indicating


that there is wide variation in the growth of C-section rates across states.        Finally, the county


indicators help to account for well-known geographic dierences in factors such as access to medical


                                                   21
care and physician practice patterns.     Although this is a simple innovation, most previous studies


have not controlled for county xed eects.    We estimate our models clustering the standard errors


by state.


     While (7) is a simple model, there are many possible permutations of the vector TORT. We


estimate the model including each tort reform separately (as some previous work has done) as well


as estimating a base model that includes all four major tort reforms together.         We estimate the


model separately for dierent risk groups as discussed above.


     Finally, we have conducted a number of additional specication checks. These include estimating


models that systematically exclude data from each of the largest states in order to see if our results


are driven by a few large states, and estimating models that exclude data from states that passed


reforms that deal only with medical malpractice.         The latter models are identied using only data


from states that passed general tort reforms that also happen to apply to malpractice cases.        The


idea is that these law changes are most likely to be exogenous to medical practice.




                                             VI.   Results


A.   Eects on Procedures and Health Outcomes.                Our main estimation results are shown in


the rst panel of Table 3. All coecients and standard errors are multiplied by 100. Caps on damages


increase the incidence of C-sections, while JSL reform reduces C-sections. The coecients represent


roughly 5 and 7% increases/decreases in the probability of C-section, respectively.         The second


column shows that the estimated eects on the probability that labor was induced or stimulated


are almost identical.   This suggests that many of the additional C-sections induced by law changes


were not scheduled C-sections but occurred as a result of problems in deliveries where natural labor


had been hurried along.


     In addition to its eects on C-sections, JSL reform reduces the incidence of preventable complica-


tions of labor and delivery.   The estimated eects are large, suggesting that caps on non economic
                                                    22
damages increase preventable complications by 6% while JSL reform reduces them by 13%.            The


eects are there even in non-C-section births, but are not there when we look at complications such


as breech birth, which are unlikely to be prevented by physician eort.       This pattern of results


provides support for our contention that complications may be prevented by physician eort, which


in turn, is inuenced by the incentives created by the tort system.


     We nd no eects of tort law changes on the probability of low APGAR scores.        This nding


suggests that increases in eort levels and procedure use induced by tort reforms such as damage


caps are not having an eect on infant health.


     The second panel of Table 3 shows estimates from models that include each tort reform separately.


That is, every coecient estimate in the table is from a separate regression.   The estimated eects


of JSL reform on complications are quite robust, as are the estimated eects of caps on punitive


damages on C-sections.     However, the estimates for caps on non-economic damages suggest that


it can be quite misleading to consider these caps separately, perhaps because JSL and NE caps


are often implemented at the same time and tend to have o-setting eects. Given the correlations


between some of the tort reforms shown in Table 2, an alternative interpretation is that the estimates


in the rst panel of Table 3 are aicted by multicollinearity.    However, if this were the case, we


would see a large drop in standard errors between panel 1 and panel 2, which we do not see.




B.   Specication Checks.      Table 4 shows estimates of models including leads and lags of law


changes.     While one might expect laws that turn "on" to have eects equal and opposite to laws


that turn "o", there is an important reason why this may not be the case.      In most cases, the law


governing the resolution of a tort is the one that was in eect at the time when the tort occurred.


Thus, even if a doctor foresees that a new law limiting damage caps will be adopted, there is no


reason for her to change her behavior until the law actually passes.   However, if the law that was in


eect at the time a tort occurred is subsequently ruled unconstitutional, then doctors will be subject
                                                   23
to the new law even if the tort occurred under the old (unconstitutional) regime.    For example, if a


doctor foresees that a damage cap that is in eect is about to be ruled unconstitutional, the doctor


has an incentive to change her behavior right away, because any cases arising from torts committed


today will be judged under the new law.


  The rst three columns of Table 4 show models that include 12 month leads of the law changes.


These models do not include CSR reforms, since these were never statistically signicant.         The


estimated eects of contemporaneous law changes are much the same as those shown in Table 3.


Leads of new laws (laws turning on) are never statistically signicant. Leads of laws turning o,


however, are sometimes signicant.     The estimates suggest that a doctor who anticipates that a cap


on non-economic damages will be ruled unconstitutional reduces C-sections in the 12 months before


the law change. This is consistent with the evidence presented earlier that non-economic damage


caps increase C-section rates.    On the other hand, doctors who anticipate that a JSL reform will be


ruled unconstitutional in the next 12 months, appear to reduce eort such that there is an increase


in preventable complications 12 months before the law change.      These changes are consistent with


our theory, given the asymmetry in the retro-activity of laws that turn "on" and laws that turn


"o".




  The next three columns of Table 4 show models that include lags of the law changes.         The lags


on laws that turn "on" suggest that these laws become eective quickly, since none of the lags are


statistically signicant.   Lags on laws that turn "o" suggest some lingering eects.   When caps on


punitive damages turn o there is a negative eect on C-sections and on preventable complications.


When caps on non-economic damages are removed, the estimates suggest that the eects on C-


section rates are immediate (i.e. lags are not statistically signicant), but that there is a lingering


positive eect of having had a cap on the incidence of complications.
                                                   24
  Table 5 shows results for high risk and non-high risk groups.      Our model implies that doctors


have less discretion in high-risk cases, so that we expect to see smaller eects of tort law changes on


procedure use in this group.   While the standard errors are large enough that we cannot conclusively


reject equality of the coecients across columns, Table 5 shows that the point estimates are generally


larger for high risk patients as predicted.


  We have also done some additional exploration of caps on non-economic damages, including


interactions of the dummies for the existence of caps with their amounts. The idea was that if a cap


had an eect, then a lower (more binding) cap should be associated with a stronger eect, while


a higher cap should have a weaker eect.      We found that the interaction term did tend to have a


sign opposite to the sign of the cap dummy, but it was only (marginally) signicant in the model of


C-sections, suggesting that higher caps produce fewer C-sections.     The estimates suggested that a


cap of $1,600,000 or more (which can be compared to the mean cap of $473,803 in our data) would


have a negligible eect on C-sections.


  As an additional specication check, we re-estimated the models in the rst panel of Table 3 after


systematically excluding each large state with a law change. This is a demanding specication check


since large states account for the majority of births. Our results regarding the eects of JSL and


non-economic damage caps on C-sections were remarkably robust.        Results regarding the eects of


JSL reform on preventable complications were also robust.    The eect of non-economic damage caps


on preventable complications was less robust, mostly because the standard error increased when we


excluded Pennsylvania, Illinois, or Texas.


  Table 6 shows the eect of excluding states that passed laws which pertained only to medical


malpractice, rather than to torts more generally. As discussed above, laws that were passed to deal


with malpractice might have been passed in response to specic incidents of malpractice, and thus


might be regarded as eects rather than causes of changes in physician behavior. Excluding states




                                                  25
that passed such laws has little qualitative eect on our estimates, though the eect of non-economic


damages caps on preventive complications is now signicant only at the 10% level of condence.




                                         VII.   Conclusions


  We develop a model that analyzes the incentives created by specic tort reforms and explores


the eect of tort reform on both the level of care and procedure use during child birth. Our model


shows that contrary to popular belief, reducing the threat of malpractice can increase the use of


unnecessary procedures and may reduce the eort made by doctors in realistic scenarios. Second,


we have assembled very detailed data on tort reform in an eort to accurately identify changes in


the laws. We apply this data to a large national panel data set covering an important population,


newborns and their mothers, and examine a range of outcomes representing procedure use, care


taken by physicians, and maternal and infant health.    Finally, we show that our results are robust


to many specication checks.


  Our strongest and most robust nding is that JSL reform reduces C-sections, and complications


of labor and delivery.   By aligning malpractice risk more closely with the physician's own actions,


JSL reform causes physicians to take more care and avoid unnecessary and potentially harmful


procedures.   In addition, JSL reform may cause hospitals to undertake systematic reforms that are


benecial to patients generally in order to avoid being held responsible for a large share of the dam-


ages in medical malpractice cases.   In contrast, caps on damages are found to increase unnecessary


procedure use.   They also increase complications of labor and delivery in some specications.


   Hence, in one important example, tort reform that reduces the malpractice risk facing doctors


appears to increase rather than decrease unnecessary procedure use, with harmful eects on patients.


Much of the public and academic discussion of tort reform on medical malpractice is premised on


the idea that reforms must either reduce unnecessary procedure use or have no eect. Our results


demonstrate that the incentives created by the tort system are complex, and interact in important
                                                  26
ways with other incentives facing physicians. Without knowing more about the specic incentives


faced by physicians it is hazardous to predict that a specic tort reform will either reduce unnecessary


procedure use or have benecial impacts on health.




                                                   27
                                                     VIII.     Appendix A


Proposition 1.                 Tort reform will increase the error rate if and only if the law de-
        creases the liability the physician incurs in the event of an error:

                                             ∂α∗ (s, p, law)
                                                              
(8)                             sign                               = −sign {Hlaw (s, p, law)}
                                                 ∂law


  Proof of Proposition 1. The rst order condition for the optimal error rate is:




(9)                                       0 = Uα = Bα (s, α∗ , p) − H(s, p, law).



If we dierentiate with respect to law we get:




                                              ∂α∗ (s, p, law)   Hlaw (s, p, law)
                                                              =                  .
                                                  ∂law                Uαα


The second order conditions for an optimum imply that                      Uαα < 0,   from which the result follows.   



Assumption 1. A tort reform satises the uniformity condition if the marginal eect of the law on
liability is independent of the procedure choice or the condition of the patient. In other words, a law
that changes the liability in the event of an error has the same eect whether the error occurred as
a result of performing a procedure, or as a result of not performing a procedure. That is, for every
s, s0 > 0   then Hlaw (s, P, law) = Hlaw (s0 , N P, law) ≡ Hlaw (law).


Proposition 2. Suppose that the uniformity condition holds. Then a legal change that increases
physician liability will increase s̄ (and therefore decrease procedure use) if and only if the error rate
when the procedure is chosen is higher than the error rate when the procedure is not chosen:

                                    
                       dG(s̄(law))
(10)        sign                         = sign {Hlaw (law) · (α∗ (s̄(law), P, law) − α∗ (s̄(law), N P, law)} ,
                         dlaw
                                                                   28
and the average error rate satises:

                                            dα∗ (law)
                                                           
(11)                           sign                             = −sign {Hlaw (law)} .
                                              dlaw


  Proof of Proposition 2. The the physician is indierent between performing or not performing


the procedure when:




(12)                          U ∗ (s̄(law), P, law) = U ∗ (s̄(law), N P, law).



Dierentiating this expression with respect to the law we obtain:




ds̄(law))       {Hlaw (s̄(law), P, law) · α∗ (s̄(law), P, law) − Hlaw (s̄(law), N P, law) · α∗ (s̄(law), N P, law)}
            =                                                                                                       ,
  dlaw                                      Us (P, s̄(law), law) − Us (P, s̄(law), law)
                {Hlaw (law) · (α∗ (s̄(law), P, law) − α∗ (s̄(law), N P, law))}
            =                                                                  .
                        Us (s̄(law), P, law) − Us (s̄(law), N P, law)


  The second line follows from the uniformity condition. The fact that physician utility rises faster


with patient condition when a procedure is performed implies that the denominator is positive. This


result combined with the fact that      G0 > 0            implies the rst expression of the proposition.


  For the second expression we dierentiate the expression for the average error rate to get:



                                        Z       s̄(law)
       dα∗ (law)/dlaw         =                           {Hlaw (law)/Uαα (s, N P, law)}g(s)ds
                                            0
                              R∞
                          +   s̄(law)   {Hlaw (law)/Uαα (s, P, law)}g(s)ds

                                                                                                  ds̄(law))
                              +         (α∗ (s̄(law), N P, law) − α∗ (s̄(law), P, law))g(s̄)                .
                                                                                                    dlaw


Note that this include two individual eects for patient who do and not not receive the procedure,


plus a third eect arising from changes in treatment for the marginal patient. This third expression




                                                                 29
can be rewritten as:




                  −Hlaw (law) · (α∗ (s̄(law), N P, law) − α∗ (s̄(law), P, law))2 g(s̄).



This, combined with the fact that   Uαα < 0   implies the second expression 11.     

  Expression 11 shows that average error rates rise if tort reform reduces liability. This result is


the consequence of two eects. The rst is the direct eect of the reform on a patient conditional


upon health status and procedure choice. The second works via the changes in procedure choice


that occur for patients whose health condition is near the cuto     s̄.   As shown above, this eect has


the same sign as the direct eect, regardless of the relative error rates for the procedure choices.




                                                   30
        IX.   Appendix B - Source of Law Data (Not Intended for Publication)


  The database of state tort reforms, containing descriptions of and citation information for tort


reforms in place in each U.S. state at dierent times between 1985 and 2004, was created using both


law and economics students who were employed as research assistants. The database's information


about tort reforms was constructed from the text of state legislation using Westlaw and Lexis-


Nexis, on-line databases containing the information used by the legal profession for both litigation


and advising clients, as well as micro-ches of early state legislation when the text of the early


legislation was not available on line. We also consulted key cases that determined the common law


rules that were in eect before legislation was enacted. Finding the relevant statues and case law is


dicult. To guide the search for this information we used:




   (1) American Tort Reform Association's Tort Reform Record ( ATRA Record available at


       http://www.atra.org/les.cgi/8140_Record07-07_3.pdf ), which lists reforms enacted since


       1986, the year it was founded.    The ATRA Record contains the name or number of the


       legislative bill that enacted the tort reform, the year the bill was passed, and a description


       of the details of each of the tort reforms, although the Record does not give the citation


       information of the statutes that the bills enact (the  name of the statutes, which is a number


       such as California Civil Code  3333.2 that shows where the statute is to be found in the


       state's statutory code).


   (2) Westlaw's 50 State Surveys of Tort reform and Medical Malpractice (http://www.westlaw.com,


       database surveys with search for tort reform), lists tort reforms that are currently in-


       cluded in a state's statutory code and provides the citation information for the reforms and


       a link to the text of the current version of the reform.


   (3) The law rm McCullough, Campbell & Lane LLP publishes on their website a summary of


       United States Medical Malpractice Law (Available at http://www.mcandl.com/introduction.html).
                                                  31
We corrected a number of deciencies in the ATRA Record. For example, it focuses on the enactment


of laws and does not always note whether the enacted reforms are struck down by a state's Supreme


Court as unconstitutional. The ATRA Record also does not indicate if reforms enacted prior to 1986


are struck down after 1986. The ATRA Record is not always clear on whether the law changes it lists


enact new tort reforms or modify existing tort reform statutes enacted before 1986. Furthermore,


the ATRA Record does not make note of when statutes enacted by state legislatures are codifying


tort reforms that were already part of a state's common law (the set of laws that were created by


the Supreme Court of that state). For instance, the ATRA Record lists New Mexico as passing a


statute adopting a reform to joint and several liability in 1987, although this reform had already


been adopted by the New Mexico appellate courts in 1982. (See N.M. Stat. Ann.  41-3A-1 and


Bartlett v.   New Mexico Welding Supply, Inc., 98 N.M. 152, 646 P.2d 579, N.M.App., March 2,


1982, Certiorari Denied by the Supreme Court of New Mexico, June 17, 1982.)


  We corresponded with Ronen Avraham, and cross validated our data with a similar data set


that he has constructed. This resulted in the correction of several errors in both of our data sets.


Avraham (2006) provides a comprehensive data set on enacted tort reform that resulted from this


collaboration. The data set we used for our regressions extend this data by including information


on whether legislation codied existing common law.


  However, coding of the tort reform variables occasionally involves some dicult issues of legal


interpretation. For example, in a few states, caps apply only to payments in wrongful death claims,


and not more generally to medical malpractice claims for nonfatal personal injury. We have treated


these states as if caps did not apply. A second issue is that some states have caps on total damages,


rather than caps on non-economic or punitive damages only, that can be awarded in a medical


malpractice claims. We have coded states with total damages caps as having caps on both non-


economic damages and punitive damages (unless punitive damages are specically excluded).




                                                 32
                                          X.   References



Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Chay and David Lee. The Costs of Low Birth Weight,            The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2005.

Arlen, Jennifer and MacLeod, W. Bentley. "Torts, Expertise and Authority: Liability of


       Physicians and Managed Care Organizations."      Rand Journal of Economics,      2005,


       36(3).



Avraham, Ronen, "Database of State Tort Law Reforms (DSTLR 2nd)" (November, 2006).


       Northwestern Law & Econ Research Paper No.           06-08.   Available at SSRN: http:


       //ssrn.com/abstract = 902711.



Avraham, Ronen, "An Empirical Study of the Impact of Tort Law on Medical Malpractice


       Payments" Northwestern Law School, 2006.



Bakalar, Nicholas.   Premature Births Increase Along with C-Sections,       The New York
       Times, Nov.   22, 2005, page f8.



Baldwin, L.M. et al., Defensive Medicine and Obstetrics,   Journal of the American Medical
       Association, 274, 1995, 1606-1610.

Baicker, Katherine and Amitabh Chandra.         Defensive Medicine and Disappearing Doc-


       tors? Regulation, 28 #3, Fall 2005, 24-31.



Baicker, Katherine, Kasey Buckles, Amitabh Chandra. Geographic Variation in the Use


       and Appropriateness of Caesarean Delivery, UCLA School of Public Aairs working


       paper, August 24, 2005.



Brown, Mark and Robert Puelz. The Eect of Legal Rules on the Value of Economic and


       noneconomic Damages and the Decision to File, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,


       v18 #2, 1999, 189-213.
                                                  33
Burstin, H.R., W.G. Johnson, S.R. Lipsitz, and T.A. Brennan. Do the Poor Sue More?


      A Case-Control Study of Malpractice Claims and Socioeconomic Status, Journal of


      the American Medical Association, 270 #14, 1993, 1697-701.


Congressional Budget Oce. Limiting Tort Liability for Medical Malpractice, Economic


      and Budget Issue Brief (Washington D.C.: CBO) Jan. 8 2004.


Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber.     "Public Health Insurance and Medical Treatment:


      The Equalizing Impact of the Medicaid Expansions," Journal of Public Economics,


      v82 #1, October 2001, 63-90.


                 ,                , and Michael Fischer, "Physician Payments and Infant


      Mortality: Evidence from Medicaid Fee Policy," The American Economic Review,


      May 1995, 85 #2, 106-111.


                 and Enrico Moretti. Mother's Education and the Intergenerational Trans-


      mission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings, Quarterly Journal of


      Economics, VCXVIII #4, Nov. 2003, 1495-1532.


Dranove, David. "Demand Inducement and the Physician/Patient Relationship," Economic


      Inquiry, 26, April, 1988, 281-299.


Dubay, Lisa, Robert Kaestner, and Timothy Waidmann. The Impact of Malpractice Fears


      on Caesarean Section Rates, Journal of Health Economics, 18 1999, 491-522.


Danzon, Patricia, Mark Pauly, and Raynard Kington. The Eects of Malpractice Litigation


      on Physician's Fees and Incomes, The American Economic Review, 80 #2, May


      1990, 122-127.


                 . Liability for Medical Malpractice, Handbook of Health Economics, 1B


      (Amsterdam: North Holland) v1b, 2000, 1339-1404.


Elias, Marilyn. Obstetricians Dwindle Amid High Malpractice Costs, USA Today, May


      6, 2002.
                                               34
Garner, Bryan (ed). Black's Law Dictionary, 7
                                             th edition (St. Paul MI: West Group) 1999,


      p 971.


General Accounting Oce, Medical Malpractice Insurance:     Multiple Factors Have Con-


      tributed to Increased Premium Rates, GAO-03-702 (June 2003), p. 27.


Gruber, Jonathan, and Maria Owings. Physician Financial Incentives and Caesarean Sec-


      tion Delivery, RAND Journal of Economics, 27 #1, Spring 1996, 99-123.


               , John Kim, Dina Mayzlin. Physician Fees and Procedure Intensity: The


      Case of Caesarean Delivery, Journal of Health Economics, 18 #4, 1999, 473-490.


Harvard Medical Practice Study. Patients, Doctors, and Lawyers: Medical Injury, Malprac-


      tice Litigtion, and Patient Compensation in New York, the report of the Harvard


      Medical Practice Study to the state of New York (Cambridge MA: President and


      Fellows of Harvard University) 1990.


Hotz-Eakin, Douglas. The Eects of Tort Reform: Evidence from the States, Congress of


      the United States, Congressional Budget Oce, June 2004.


Institute of Medicine. Preventing Medication Errors (Washington D.C.: National Academy


      Press) July 2006.


Jensen, Michael and Willam Meckling, Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency


      Costs and Ownership Structure,   Journal of Financial Economics   , 3(6), 305-60,


      1976.


Kahneman, Daniel, David Schkade, and Cass Sunstein. Assessing Punitive Damages, Yale


      Law Journal, v107, May 1998, 2071-2153.


Keeler, Emmett B, M. Brodie. Economics Incentives in the Choice Between Vaginal De-


      livery and Caesarean Section, Millbank Quarterly, 71 #3, 1993, 365-404.


Kessler, Daniel and Mark McClellan. Do Doctors Practice Defensive Medicine? Quarterly


      Journal of Economics, v 111 #2, May 1996, 353-390.
                                                35
                 and                  , "Malpractice Law and Health Care Reform: Optimal


      Liability Policy in an Era of Managed Care," Journal of Public Economics, 2002, 84,


      175-197.



                 and                  , "How Liability Reform Aects Medical Productivity,"


      Journal of Health Economics, 2002, 21, 931-955.



                 , W.M. Sage, and D.J. Becker.         Impact of Malpractice Reforms on the


      Supply of Physician Services, Journal of the American Medical Association, 293


      #21, June 1, 2005.



Kim, Beomsoo.      The Impact of Malpractice Risk on the Use of Obstetrics Procedures,


      Xerox, Dept. of Economics, University of Maryland, November 2005.



Kornhauser, Lewis A. and Revesz, Richard L. Sharing Damages Among Multiple Tortfea-


      sors,   Yale Law Journal, 98 (5), March, 831-884 1989.

                  and Klee, Elizabeth, Comparisons of the incentive to Insolvency under


      Dierent Legal Regimes,     Journal Of Legal Studies, 36(1), January, 141-170, 2007.

Landes, William M. and Posner, Richard A., Joint And Multiple Tortfeasors - An Economic-


      Analysis,   Journal Of Legal Studies, 1980, 9, 517-555.

                  and                  ,   The Economic Structure of Tort Law      (Cambridge


      MA: Harvard University Press) 1987.



Lawthers, A.G., A.R. Localio, N.M. Laird, S. Lipsitz, L. Hebert and T.A. Brennan. Physi-


      cians' Perceptions of the Risk of Being Sued,     Journal of Health Politics, Policy and
      Law, 17 #3, 1992, 463-482.

Localio, A.R. A.G. Lawthers, J.M. Bengtson, L.E. Hebert, S.L. Weaver, T.A. Brennan,


      J.R. Landis.      Relationship Between Malpractice Claims and Caesarean Delivery,


      Journal of the American Medical Association, 269, 1993, 366-373.
                                                  36
MacLeod, W. Bentley, Reputations, Relationships, and Contract Enforcement,          Journal
       of Economic Literature, XLV, September, 597-630, 2007.
Matsa, David.      Does Malpractice Liability Keep the Doctor Away?      Evidence from Tort


       Reform Damage Caps, Xerox, Dept. of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Tech-


       nology, March 2, 2005.


Mello, Michelle. Medical Malpractice: Impact of the Crisis and Eect of State Tort Re-


       forms (New Brunswick NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation) Research Synthesis


       Report #10, May 2006.


Pauly, Mark.   Doctors and Their Workshops      (Chicago: University of Chicago Press) 1980.


Priest, George L. The Current Insurance Crisis and Modern Tort Law,      Yale Law Journal,
       96, 1987, 1521-1589.


Shavell, Steven.   Economic Analysis of Accident Law    (Cambridge M.A.: Harvard University


       Press), 1987.


Silver, Charles, Kathryn Zeiler, Bernard Black, David Hyman, William Sage.            Physi-


       cian's Insurance Limits and Malpractice Payments: Evidence From Texas Closed


       Claims,1990-2003, paper presented at the American Law and Economics Associa-


       tions, San Francisco, May 2006.


Sloan, Frank, K. Whetten-Goldstein, P.B. Githens, S.S. Entman.         Eects of the Threat


       of Medical Malpractice Litigation and Other Factors on Birth Outcomes,        Medical
       Care, 33, 1995, 700-714.
                   , S.S. Entman, B.A. Reilly, C.A. Glass, G.B. Hickson, H.H. Zhang. Tort Li-


       ability and Obstetricians' Care Levels,   International Review of Law and Economics,
       17, 1997, 245-260.


Spier, Kathryn E. "Litigation," A. M. Polinsky and S. Shavell,     Handbook of Law and Eco-
       nomics.     Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2006,
                                                   37
Viscusi, Kep and Patricia Born. Damages Caps, Insurability, and the Peformance of Med-


      ical Malpractice Insurance,     The Journal of Risk and Insurance,   v 72 #1, 2005,


      23-43.


Yoon, Albert. Damage Caps and Civil Litigation: An Empirical Study of Medical Malprac-


      tice Litigation in the South,   American Law and Economics Review,     v3 #2, 2001,


      199-227.




                                                 38
                                               Notes




   1 See Nightingale F, Notes on hospitals; being two papers read before the National Association


for the Promotion of Social Science, at Liverpool, in October, 1858; with evidence given to the


Royal Commissioners on the state of the Army in 1857. London: Parker; 1859.



   2 Some legal scholars argue that the tort system also exists to provide insurance. The idea is that


it is easier for providers than patients to purchase insurance, especially since providers can pass


the costs of premiums on by setting higher fees.       Priest (1987) points out that higher prices will


disproportionately impact the poor, and that higher premiums may cause insurance markets to fail


as lower risk providers pull out (self insure) causing premiums to go still higher.



   3 See Dranove (1988) and Pauly (1980) for a discussion of physician induced demand.



   4 Even more recently, Viscusi and Born (2005) examine data at the insurance company and state-


level from 1984 to 1991 and nd that limits on non-economic damages and punitive damages reduced


insurance payouts and premiums, and increased the prots of insurance companies



   5 However, increases in payouts are not necessarily the driving force behind increases in premi-


ums. On average claims are settled 6 years after the premiums used to pay for them were collected.


Insurers typically invest the premiums during that interval, and their prots are sensitive to the


returns on these investments.   A reduction in returns can drive up premiums sharply, as appar-


ently occurred in the early 2000s (Baicker and Chandra, 2005; General Accounting Oce, 2003;


Congressional Budget Oce, 2004).



   6 There have been repeated claims that malpractice premiums are driving ob-gyns out of high


premium states, or out of practice (Elias, 2002). However, Mello (2006, page 4) concludes that the


best studies show only small or no eects of the malpractice environment on physician supply (See


                                                  39
Baicker and Chandra, 2005, Kessler et al. 2005, and Matsa 2005). In one of the few papers to look


at several tort reforms in the same framework, Klick and Stratmann (2005) argue that caps increase


physician supply while the abolition of joint and several liability reduces it.   Their OLS estimates


are small (in line with other studies surveyed by Mello) while their instrumental variables estimates


are very large.



   7 Several previous studies use cross sections of data from single states to examine the eect of


malpractice premiums on obstetrical procedures and infant health outcomes, with mixed results.


These include: Baldwin et al. 1995, Localio et al. 1993, Sloan et al. 1997, and Sloan et al. 1995.


Baicker and Chandra (2005) look at the eect of malpractice premiums on the use of C-sections


and several procedures for Medicare patients using state-level data. They nd no eect. Dubay,


Kaestner, and Waidmann (1999) and Kim (2005) use panels of national vital statistics data and


look at the eects of malpractice premiums on C-sections, nding little eect.



   8 Some reforms specify that only payments from public sources can be admitted as evidence. In


this paper, we use only reforms that allow payments from private sources to be admitted, but it did


not change our results to use a more liberal denition of reform (i.e. reform =1 if either public or


private payments are admitted).



   9 We coded JSL=1 if either the rule covering economic damages OR the rule covering non-


economic damages specied that parties had to be responsible for 50% of the harm before they


could be held liable for 100% of the damages.     This coding captures most of the changes in JSL


rules over our sample period. For example, prior to 1989, Texas had enacted a reform that set the


liability threshold at 10%, which they raised to 50% in 1995. New Hampshire, Wisconsin, and Ohio


all adopted the 50% threshold.    Illinois, Mississippi, and Tennessee all abolished the common law


JSL rule (meaning that people could only be liable for damage they caused). A few changes that


are not captured by our simple algorithm are that Alaska had a 50% threshold that they raised to
                                                  40
100% in 1989.   New Jersey had a 60% threshold for non-economic damages over the whole period,


and raised the threshold for economic damages from 20% to 60% in 1995. In both cases, we take


the view that the states had already enacted signicant JSL reforms before these further changes.



  10 For example, in Alabama, a cap implemented before the beginning of our sample period was


declared unconstitutional and removed in 1991. Yoon (2001) exploits this feature of the data in his


study of the eects of caps on malpractice awards in Alabama.



  11 The estimate of four billion is based on the assumption that 15 percent of current C-sections


are unnecessary and that the dierence in cost between a C-section and a normal delivery is about


$6,000.



  12 APGAR stands for activity, pulse, grimace, appearance, and respiration. The infant is given a


maximum score of 2 for each attribute for a maximum score of 10.       Most children receive a nine or


higher.   We code a score of 8 or lower as low APGAR.       Almond, Chay, and Lee (2005) also argue


that APGAR is a better predictor of infant mortality than low birth weight.



  13 As they point out on page 533, in the absence of transactions costs the Coase theorem implies


that one should get the rst best, regardless of the liability rule.



  14 For example, in Table 5 which examines eects on ischemic heart disease they nd that indirect


reforms increase 1 year hospital expenditures by 3.4 percent and reduce one year mortality by .4


percent. In contrast, direct reforms reduce spending by 9 percent but have no signicant eect on


mortality.



  15 The report noted that although 1.5 million people are harmed annually by medication errors in


the U.S., only 6 percent of U.S. hospitals have adopted drug computer-entry systems, which have


been proven to reduce such errors.




                                                   41
  16 An additional complication is that a cap could act as a focal point, and hence increase liability


in cases with small damages. Kahneman, Schkade, and Sunstein (1998) discuss the importance of


such focal points to juries.



  17 We have veried that we obtain the same results for Table 3 if we use all of the states.



  18 Our results for C-sections are not robust to the exclusion of the state-specic time trends,


though our other results are.




  Columbia University and NBER, 420 W 118th St., New York NY 10027, jc2663@columbia.edu




  Columbia University, 420 W 118th St., New York NY 10027, wbm2103@columbia.edu




                                                 42
Table 1: Summary of Changes in State Tort Laws, 1989-2001
                                                                                                                          Law both
                                                   Law "on"                            Law "off"                        "on" & "off"
Cap Punitive Damages                       AK (8/7/1997), IN (6/30/1995),             SD* (1/31/1996)            AL* (off 6/25/1993, on 6/7/1999),
                                          NJ (10/27/1995), NC (1/1/1996),                                        OH* (on 1/27/1997, off 2/25/1998)
                                          ND (4/30/1993), NV (5/30/1989),
                                           PA (1/25/1997), WI* (7/5/1995)

Cap Non-Economic                           MT (10/1/1995), ND (8/1/1995)     AL* (9/27/1991), NH* (3/13/1991),    IL* (on 3/9/1995, off 12/18/1997),
  Damages                                                                    OR* (7/15/1999), WA* (4/27/1989)            OH* (off 8/27/1991,
                                                                                                                     on 1/27/1997, off 2/25/1998)

Limit Joint and Several                   MS (7/1/1989), NH (1/1/1990),                                          IL* (on 3/9/1995, off 12/18/1997),
  Liability                               TX (9/1/1995), WI (5/17/1995),                                         OH* (on 1/27/1997, off 2/25/1998)
                                                  TN* (5/4/1992)

Modify the Collateral                     ID (3/23/1990), ME (4/24/1990),    GA* (3/15/1991), KS* (4/16/1993),
  Source Rule                                      WI (5/25/1995)                    KY* (1/19/1995)              AL* (off 7/12/1996, on 9/22/2000)



Notes: An asterisk indicates that the law was found unconstitutional, or reversed through a court's decision. Bold face indicates that the law applied only
to medical malpractice rather than to all torts. Sources for the laws include Westlaw's 50 State Statutory Surveys on Tort Reform and Medical Malpractice,
McCullough, Campbell, and Lane LLP's Summary of United States Medical Malpractice Law, Ronen Avraham's Data Base of State Tort Law Reforms (1st Edition),
the American Tort Reform Association Tort Reform Record (1st Edition), and Lexus-Nexus. For a more complete description, please see the unpublished law data appendix.
Table 2: Means of Key Variables by Law in Effect at Time   of Birth or Risk Group
                             All                 State      State has State has State has
OUTCOMES                   Births   High Risk has NE Cap   JSL Reform CSR refrom  PD cap
C-section                   0.217     0.297      0.196        0.222      0.217     0.216
Complications               0.335     0.450      0.331        0.325      0.351     0.324
Preventable Compl.          0.265     0.358      0.259        0.255      0.279     0.261
5-minute APGAR < 8          0.031     0.051      0.035        0.030      0.028     0.031
Low Birth Weight            0.077     0.157      0.069        0.077      0.077     0.076
DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES
Male                        0.512     0.514      0.512       0.512      0.512        0.512
Multiple Birth              0.027     0.097      0.027       0.027      0.029        0.028
High Risk                   0.280       1        0.297       0.280      0.279        0.283
Mother Hispanic             0.133     0.117      0.062       0.154      0.119        0.194
Mother African-American     0.167     0.190      0.106       0.172      0.178        0.161
Mother Other Race           0.033     0.032      0.040       0.038      0.044        0.037
First Birth                 0.406     0.387      0.395       0.408      0.404        0.401
Mother HS Dropout           0.218     0.221      0.190       0.225      0.196        0.233
Mother College or More      0.203     0.197      0.207       0.213      0.228        0.208
Teen Mother                 0.135     0.134      0.127       0.137      0.121        0.134
Mother Married              0.697     0.665      0.711       0.691      0.698        0.701
Observations             2,392,793   671,176   496,794     1,040,245   673,423     1,483,207

                             All      State     State has State has    State has
TORT REFORM MEASURES       Births   has NE Cap JSL Reform CSR refrom    PD cap
State has NE Cap            0.208        1         0.264     0.260        0.205
Amount if Cap              439264     439264      370977    354072       371471
State has JSL Reform        0.435      0.552        1        0.557        0.473
State has CSR Reform        0.281      0.352      0.361        1          0.320
State has PD Cap ($)        0.590      0.613      0.674      0.705        0.953
Amount if Cap ($)          293086     257264      388291    353572       293086
State has PD Cap (multip    0.523      0.477       0.479     0.602        0.844
Amount if Cap (multiple)    3.073      2.938      2.728      4.230       3.073

Notes: The sample is drawn from the National Vital Statistics Natality Files for 1989-2001 and consists
of a 10% random sample of births from states that experienced a law change. (These states are listed in
Table 1). NE Cap indicates a cap on non-economic damages, while PD cap indicates a cap on
punitive damages. Caps on punitive damages may be specified in either dollar terms or as a multiple of
the economic damages.   Births are considered to be high risk if they have one of the risk factors
listed in the text. Non-preventable complications include: breech delivery, cephalopelvic disproportion,
cord prolapse, placenta previa, abruptio placenta, and premature rupture of membranes. All other
complications are considered preventable and include: maternal fever, meconium (moderate/heavy),
excessive bleeding not from abruptio placenta or placenta previa, maternal seizures, precipitous labor,
prolonged labor, dysfunctional labor, anesthetic complications, fand etal distress.
Table 3: Effects of Tort Reforms
a) Overall Effects, Four Laws Entered
                          Induction/ Preventable       Other    No-C sect.
              C-         Stimulation    Compli-       Compli-     Compli-        Low
Procedures:   sections       Labor      cations       cations     cations       Apgar
Any PD Cap    0.86*      0.61         1.17          0.19        0.85         0.05
              [0.32]     [.65]        [2.21]        [0.20]      [2.20]       [0.05]
Any NE Cap    1.20**     1.2          1.59*         -0.35       0.62         0.07
              [0.37]     [.62]        [0.73]        [0.30]      [0.57]       [0.09]
JSL Reform    -1.74**    -1.76**      -3.49**       0.35        -2.20*       -0.09
              [0.50]     [.72]        [1.03]        [0.27]      [0.90]       [0.12]
CSR Reform    0.43       1.02         1.06          0.06        0.77         0.04
              [0.54]     [.56]        [0.82]        [0.21]      [0.81]       [0.12]
Observations 2,392,793 2,392,793      2,392,793     2,392,793   1,852,997    1,942,247
R-squared     0.04       0.04         0.04          0.03        0.04         0.01

b) Effects with Tort Laws Entered Separately (Each Cell From a Separate      Regression Model)
                          Induction/ Preventable    Other    No-C sect.
              C-         Stimulation   Compli-     Compli-    Compli-            Low
Procedures:   sections       Labor     cations     cations    cations           Apgar
Any PD Cap    0.83       0.48        1.00        0.19       0.67             0.01
              [0.41]     [.64]       [2.14]      [0.20]     [2.08]           [0.08]
Any NE Cap    0.40       0.36        -0.09       -0.14      -0.44            -0.02
              [0.26]     [.59]       [0.66]      [0.22]     [0.60]           [0.04]
JSL Reform    -0.94      -1.06       -2.38*      0.19       -1.67*           -0.08
              [0.64]     [.58]       [1.05]      [0.27]     [0.78]           [0.07]
CSR Reform    0.27       -0.54       0.64        0.17       0.52             -0.12
              [0.45]     [.59]       [0.71]      [0.21]     [0.67]           [0.14]

Notes: Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100. Linear probability models
include dummy variables for county, state-specific time trends, month, and year
dummies, in addition to controls for child gender, multiple births, indicators for
mother Hispanic, African American or other race, dummies for each parity from 1 to 4
and for parity 5+, dummies for mother's education (<12, 12, 13-15, 16+ years),
mother's age (19-24, 25-34, 35+) and marital status. Complications that are not considered
preventable are breech position, cephalopelvic disproportion, cord prolapse, premature
rupture of membrane, abruptio placenta, and placenta previa.
Other complications are considered to be preventable.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level. A ** or * indicates
statistical significance at 99 or 95%, respectively.
Table 4: Leads and Lagged Effects of Tort Reforms

                                               Leads                                 Lags
                                   Leads    Preventable                  Lags     Preventable
                                     C-       Compli-         Low          C-       Compli-          Low
Procedures:                      sections     cations        APGAR     sections     cations        APGAR
Any PD Cap                     0.96*        1.84          0.06        0.89*       1.56          0.01
                               [0.39]       [2.45]        [0.07]      [0.38]      [2.73]        [0.06]
  12 month lead/lag law ON     0.25         -0.32         0.18        -0.35       -2.25         0.20**
                               [0.57]       [0.82]        [0.15]      [0.43]      [2.69]        [0.06]
  12 month lead/lag law OFF    -0.35        -3.47         0.01        -0.27*      -1.81*        -0.01
                               [0.64]       [1.80]        [0.10]      [0.10]      [0.85]        [0.04]
Any NE Cap                     1.23**       1.29          0.09        1.26**      1.92**        0.05
                               [0.39]       [0.68]        [0.10]      [0.40]      [0.65]        [0.08]
  12 month lead/lag law ON     -0.4         -0.83         3.51        0.19        -0.58         0.72**
                               [3.56]       [5.98]        [3.33]      [0.23]      [0.32]        [0.09]
  12 month lead/lag law OFF    -0.73*       -0.76         -0.08       0.48        1.16**        -0.02
                               [0.32]       [0.64]        [0.09]      [0.25]      [0.37]        [0.09]
JSL Reform                     -1.73**      -3.41**       -0.1        -1.77**     -3.30**       -0.11
                               [0.47]       [0.97]        [0.15]      [0.48]      [1.07]        [0.15]
  12 month lead/lag law ON     0.24         -1.2          -3.5        -0.01       0.58          -0.66**
                               [3.52]       [5.96]        [3.33]      [0.27]      [0.97]        [0.12]
  12 month lead/lag law OFF    0.88         2.45**        0.12        -0.48       0.13          -0.04
                               [0.45]       [0.80]        [0.15]      [0.24]      [0.58]        [0.07]
Observations                   2,392,793    2,392,793     1,942,247   2,392,793   2,392,793     1,942,247
R-squared                      0.04         0.04          0.01        0.04        0.04          0.01

See notes to Table 3.
A 12 month lead is a dummy that is equal to one in the 12 months before a law changes.
A 12 month lag is a dummy that is equal to one in the 12 months after a law changes.
Table 5: Effects of Tort Reform on Subgroups

                                           Non High       High
                 Non High      High          Risk          Risk
                   Risk         Risk     Preventable Preventable
               C-section    C-section   Complications Complications
Any PD Cap     0.90**       0.46        0.96          1.37
               [0.28]       [0.45]      [2.14]        [2.00]
Any NE Cap     1.13**       1.14*       1.90*         0.69
               [0.34]       [0.41]      [0.78]        [0.59]
JSL Reform     -1.67**      -1.26**     -3.37**       -3.15**
               [0.51]       [0.39]      [1.08]        [0.92]
CSR Reform     0.65         -0.27       0.86          1.38
               [0.60]       [0.42]      [0.83]        [0.97]
Observations   1,721,617    671,176     1,721,617     671,176
R-squared      0.02         0.06        0.04          0.04

Notes: See Table 3.
Table 6: Effect of Excluding Law Changes Pertaining Only to Malpractice

                (1)              (3)
                                 Preventable
             C-                  Compli-
             section             cations
Any PD Cap   0.97                6.22
             [0.85]              [5.28]
Any NE Cap   1.41*               1.79
             [0.50]              [0.91]
JSL Reform   -1.92**             -2.76*
             [0.44]              [1.08]
CSR Reform   1.14                1.31
             [0.73]              [0.83]
Observations 1,760,142           1,760,142
R-squared    0.04                0.04

Notes: Deleted States include AL,
ME, MT, OH, ND, PA, RI, SD and WI.
