                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE RETURNS TO CURRENCY SPECULATION

                                           Craig Burnside
                                         Martin Eichenbaum
                                         Isaac Kleshchelski
                                           Sergio Rebelo

                                        Working Paper 12489
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12489


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2006




We thank Ravi Jagannathan for numerous discussions and suggestions. We benefited from the comments
of David Backus, Lars Hansen, Bob Hodrick, and Barbara Rossi and from conversations with Kent
Daniel (Goldman Sachs), Angel Serrat (J.P. Morgan), and Amitabh Arora, Antonio Silva and David
Mozina (Lehman Brothers). We also thank Andrew Nowobilski for research assistance, and Kevin
Ji for assistance with our data set.

© 2006 by Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Returns to Currency Speculation
Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo
NBER Working Paper No. 12489
August 2006, Revised November 2006
JEL No. E24,F31,G15

                                            ABSTRACT

Currencies that are at a forward premium tend to depreciate. This 'forward-premium puzzle' represents
an egregious deviation from uncovered interest parity. We document the properties of returns to currency
speculation strategies that exploit this anomaly. We show that these strategies yield high Sharpe ratios
which are not a compensation for risk. In practice bid-ask spreads are an increasing function of order
size. In addition, there is price pressure, i.e. exchange rates are an increasing function of net order
flow. Together these frictions greatly reduce the profitability of currency speculation strategies. In
fact, the marginal Sharpe ratio associated with currency speculation can be zero even though the average
Sharpe ratio is positive.

Craig Burnside                                     Isaac Kleshchelski
Department of Economics                            Northwestern University
Duke University                                    ikleshchelski@kellogg.northwestern.edu
213 Social Sciences Building
Durham, NC 27708-0097                              Sergio Rebelo
and NBER                                           Kellogg Graduate School of Management
burnside@econ.duke.edu                             Northwestern University
                                                   Leverone Hall
Martin Eichenbaum                                  Evanston, IL 60208-2001
Department of Economics                            and NBER
Northwestern University                            s-rebelo@northwestern.edu
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eich@northwestern.edu
1         Introduction
Currencies that are at a forward premium tend to depreciate. This ‘forward-premium puzzle’
represents an egregious deviation from uncovered interest parity (UIP). We document the
properties of the payoﬀs to currency speculation strategies that exploit this anomaly. The
first strategy, known as the carry trade, is widely used by practitioners. This strategy
involves selling currencies forward that are at a forward premium and buying currencies
forward that are at a forward discount. The second strategy relies on a particular regression
used by Bilson (1981), Fama (1984), and Backus, Gregory, and Telmer (1993) to forecast
the payoﬀ to selling currencies forward. We show that both strategies applied to portfolios
of currencies yield high Sharpe ratios. These high Sharpe ratios primarily reflect the low
standard deviation of the payoﬀs as opposed to high average returns.1 A key property of the
payoﬀs is that they are uncorrelated with traditional risk factors. Consequently, the high
Sharpe ratios that we identify cannot be interpreted as compensating agents for bearing
risk.2
        Our empirical findings raise the question: why don’t investors massively exploit our trad-
ing strategies to the point where either the Sharpe ratios fall to zero or currency-speculation
payoﬀs become correlated with risk factors? We explore two answers to this question. First,
we use direct evidence that bid-ask spreads are an increasing function of order size. This
pattern of transactions costs substantially reduces the apparent profitability of currency spec-
ulation strategies. Second, evidence from the microstructure literature suggests that there
is price pressure in spot currency markets: exchange rates change in response to net order
flow, i.e. the diﬀerence between buyer-initiated and seller-initiated orders. Price pressure
drives a wedge between average and marginal Sharpe ratios. By marginal Sharpe ratio we
mean the Sharpe ratio associated with the last unit of currency that is bet in a given period.
We argue that marginal Sharpe ratios can be zero even though average Sharpe ratios are
positive. Consequently, the existence of price pressure can rationalize the view that currency
speculators make profits but leave little, if any, money on the table.
        Why should macroeconomists care about our results? UIP is a central feature of virtually
    1
      Since our currency speculation strategies involve zero net investment, the Sharpe ratio is the ratio of the
average payoﬀ to the standard deviation of the payoﬀ.
    2
      There is some evidence that for the second strategy the cross-sectional variation in the average excess
returns across currencies is correlated with some traditional risk factors. This result does not hold for the
first strategy.



                                                       1
all linearized general-equilibrium open-economy models. Model builders tend to respond to
the sharp statistical failure of UIP in one of two ways. The first response is to ignore the
problem. The second response is to add a shock to the UIP equation. This shock is often
referred to as a ‘risk premium’ shock (see, e.g., McCallum, 1994). Without understanding
why UIP fails it is hard to assess the first response. Our evidence strongly suggests that
the second response is fraught with danger. In general equilibrium open-economy models
“risk premium” shocks aﬀect domestic interest rates which in turn aﬀect aggregate quanti-
ties like consumption and output. We find little evidence that currency-speculation payoﬀs
are correlated with variables like consumption or output. While introducing ‘risk premium’
shocks improves the fit of the UIP equation, these shocks can induce counterfactual correla-
tions between interest rates and aggregate quantities. So allowing for ‘risk premium’ shocks
can introduce an important source of model misspecification that is likely to aﬀect policy
analyses.
    Our paper is organized as follows. We review the basic parity conditions in Section 2. In
Section 3 we briefly describe statistical evidence on UIP. We describe the two speculation
strategies that we study in Section 4 and characterize the properties of payoﬀs to currency
speculation in Section 5. In Sections 6 and 7 we study whether the payoﬀs to currency spec-
ulation are correlated with risk and macro factors. In Section 8 we examine the consequences
of price pressure. Section 9 concludes.


2     Covered and Uncovered Interest Rate Parity
To fix ideas we derive the standard covered and uncovered interest parity conditions using a
simple small-open-economy model with an exogenous endowment of a single good, Yt . This
economy is populated by a representative agent who maximizes his lifetime utility:
                                          X
                                          ∞
                                 U = E0         β t u(Ct , Mt /Pt ).
                                          t=0

Here, Ct represents consumption, Mt denotes beginning-of-period money holdings, and
Pt denotes the price level. The momentary utility function u(.) is strictly concave, the dis-
count factor, β, is between zero and one, and E0 is the expectations operator conditional
on the information available at the beginning of time zero. It is convenient to express the




                                                 2
agent’s time t budget constraint in foreign currency units (FCUs),

                     ∗
          St Bt+1 + Bt+1 = St Bt (1 + Rt−1 ) + Bt∗ (1 + Rt−1
                                                         ∗
                                                             )
                              +St (Mt − Mt+1 ) + xt−1 (Ft−1 − St ) + St Pt (Yt − Ct ) .   (1)

Here St denotes the spot exchange rate defined as FCUs per unit of domestic currency. In
our data exchange rates are quoted as FCUs per British pound. So it is natural for us to take
the British Pound as the domestic currency. The variable Ft denotes the forward exchange
rate, expressed as FCUs per British pound, for forward contracts maturing at time t + 1.
The variables Bt and Bt∗ denote beginning-of-period holdings of domestic and foreign bonds,
respectively. Bonds purchased at time t yield interest rates of Rt and Rt∗ in domestic and
foreign currency, respectively. The variable xt denotes the number of pounds sold forward
at time t. To simplify notation we abstract from state-contingent securities.
   The agent’s first-order conditions imply two well-known parity conditions,
                                           1
                                 (1 + Rt∗ ) = (1 + Rt ) Ft ,                              (2)
                                           St
                                      ∙ µ      ¶                           ¸
                       ∗                  St+1     covt (St+1 /St , λt+1 )
                 (1 + Rt ) = (1 + Rt ) Et        +                           .            (3)
                                           St                Et λt+1
Relation (2) is known as covered interest-rate parity (CIP). Relation (3) is a risk-adjusted
version of UIP. Here λt , the time t marginal utility of a FCU, is the Lagrange multiplier
associated with (1).
   Together (2) and (3) imply that the forward rate is the expected value of the future spot
rate plus a risk premium,
                                            covt (λt+1 , St+1 )
                              Ft = Et St+1 +                    .                        (4)
                                                 Et λt+1
We pay particular attention to the case in which covt (λt+1 , St+1 ) = 0 so that the forward
rate is an unbiased predictor of the future spot rate:

                                       Ft = Et (St+1 ) .                                  (5)

   There is a large literature, surveyed by Hodrick (1987) and Engel (1996), that rejects
the implications of (5). There is also a large literature that tests (4) under alternative
parameterizations of an agent’s utility function that allow for risk aversion. As far as we
know there is no utility specification for a representative agent which succeeds in generating
a risk premium compatible with (4) (see Backus, Foresi, and Telmer 1998 for a discussion).

                                                3
3       Evaluating Parity Conditions
In this section we describe our data set and use it to briefly review the nature of the statistical
evidence against (5).


Data Our data set, obtained from Datastream, consists of daily observations for bid and
ask interbank spot exchange rates, 1-month and 3-month forward exchange rates, and interest
rates at 1-month and 3-month maturities. All exchange rates are quoted in FCUs per British
pound. The ask (bid) exchange rate is the rate at which a participant in the interdealer
market can buy (sell) British pounds from a currency dealer. The ask (bid) interest rate
is the rate at which agents can borrow (lend) currency. We convert daily data into non-
overlapping monthly observations (see appendix A for details). Our data set covers the
period January 1976 to December 2005 for spot and forward exchange rates and January
1981 to December 2005 for interest rates. The countries included in the data set are Belgium,
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Switzerland, the UK, and the U.S.3


Bid-Ask Spreads Table 1 displays median bid-ask spreads for spot and forward ex-
change rates. The left-hand panel reports median bid-ask spreads in percentage terms
[100×ln (Ask/Bid)]. The right-hand panel reports the diﬀerence between ask and bid quotes
in units of foreign currency. Three observations emerge from Table 1. First, bid-ask spreads
are wider in forward markets than in spot markets. Second, there is substantial heterogeneity
across currencies in the magnitude of bid-ask spreads. Third, bid-ask spreads have declined
for all currencies in the post-1999 period. This drop partly reflects the advent of screen-based
electronic foreign-exchange dealing and brokerage systems, such as Reuters’ Dealing 2000-2,
launched in 1992, and the Electronic Broking System launched in 1993.4


Covered Interest Parity To assess the quality of our data set, and to determine whether
we can test UIP using (5), we investigate whether CIP holds taking bid-ask spreads into
account. We find that deviations from CIP are small and rare. Details of our analysis are
provided in appendix B.
    3
     We focus on developed-country currencies with liquid markets where currency speculation strategies are
most easily implementable. See Bansal and Dahlquist (2000) and Lustig and Verdelhan (2006) for analyses
that include emerging markets.
   4
     It took a few years for these electronic trading systems to capture large transactions volumes. We break
the sample in 1999, as opposed to in 1992 or 1993, to fully capture the impact of these trading platforms.


                                                     4
Uncovered Interest Parity: Statistical Evidence Tests of (5) generally focus on the
regression:
                        (St+1 − St ) /St = α + β (Ft − St ) /St + ξ t+1 .                 (6)

Under the null hypothesis that (5) holds, α = 0, β = 1, and ξ t+1 is orthogonal to time t
information. The rejection of this null hypothesis has been extensively documented. Table 2
reports the estimates of α and β that we obtain using non-overlapping data for both 1-month
and 3-month horizons. We run these regressions using the average of bid and ask spot and
forward exchange rates. Consistent with the literature, we find that β is generally diﬀerent
from 1. We also confirm the existence of the ‘forward-premium puzzle,’ i.e. point estimates
of β are negative. Under the null hypothesis (5), the pound should, on average, appreciate
when it is at a forward premium (Ft > St ). The negative point estimates of β imply that
the pound actually tends to depreciate when it is at a forward premium. Equivalently, low
interest rate currencies tend to depreciate.
    There is a large literature aimed at explaining the failure of (5) and the forward premium
puzzle. Proposed explanations include the importance of risk premia (Fama, 1984), the
interaction of risk premia and monetary policy (McCallum, 1994), statistical considerations
such as peso problems (Lewis, 1995) and non-cointegration of forward and spot rates (Roll
and Yan, 2000, and Maynard, 2003). Additional explanations include learning (Lewis, 1995)
and biases in expectations (Frankel and Rose, 1994). More recently, Alvarez, Atkeson, and
Kehoe (2006) stress the importance of time-varying risk premia resulting from endogenous
market segmentation, while Bacchetta and Van Wincoop (2006) emphasize the implication
of the cost of actively managing foreign exchange portfolios for the failure of UIP.
    Our objective in this paper is not to explain the failure of UIP. Instead our goal is to
measure the economic significance of this failure. Our metric for significance is the amount
of money that can be made by exploiting deviations from UIP.


4     Two Currency-Speculation Strategies
We consider two speculation strategies that exploit the failure of UIP. The first strategy,
known to practitioners as the ‘carry trade’, involves borrowing low-interest-rate currencies
and lending high-interest-rate currencies, without hedging the exchange rate risk. The second
strategy, suggested by Bilson (1981), Fama (1984), and Backus, Gregory, and Telmer (1993),
relies on a particular regression to predict the payoﬀ to selling currency forward. We refer

                                               5
to this strategy as the BGT strategy.


The Carry-Trade Strategy To describe this strategy we abstract, for the moment, from
bid-ask spreads. The carry trade consists of borrowing the low-interest-rate currency and
lending the high-interest-rate currency,
                                       ½
                                         > 0 if Rt < Rt∗ ,
                                  yt =                                                        (7)
                                         < 0 if Rt∗ < Rt ,
where yt is the amount of pounds borrowed. The payoﬀ to this strategy, denominated in
pounds, is:                       ∙                             ¸
                                             ∗   1
                                yt St (1 + Rt )      − (1 + Rt ) .                         (8)
                                                St+1
      An alternative version of the carry-trade strategy consists of selling the pound forward
when it is at a forward premium (Ft > St ) and buying the pound forward when it is at a
forward discount (Ft < St ),                ½
                                                 > 0 if Ft > St ,
                                     xt =                                                     (9)
                                                 < 0 if Ft < St .
Here xt is the number of pounds sold forward. The pound-denominated payoﬀ to this strategy
is,                                              µ          ¶
                                                      Ft
                                            xt            −1 .                               (10)
                                                     St+1
      When (2) holds, strategy (7) yields positive payoﬀs if and only if strategy (9) has positive
payoﬀs. This result holds because the two payoﬀs are proportional to each other. In this
sense the strategies are equivalent. We focus our analysis on strategy (9) for two reasons.
First, strategy (9) is generally more profitable than (7) because it involves lower transactions
costs. Second, our sample for forward rates is longer than our interest rate sample.
      In general there is no reason to think that the carry trade is an optimal speculation
strategy. However, it is widely used by practitioners (see Galati and Melvin, 2004) and can
be rationalized under certain assumptions. It is convenient to define the time t marginal
utility of a pound, λ∗t = St λt . Suppose that an agent increases xt by one unit, i.e. he sells
an additional pound forward. The impact of this action on the agent’s utility is given by,

                                        £                    ¤
                                      Et λ∗t+1 (Ft /St+1 − 1)
                 ¡              ¢
Suppose that covt λ∗t+1 , 1/St+1 = 0 and that the agent believes that 1/St+1 is a martingale:

                                        Et (1/St+1 ) = 1/St .                                (11)

                                                       6
Then it is optimal for the agent to engage in the carry trade, i.e. he should sell the pound
forward (xt > 0) when Ft > St and buy the pound forward (xt < 0) when Ft < St .
   We consider two versions of the carry trade distinguished by how bid-ask spreads are
treated. In both versions we normalize the size of the bet to 1 pound. In the first version
we implement (9) and calculate payoﬀs assuming that agents can buy and sell currency at
the average of the bid and ask rates. From this point forward, we denote the average of the
bid (Stb ) and the ask (Sta ) spot exchange rates by St ,
                                              ¡         ¢
                                          St = Sta + Stb /2,

and the average of the bid (Ftb ) and the ask (Fta ) forward exchange rates by Ft ,
                                              ¡         ¢
                                          Ft = Fta + Ftb /2.

The sign of xt is given by:                   ½
                                                  +1 if Ft ≥ St ,
                                       xt =                                            (12)
                                                  −1 if Ft < St ,
while the payoﬀ at t + 1, denoted zt+1 , is
                                                    µ          ¶
                                                         Ft
                                        zt+1 = xt            −1 .                      (13)
                                                        St+1
We refer to this strategy as ‘carry trade without transactions costs’.
   In the second version of the carry trade we take bid-ask spreads into account when
deciding whether to buy or sell pounds forward and in calculating payoﬀs. We refer to
this strategy as ‘carry trade with transactions costs’. While agents know Fta and Ftb at
                              a          b
time t, they must forecast 1/St+1 and 1/St+1 to decide whether to buy or sell the pound
                                                                  ¡   a
                                                                         ¢
forward. We assume that agents compute these forecasts using Et 1/St+1     = 1/Sta and
       b
Et (1/St+1 ) = 1/Stb . Agents adopt the decision rule,
                                       ⎧
                                       ⎨ +1 if Ftb /Sta > 1,
                                  xt =    −1 if Fta /Stb < 1,                          (14)
                                       ⎩
                                          0    otherwise.

The payoﬀ to this strategy is:
                                       ⎧ ¡ b a           ¢
                                       ⎨ xt ¡Ft /St+1 − 1 ¢ if xt > 0,
                              zt+1   =   x F a /S b − 1 if xt < 0,                     (15)
                                       ⎩ t t t+1
                                         0                  if xt = 0.



                                                     7
The BGT Strategy Backus, Gregory, and Telmer (1993) use the following regression to
forecast payoﬀ to selling pounds forward:

                           (Ft − St+1 ) /St+1 = a + b (Ft − St ) /St + ξ t+1 .                       (16)

The BGT strategy involves selling (buying) the pound forward when the payoﬀ predicted by
the regression is positive (negative). To avoid ‘look-ahead’ bias, we use recursive estimates
of the coeﬃcients in (16), where the first estimate is obtained using the first 30 data points.5
       Table 3 displays estimates of a and b computed using data at 1 and 3-month horizons for
the 9 bilateral exchange rates in our sample. For many countries the point estimate of b is
well above 1 and is not statistically diﬀerent from 3. To understand the magnitude of the b
estimates it is useful to note the close connection between regressions (16) and (6) discussed
in Fama (1984). Suppose that 1/St is a martingale. Then (16) is roughly equivalent to the
regression:
                            (Ft − St+1 ) /St = a + b (Ft − St ) /St + ξ t+1 .

This equation can be re-arranged to show that: a = −α and b = 1 − β, where α and β are
the slope and intercept in (6). Suppose that β, the slope coeﬃcient in (6), is close to −2, as
we found for the several currencies in Table 2. This translates into a value of b close to 3.
       As with the carry trade we report results for two versions of the BGT strategy, with and
without transactions costs. Using (16) it is convenient to define

                              Et (Ft /St+1 ) = 1 + ât + b̂t (Ft − St ) /St ,                        (17)

where ât and b̂t are the time t recursive estimates of a and b. For the BGT strategy without
transactions costs we assume that speculators follow the rule:
                                 ½
                                    +1 if Et (Ft /St+1 ) ≥ 1,
                            xt =
                                    −1 if Et (Ft /St+1 ) < 1.
The payoﬀ to the strategy is given by (13).
                                                                                        ¡          ¢
       In the version of the BGT strategy with transactions costs speculators compute Et Ftb /St+1
                                                                                               a


and Et (Fta /St+1
              b
                  ) using the following rules:
                                         h                           i Fb S
                                                                           t
                       Et (Ft /St+1 ) = 1 + ât + b̂t (Ft − St ) /St t a
                             b   a
                                                                                                     (18)
                                                                       Ft St
                                         h                           i Fa S
                                                                            t
                       Et (Fta /St+1
                                 b
                                     ) = 1 + ât + b̂t (Ft − St ) /St t b .                          (19)
                                                                       Ft St
   5
     We investigate variants of the BGT strategy that use separate regressions on bid and ask rates. These
refinements make little diﬀerence to our results.

                                                    8
Essentially this is a modified version of (17) that assumes that the time t bid-ask spread on
the spot is the best predictor of the time t + 1 spread (see appendix C for details). The
speculator’s decision rule is given by
                                    ⎧          ¡          ¢
                                    ⎨ +1 if Et ¡Ftb /St+1
                                                      a
                                                          ¢ > 1,
                                                  a    b
                              xt =     −1 if Et Ft /St+1 < 1,                             (20)
                                    ⎩
                                       0  otherwise,

while his payoﬀ is given by (15).


5       The Returns to Currency Speculation
In this section we study the payoﬀ properties of the carry trade and the BGT trading
strategies. We consider these strategies for individual currencies as well as for portfolios of
currencies.
    Table 4 reports the mean, standard deviation, and Sharpe ratio of the monthly non-
annualized payoﬀs to the carry trade, with and without transactions costs. We report payoﬀ
statistics for the carry trade implemented for individual currencies against the pound and
for an equally-weighted portfolio of the currency strategies. Table 5 is the analogue to Table
4 for the BGT strategy. To put our results into perspective, the monthly non-annualized
Sharpe ratio of the Standard & Poors 500 index (S&P 500) is 0.14 for the period 1976 to
2005.
    Even though bid-ask spreads are small, they have a sizable impact on the profitability of
currency speculation. For example, without transactions costs the Sharpe ratio associated
with the equally-weighted portfolio is roughly 0.18 for the carry trade and 0.20 for the BGT
strategy. Incorporating bid-ask spreads reduces the Sharpe ratio to 0.15 for the carry trade
and to 0.10 for the BGT strategy. Most of the reduction results from a substantial decline
in the expected payoﬀ to the strategies.
    It is sometimes argued that since bid-ask spreads are small it is reasonable to ignore
them. In one sense bid-ask spreads are small. For example, if an agent buys and sells one
pound against the U.S. dollar in the spot market he loses on average S a −S b = 0.0013 dollars.
But in the sense relevant to a currency speculator bid-ask spreads are large. They are of the
same order of magnitude as the expected payoﬀ associated with our two currency-speculation
strategies. For this reason, in the remainder of this paper, we only consider strategies and
payoﬀs that take bid-ask spreads into account.

                                              9
       Even though Sharpe ratios including transactions costs are high, the average payoﬀs to
currency-speculation strategies are low. A speculator who bets one pound on an equally-
weighted portfolio of carry-trade strategies receives a monthly (annual) payoﬀ of 0.0029
(0.035) pounds. To generate an average annual payoﬀ of 1 million pounds the speculator
must bet of 28.6 million pounds every month. So to generate substantial profits speculators
must wager very large sums of money.
       Tables 4 and 5 also show that there are large diversification gains from forming portfolios
of currency strategies. For the carry-trade strategy the average Sharpe ratio across-currencies
is 0.099, while the Sharpe ratio for an equally weighted portfolio of currencies is 0.145. The
analogue estimates for the BGT strategy are 0.059 and 0.103, respectively.
       Since there are gains to combining currencies into portfolios, it is natural to construct
portfolios that maximize the Sharpe ratio. Accordingly, we compute the portfolio frontier
and calculate the portfolio weights that maximize the Sharpe ratio. Specifically at each time
t we solve the problem:

                     min wt0 Vt wt                                                                     (21)
                      wt
                                  X
                                  9                            X
                                                               9
                           s.t.         wit Et zit+1 = zp ,          wit = 1, wit ≥ 0, for all i.
                                  i=1                          i=1

Here wit is the time t portfolio weight of currency i, Et zit+1 is the expected payoﬀ associated
with the trading strategy applied to currency i and zp is the time t expectation of the payoﬀ
to the portfolio at t + 1. The variable wt represents the vector of portfolio weights. In
addition, Vt is the variance-covariance matrix of payoﬀs to the trading strategy applied to
each of the nine currencies. For both strategies Vt is a recursive estimate of the covariance
matrix of the one-step ahead forecast errors of the returns. We assume that the true value of
this matrix is time-invariant.6 To compute the recursive estimate for either strategy we take
the forecast error to be the diﬀerence between the actual payoﬀ and the agent’s expected
payoﬀ computed using the rules described in appendix C.
       Problem (21) is completely standard except for the fact that we impose a non-negativity
constraint on the portfolio weights. This constraint is important because negative weights
allow agents to trade at negative bid-ask spreads, thus generating spuriously high payoﬀs.
The solution to (21) provides a set of portfolio weights, wt , for every feasible value zp . We
   6
    In principle we could improve on the Sharpe ratio of our strategies by modeling the conditional variance
of the payoﬀs as time-varying.


                                                          10
choose the weights that maximize the Sharpe ratio of the portfolio.
      Table 6 reports Sharpe ratios corresponding to UK pound payoﬀs for the equally-weighted
and optimally-weighted strategies computed over a common sample (1979:10 to 2005:12).
These Sharpe ratios are both high and statistically diﬀerent from zero. The Sharpe ratios of
the optimally-weighted portfolio strategies are substantially higher than those of the equally-
weighted portfolio strategies.
      The top of Figure 1 displays realized payoﬀs (measured in pounds) for the equally-
weighted and optimal portfolio carry-trade strategies. The bottom of Figure 1 presents
the analogue results for the BGT strategy. Since realized payoﬀs are very volatile we display
a 12 month moving average of the diﬀerent series. Interestingly, payoﬀs to the carry-trade
strategy are not concentrated in a small number of periods. In contrast, the BGT strategy
does better in the early part of the sample.
      We use the realized payoﬀs to compute the cumulative realized return (measured in U.S.
dollars) to committing one dollar in the beginning of the sample (1977 for the carry trade
and 1979 for BGT) to various currency-speculation strategies and reinvesting the proceeds
at each point in time.7 The agent starts with one U.S. dollar in his bank account and bets
that dollar in the currency strategy. From that point forward the agent bets the balance
of his bank account on the currency strategy. Currency strategy payoﬀs are deposited or
withdrawn from the agent’s account. Since the currency strategy is a zero-cost investment,
the agent’s net balances stay in the bank and accumulate interest at the bid Libor rate
published by the Federal Reserve. It turns out that the bank account balance never becomes
negative in our sample. This result reflects the fact that strategy payoﬀs are small in absolute
value (see Tables 4 and 5).
      Figures 2 and 3 display the cumulative returns to various trading strategies. For compar-
ison we also display the cumulative realized return to the S&P 500 index and the 1-month
Libor. These figures show that all of the strategies, including the S&P 500, dominate the
Libor. More interestingly, the total cumulative return to the optimally-weighted carry-trade
strategy is very similar to that of the S&P 500. However, the volatility of the returns to
this version of the carry-trade strategy is much smaller than that of the cumulative return
associated with the S&P 500.
      Figure 4 displays realized Sharpe ratios corresponding to U.S. dollar excess returns com-
  7
      Appendix D discusses how we convert the payoﬀs to our currency speculation strategies to U.S. dollars.



                                                     11
puted using a three-year rolling window. For both strategies Sharpe ratios are high in the
early 1980s. The optimally-weighted carry-trade strategy consistently delivers a positive
Sharpe ratio except for a brief period around 1995. In contrast the S&P 500 yields negative
returns in the early 1980s and in the 2001 to 2005 period.


Robustness Our data set consists of currencies quoted against the British pound, rather
than the U.S. dollar. Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2006a) use an alternative data
set available over a shorter sample period (1983:11-2005:12) in which currencies are quoted
against the U.S. dollar. They show that bid ask spreads are generally smaller against the
U.S. dollar than against the British pound and that the Sharpe ratio associated with the
carry trade is about 40 percent higher due to the lower bid-ask spreads against the dollar.
So the high Sharpe ratios associated with our currency speculation strategies are robust to
whether we work with quotes against the British pound or the U.S. dollar.
   Our data set only contains forward rates at the 1 and 3-month horizons. The data set
used by Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2006a) includes forward rates at 1, 3, 6 and
12-month horizons. They show that long (3, 6 and 12 month) and short (1 month) horizon
trading strategies generate similar Sharpe ratios. Long horizon strategies involve less trading
but bid-ask spreads rise with the forward horizon. These two eﬀects roughly cancel each other
out. So the high Sharpe ratios associated with our currency speculation strategies are robust
to whether we work with long or short horizons.


Fat tails So far we have emphasized the mean and variance of the payoﬀs to currency
speculation. Given that these statistics are suﬃcient to characterize the distributions of the
payoﬀs only if they are normal, we now analyze other properties of the distributions. Figure
5 and 6 show sample distributions of the UK pound payoﬀs to the carry trade and the BGT
strategies implemented for each of our nine currencies. Figure 7 is the analogue to Figures
5 and 6 but pertains to the equally and optimally-weighted BGT and carry-trade strategy
payoﬀs. We exclude from the distribution periods in which the trading strategy dictates
no trade. We superimpose on the empirical distribution of payoﬀs a normal distribution
with the same mean and variance as the empirical distribution. It is evident that these
distributions are not normal, but are leptokurtic, exhibiting fat tails. This impression is
confirmed by Table 7 which reports skewness, excess kurtosis, and the Jarque-Bera normality
test. There is mixed evidence regarding the skewness of the payoﬀ distributions but almost

                                              12
all the distributions show evidence of excess kurtosis.
      One way to assess the economic significance of these deviations from normality is to
confront a hypothetical trader with the possibility of investing in the S&P 500 and wagering
bets on the optimally-weighted carry trade. The trader’s problem is given by,
                                            X∞      µ 1−σ    ¶
                                                  t  Ct − 1
                         max        U = E0      β
                        s ,X c }∞
                  {Ct ,Xt+1 t+1 t=0
                                            t=0
                                                      1−σ
                               s.t. Ct = Yt + Xts (1 + rts ) + Xtc rtc − Xt+1
                                                                          s
                                                                              ,
                                      Yt = γ t .

Here Ct denotes consumption, Yt is an exogenous income endowment assumed to grow at an
annual rate of 1.9 percent, Xts and Xtc are the end-of-period t−1 investments in, respectively,
the S&P 500 and a portfolio of optimally-weighted carry-trade strategies. The variables rts
and rtc are the time t realized real return to the S&P 500, and the real excess return to the
carry trade, respectively.8 We assume that rtc and rts are generated by the joint empirical
distribution of returns to the S&P 500 and to the optimally-weighted carry trade.
      It is useful to define the ratios xst = Xts /Yt and xct = Xtc /Yt . We impose that the agent
uses a time invariant strategy for these ratios, that is, he sets xSt = xS and xC    C
                                                                                t = x for all

t. For σ = 5 we find that the optimal strategy is xS = 0.68, xC = 1.89. These portfolio
weights imply that investments in the optimally-weighted carry-trade strategy account for
67 percent of the investor’s expected return and 70 percent of the variance of his return. So,
even though the distribution of payoﬀs to the carry trade has fatter tails than those of a
comparable normal distribution, agents still want to place very large bets on the optimally-
weighted carry-trade strategy.
      We can also compare the fat tails associated with currency speculation payoﬀs with
those present in the returns to the S&P 500 for the same time period. S&P 500 returns
display higher excess kurtosis (2.2 with a standard error of 1.3) and skewness (−0.5 with a
standard error of 0.35) than the optimally-weighted portfolio of carry-trade strategies. We
conclude that fat tails are an unlikely explanation of the high Sharpe ratios associated with
our currency-speculation strategies.
  8
    We define the real excess return to carry trade in appendix D and show how it relates to the nominal
payoﬀ, in pounds, defined above.




                                                   13
6         Does Risk Explain the Sharpe Ratio of Currency
          Strategies?
A natural explanation for the Sharpe ratios of our currency-speculation strategies is that
these strategies are risky, in the sense that the payoﬀs are correlated with risk factors such as
consumption growth. We investigate this possibility by regressing the accumulated quarterly
real excess returns to these strategies on a variety of risk factors. These factors include U.S.
per capita consumption growth, the returns to the S&P 500, the Fama-French (1993) stock-
market factors, the slope of the yield curve computed as the yield on 10-year U.S. treasury
bills minus the 3-month U.S. treasury-bill rate, the luxury retail sales series constructed by
Parker, Ait-Sahalia, and Yogo (2004), U.S. industrial production, the return to the FTSE
100, and per-capita UK consumption growth. We provide detailed definitions of the real
excess returns for U.S. and UK investors in appendix D, as well as sources for the risk factor
data.


Time-Series Risk-Factor Analysis Tables 8 and 9 report results for time-series regres-
sions of real returns on real risk factors for, respectively, the U.S. and UK. Our key finding is
that, with two exceptions, no risk factor is significantly correlated with real returns. The two
exceptions are for optimally-weighted carry trade, which is correlated with the Fama-French
HML factor and real UK consumption growth. There is no general pattern of correlation of
the HML factor with a wider range of our portfolio returns, and while the latter correlation
might explain the high Sharpe ratio associated with the optimally-weighted carry trade as
compensation for the riskiness of the associated payoﬀs to UK investors, it cannot be used
to explain the high Sharpe ratio from the perspective of U.S. investors. We infer that risk-
related explanations for the Sharpe ratios of currency-speculation strategies are empirically
implausible. This result is consistent with the literature that shows that allowing for diﬀerent
forms of risk aversion does not render risk-adjusted UIP, (4), consistent with the data.


Panel Risk-Factor Analysis In this subsection we study how much of the cross-sectional
variation in average excess returns across currencies is explained by diﬀerent risk factors.9
We use rt to denote an n × 1 vector of time t excess returns to implementing the carry trade
    9
        See Cochrane (2005) for a discussion of the relation between the time-series and panel risk factor analyses.




                                                          14
                          10
(or BGT) strategies.           Also, let mt denote the time-t stochastic discount factor. Standard
asset pricing arguments imply the restriction:

                                                E (mt rt ) = 0.                                         (22)

We use a linear factor pricing model, where mt takes the form

                                                mt = a − ft0 b,

and ft is a vector of asset-pricing factors. It is convenient to rewrite mt as

                                             £               ¤
                                       mt = m 1 − (ft − μ)0 b ,

where m and μ are the unconditional means of mt and ft , respectively.
       We estimate b by generalized method of moments using (22). It is evident from (22) that
m is not identified. Fortunately, the point estimate of b and inference about the model’s
over-identifying restrictions are invariant to the value of m so we set m to 1 for convenience.
Given an estimate of b we calculate the mean excess returns predicted by the model using:
                                             cov(mt , rt )    £              ¤
                               E (rt ) = −                 = E rt (ft − μ)0 b .                         (23)
                                               E (mt )

We compute the R2 between the predicted and actual mean excess returns. The predicted
mean excess return is the sample analogue of the right-hand side of (23), which we denote
by r̂. The actual mean excess return is the sample analogue of the left-hand side of (23),
which we denote by r̄. Let the average across the elements of r̄ be r̃. The R2 measure is
                                                     (r̄ − r̂)0 (r̄ − r̂)
                                       R2 = 1 −                           .
                                                     (r̄ − r̃)0 (r̄ − r̃)

This R2 measure is also invariant to the value of m.
       In practice we consider several alternative candidates for ft . These are specified in the far
left column of Table 10. For each factor, or vector of factors, we report the estimated value
of b, the R2 , and the value of Hansen’s (1982) J statistic used to test the over-identifying
restrictions implied by (22).
  10
    For our panel analysis we examine quarterly returns over a balanced sample. This is 78Q3—98Q3 in the
case of the carry trade, and 81Q1—98Q3 in the case of the BGT strategy. In the vector rt we include payoﬀs
corresponding to Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Switzerland, the U.S.,
and the optimally-weighted portfolio. Our results are qualitatively robust to excluding the portfolio return.



                                                       15
       For both strategies, the J statistic reveals mixed evidence against the model. For ex-
ample, for the returns to carry trade, the model is soundly rejected when ft is given by the
S&P500 return or the CAPM excess return. However, there is very little evidence against
the model when ft is given by the Fama-French (1993) factors. For the BGT strategy, the
model is only rejected when ft is given by luxury retail sales growth or the growth rate of
industrial production.
       In sharp contrast, the R2 s almost always paint a dismal picture of the ability of risk
factors to explain the cross-sectional variation in expected returns. Most of the R2 s are
negative.11 The only exceptions to the negative R2 problem are for the BGT strategy, when
ft is given by the Fama-French factors, consumption growth, or the factors suggested by
Yogo (2006).12 These factors, however, perform dismally in explaining the payoﬀs to carry
trade.
       In sum, we find very little evidence in either time-series data or panel data that the
payoﬀs to our trading strategies are compensation for bearing risk.


7        Are Currency Strategy Payoﬀs Correlated with Mon-
         etary Variables?
There is a large literature that emphasizes the role of monetary policy in generating devi-
ations from UIP (e.g. Grilli and Roubini 1992, McCallum 1994, Schlagenhauf and Wrase
1995, and Alvarez, Atkeson, and Kehoe 2006). A common theme in this literature is that
monetary policy can generate time-varying risk premia. The precise transmission mechanism
varies across papers. Motivated by this literature we investigate whether real excess returns
to the currency-speculation strategies are correlated with various monetary variables. We
regress real dollar returns on the Federal Funds rate, the rate of inflation (of the deflator for
nondurables plus services), and the growth rates of four diﬀerent measures of money (M1,
M2, M3, and MZM). We also regress real pound returns on the UK rate of inflation and the
UK 3-month treasury-bill rate. Our results are reported in Table 11.
  11
     This result reflects the fact that the mean-square of r̄ − r̂ (the diﬀerence between the predicted and
actual expected returns) is larger than the cross-sectional variance of r̄ (the actual expected returns). This
can occur because the GMM procedure does not center r̂ around the average of the elements of r̄, which we
denoted r̃.
  12
     The factors used by Yogo (2006) are the growth rate of per capita consumption of nondurables and
services, the growth rate of the per capita service flow from the stock of consumer durables and one of the
Fama-French factors: the market premium.



                                                     16
      Inflation and the Fed funds rate enter significantly and positively in regressions for three
currency-speculation strategies, the equally-weighted carry trade, the equally-weighted BGT,
and the optimally-weighted BGT. This statistical significance of inflation and the Fed funds
rate in these regressions reflects in part the fact that these variables and the payoﬀs to
the three currency-speculation strategies trend downwards over the sample. The correlation
between currency-speculation payoﬀs and monetary variables oﬀers some support for theories
that emphasize the link between monetary policy and the failure of UIP. Still, it is troubling
that none of the monetary variables enter the regression significantly.


8       Transactions Costs and Price Pressure
Taken at face value, our results pose an enormous challenge for asset pricing theory. In
Section 5 we argue that there are currency-speculation strategies that yield much higher
Sharpe ratios than the S&P 500. Moreover, the payoﬀs to these strategies are uncorrelated
with standard risk factors. So, investors can significantly increase their expected return, for
a given level of the variance of returns, by combining currency speculation with a passive
strategy of holding the S&P 500. A crucial question is: How can such a situation persist in
equilibrium?
      In this section we explore two answers to this question. First, direct evidence suggests
that bid-ask spreads are an increasing function of order size. Second, evidence from the
microstructure literature suggests that there is price pressure: exchange rates change in
response to net order flow, i.e. the diﬀerence between buyer-initiated and seller-initiated
orders.


Transactions Costs Unlike simple textbook Walrasian markets, the foreign exchange
market is a decentralized, over-the-counter market. There are no disclosure requirements,
so trades are not observable. The market is suﬃciently fragmented that transactions can
occur at the same time at diﬀerent prices (see Lyons 2001 and Sarno and Taylor 2001). The
bid and ask exchange rates quoted by dealers are indicative in nature. These quotes only
apply to relatively small trades with transaction costs increasing in order size. To illustrate
the nature of these costs, Table 12 displays a “currency pricing matrix” that a major dealer
issues to its large customers.13 This table summarizes the bid-ask spread as a function of
 13
      We thank Ryan Owen of Belvedere Trading for providing us with this information.


                                                   17
the time of day, the size of the order, and the currencies involved. The time of the day is
relevant because it governs which exchange rate markets are open. The business day starts
in Asia between 10:00 pm and 3:00 am, New York time. Markets open in London at 3:00 am
New York time, while the New York market is open between 8:00 am and 3:00 pm. Table 12
shows that bid-ask spreads are highest when only Asian markets are open and lowest when
both European and American markets are open.
       The key feature of Table 12 is that the bid-ask spread is an increasing function of order
size. The relation between order size and bid-ask spreads is approximately linear. For
example, when we fit a linear regression to bid-ask spreads as a function of order size for the
U.S. dollar rate/British Pound we obtain a constant and slope coeﬃcient of 2.482 and 0.09.
The R2 for this regression is 0.9945.14 These regression estimates imply that the bid-ask
spread goes up by 9 pips when the order size increases by 100 million dollars. For example,
suppose that indicative bid and ask quotes for the U.S. dollar/British pound rate are 2.0000
and 2.0003. These quotes are operative for order sizes smaller than 10 million. For an order
of 100 million the bid and ask prices are 1.9997 and 2.0006.
       Suppose, for institutional reasons, that it is not feasible to break up trades into very
small amounts.15 Then the dependence of bid-ask spreads on order size substantially reduces
currency speculation payoﬀs. Since our spot and forward rate quotes are against the British
pound, we can only investigate the impact of this dependence for speculation involving the
U.S. dollar and the British pound. Comparing tables 4 and 12 we see that the average
payoﬀ to the carry trade (0.0030) is the same as the bid-ask spread associated with orders
of 300 million U.S. dollars worth of British pounds between 3am and noon, New York time.
Clearly, the dependence of bid-ask spreads on order size severely limits the total potential
profits from the carry trade.
       To illustrate the previous point we conducted the following exercise. Consider two traders,
A and B, who pursue the carry-trade strategy between the pound and the dollar. For
simplicity we assume that both traders have a bet limit of one billion pounds. Suppose that
trader A can trade at the indicative bid-ask spread, regardless of order size. Trader B faces
a linear bid-ask spread schedule with slope coeﬃcient of 9 pips per 100 million dollar order
  14
    This regression is based on order size and bid-ask spreads in New York between 8:00 am and 3:00 pm.
  15
    We do not understand why it is not possible to break large trades into very small amounts. But
banks issue currency pricing matrices like the one in Table 12 to large customers to attract their business.
Presumably, the banks would not issue matrices in which bid-ask spreads are increasing in order size if it
was straighforward for banks’ customers to break up trades.


                                                    18
size. We assume that this schedule applies to both spot and forward market transactions.
       Using our data set we find that trader A either trades zero (when the expected payoﬀ
is smaller than the bid-ask spread) or places the maximum bet of one billion pounds. The
average bet over the sample is equal to 786 million pounds, the average payoﬀ is 3.0 million
pounds, and the average payoﬀ per pound bet is 0.0030 pounds. Trader B places an average
bet of 177 million pounds, generates an average payoﬀ of 0.79 million. The payoﬀ per pound
bet is 0.0021 pounds. So the dependence of bid-ask spreads on order size reduces the average
payoﬀ per pound by 70 percent and total expected payoﬀ by 73 percent.


Price Pressure An important feature of the foreign exchange market is that trade is bilat-
eral in nature. Customers trade with dealers and brokers. Dealers trade amongst themselves
to reduce the risk associated with holding large currency inventories.16 The bilateral nature
of trades leads naturally to asymmetric information problems between customers and dealers
and between dealers. Various authors in the microstructure literature argue that asymmetric
information problems generate a phenomenon known as ‘price pressure’. In the presence of
price pressure the price at which investors can buy or sell an asset depends on the quantity
they wish to transact. For example, Kyle (1985) and Easley and O’Hara (1987) stress the
importance of adverse selection between customers and dealers in generating price pressure.
Garman (1976), Stoll (1978), and, most recently, Cao, Evans, and Lyons (2006) stress the
importance of inventory motives in generating price pressure. For our purposes the precise
source of price pressure is not important.
       The empirical literature on price pressure in foreign exchange markets is small because it
is diﬃcult to obtain data on trading volume. In an important paper Evans and Lyons (2002)
estimate price pressure for the Deutsche Mark/U.S. dollar and Yen/U.S. dollar markets
using daily order flow data collected between May and August 1996. In their empirical
model the exchange rate depends on the order flow, xt , defined as the diﬀerence between
buyer-initiated and seller-initiated orders over a one-day period. Evans and Lyons (2002)
model price pressure as taking the form,

                                      St+1 = St exp(bxt + ut+1 ).                                    (24)

Here ut+1 is an i.i.d. random variable with zero mean realized at the beginning of day t + 1.
  16
    These inter-dealer trades, often referred to as “hot-potato” trades, account for roughly 53 percent of
daily volume in 2004 (Bank for International Settlements, 2005).


                                                   19
The variable St denotes the exchange rate quote at the beginning of day t, before trade
starts. During the day the order flow xt accumulates. The exchange rate at the close of day
t is St exp(bxt ), reflecting both the order flow and the random shock.
       Evans and Lyons (2002) estimate b = 0.0054, so that a buy order of 1 billion dollars
increases the execution spot exchange rate by 0.54 percent.17 The R2 of regression (24) is
0.63 for the Deutsche Mark/U.S. dollar and 0.40 for the Yen/U.S. dollar.18
       In a recent study Berger, Chaboud, Chernenko, Howorka, and Wright (2006) estimate
(24) using high-frequency order flow data from the Electronic Broking System for Euro-
Dollar and Dollar-Yen exchange rates. Their data covers the period from January 1999 to
December 2004. Berger et al. (2006) provide estimates of b under diﬀerent assumptions
about the length of the time period, ranging from one minute to three months. Their
estimates of b for daily frequencies are roughly equal to 0.0040, with a corresponding R2
of about 0.50. Using monthly data Berger et al. (2006) estimate b to be roughly 0.0020.
The corresponding R2 is 0.20 for the Euro/U.S. dollar and 0.30 for the U.S. Dollar/Yen.
Their quarterly data results are similar to the monthly data results. Overall, Berger et al.
(2006)’s results establish that price pressure exists, even in the era of electronic trading and
for horizons as long as three months.
       We use Evans and Lyons’ and Berger et al.’s estimates of b to study the implications of
price pressure for the profitability of the carry-trade strategy. We assume that their estimate
of b applies to both bid and ask spot exchange rates. To simplify we abstract from price
pressure in the forward market. We define the average payoﬀ as the payoﬀ per pound bet
and the average Sharpe ratio as the payoﬀ per pound bet divided by the standard deviation
of the payoﬀ per pound bet. In general the average payoﬀ depends on the timing of agents’
actions and whether or not they internalize the impact of their actions on price pressure.
       To illustrate the key implications of price pressure we consider a sequence of monopolist
traders indexed by t. Trader t buys pounds forward at time t and settles these contracts at
                                 ¡             ¢       ¡               ¢
time t + 1. We assume that covt λ∗t+1 , 1/St+1
                                           a
                                                 = covt λ∗t+1 , 1/St+1
                                                                   b
                                                                         = 0, where λ∗t+1 is the
time t + 1 marginal utility of a pound. While this market structure is stark it allows us to
  17
     Our definition of xt is the dollar value of buy orders minus the dollar value of sell orders. Evans and
Lyons (2002) measure of order flow as the number of buy orders minus the number of sell orders. They
translate their estimate of price pressure into the estimate of b that we report.
  18
     See Evans and Lyons (2002) for a discussion of the identifying assumptions underlying their estimate of
b based on equation (24).




                                                    20
demonstrate the key implications of price pressure in a very transparent way.19
       Equation (24) implies that there is an incentive to break up a large trade into small
orders. A trader who places an order for z pounds at the beginning of t pays zSt exp(bz).
In contrast, if the trader divides this order into infinitesimal orders and the net order flow
                                         Rz
is zero while execution occurs, he pays 0 St exp(bw)dw = St [exp(bz) − 1] /b, which is lower
than zSt exp(bz). To be conservative we allow the trader to break his orders up, even though
in practice there are limits to how finely orders can be broken up.
       Let each period be an interval of unit length and let i denote the time within that interval.
The subscript it denotes the value of a variable in period t at time i. For example, xit denotes
the amount of pounds sold forward in period t at time i.20 When a trader sells xit pounds
forward he must buy xit pounds spot at time i in period t + 1 to settle the forward contract.
This purchase exerts price pressure on period t + 1 spot exchange rates.
       We assume that covered interest parity holds throughout the day and that interest rates
in money markets are not aﬀected by price pressure in spot exchange rate markets. It follows
that the forward premium is constant throughout period t, so that:
                                                Fita   F0ta
                                                     =      ,                                           (25)
                                                Sitb    b
                                                       S0t
                                                Fitb   F0tb
                                                     =      .                                           (26)
                                                Sita    a
                                                       S0t

The spot exchange rates Sita and Sitb are aﬀected by price pressure as traders settle their time
t − 1 forward contracts:
                                                      Z       i
                                     Sita   =    a
                                                S0t               exp(bxjt−1 )dj,                       (27)
                                                      0
                                                      Z       i
                                     Sitb   =    b
                                                S0t               exp(bxjt−1 )dj.                       (28)
                                                      0

Equations (25)—(28) imply that forward rates at time i in period t satisfy:
                                          Z i
                                a       a
                              Fit = F0t       exp(bxjt−1 )dj,
                                           0
                                          Z i
                                b       b
                              Fit = F0t       exp(bxjt−1 )dj.
                                                          0
  19
     For example, these properties hold if there are N large traders who internalize price pressure and trade
before a competitive fringe.
  20
     A negative value of xit means that the trader buys pounds forward.



                                                          21
The trader takes the bid and ask spot exchange rates at the end of period t as given:
                                          Z 1
                                a       a
                              S1t = S0t       exp(bxjt−1 )dj,
                                           0
                                          Z 1
                                b       b
                              S1t = S0t       exp(bxjt−1 )dj.
                                                              0

In forming expectations about 1/Sit+1 the trader takes into account the price pressure impact
of his actions on period t + 1 spot rates:
                                                                   Z
                                ¡ a ¢−1     a
                                                                         i
                              Et Sit+1  = [S1t                               exp(bxjt )dj]−1 ,
                                                                     0
                                                                   Z
                                ¡ b ¢−1     b
                                                                         i
                              Et Sit+1  = [S1t                               exp(bxjt )dj]−1 .
                                                                     0

The trader’s expected time t + 1 payoﬀ is given by:
                              Z 1 Ã                           !
                                              Fitb
                         π=       xit
                                        a
                                          Ri               − 1 di,
                               0      S1t  0
                                             exp(bx jt )dj

if the trader sells pounds forward, or
                                   Z               Ã                                    !
                                         1
                                                                  Fita
                              π=             xit             Ri                     − 1 di.
                                                        b
                                     0                 S1t    0
                                                                exp(bxjt )dj

if he buys pounds forward. The solution to this problem has three key properties. First, the
                             R1
optimal trade size is finite, 0 xit di < ∞. Second, the expected payoﬀ associated with the
last pound bet by the trader is zero. Third, the expected payoﬀ to the inframarginal pounds
is positive. So the average Sharpe ratio is positive, even though the marginal Sharpe ratio
is zero.21
       We now provide a quantitative example to illustrate these points. Suppose that the trader
implements the carry trade for each of the nine currencies.22 To simplify our computations
we assume that the trader chooses the total amount of trade at time t, xt and executes the
trades uniformly throughout the day: xit = ixt . Also, we assume that the data corresponds
to end-of-day quotes (i = 1). Our assumptions imply that our quotes reflect the day’s net
order flow. Appendix E contains the details of our calculations.
       Table 13 reports our results. Using Evans and Lyon’s estimates of b (0.0054) we find that
the trader places an average monthly bet of 1.3 billion pounds. The amounts invested are
  21
    These results do not rely on price pressure taking the functional form given by (24).
  22
    The portfolio constructed in this way does not correspond to either the equally-weighted carry trade or
the optimally-weighted carry trade discussed above.

                                                              22
very volatile with a standard deviation of 1.1 billion pounds. This high standard deviation
is consistent with the notion that speculative currency flows are very volatile. The expected
average payoﬀ per pound and average Sharpe ratio are 0.013 pounds per month and 0.138,
respectively.
    The average payoﬀ per pound and the average Sharpe ratio are independent of b as long
as b is strictly positive. However, b aﬀects the total bet size on the carry trade. When b is
equal to 0.0020, which corresponds to Berger et al.’s (2006) monthly estimates, the amount
bet rises to 3.6 billion pounds per month. Finally, when b is equal to 0.0010 we obtain a
mean monthly bet size of 7.2 billion pounds.
    We conclude with the following observation about price pressure and its implications.
Suppose that an econometrician uses end-of-day quotes from an economy in which there is
price pressure. Suppose he ignores price pressure and calculates the Sharpe ratio associated
with a one-pound bet in the carry trade. The econometrician would obtain the Sharpe ratios
that we report in Section 5. Taken at face value those Sharpe ratios imply that the trader
could make potentially infinite expected profits. But, as we just saw, in the presence of
transactions costs and price pressure those Sharpe ratios greatly overstate the profitability
of currency speculation.


9     Conclusion
In this paper we document that implementable currency-speculation strategies generate very
large Sharpe ratios and that their payoﬀs are uncorrelated with standard risk factors. We
argue that the presence of transactions costs and price pressure limits the size of the bets
that agents choose to place on these strategies. Moreover, the average payoﬀ to currency
speculation is much smaller than suggested by calculations based on indicative quotes. So,
while the statistical failure of UIP is very sharp, the amount of money that can be made
from this failure, at least with our currency-speculation strategies, seems relatively small.
    While we provide an explanation for why deviations from UIP persist, our analysis does
not address the obvious question of why the ‘forward-premium puzzle’ arises in the first
place. There is a very large literature on this problem, which remains a central issue in open
economy macroeconomics. Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2006b) stress the potential
of microstructure frictions for explaining the ‘forward premium puzzle.’ The central feature
of their model is that market makers face an adverse selection problem that is less severe


                                               23
when a currency is expected to appreciate.




                                             24
References

Alvarez, Fernando, Andrew Atkeson and Patrick J. Kehoe (2006) “Time-Varying Risk,
    Interest Rates, and Exchange Rates in General Equilibrium,” mimeo, Federal Reserve
    Bank of Minneapolis, March.
Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2006) “Incomplete Information Processing: A
    Solution to the Forward Discount Puzzle,” mimeo, Study Center Gerzensee.
Backus, David K., Allan W. Gregory and Chris I. Telmer (1993) “Accounting for Forward
    Rates in Markets for Foreign Currency,” Journal of Finance 48 (5, Dec.): 1887—908.
Backus, David K., Silverio Foresi and Chris I. Telmer (2001) “Aﬃne Term Structure Models
    and the Forward Premium Anomaly,” Journal of Finance 56 (1, Feb.): 279—304.
Bank for International Settlements (2005) Triennial Central Bank Survey, Foreign Exchange
   and Derivatives Market Activity in 2004, March.
Bansal, Ravi and Magnus Dahlquist (2000) “The Forward Premium Puzzle: Diﬀerent Tales
    from Developed and Emerging Economies,” Journal of International Economics 51 (1,
    June): 115—44.
Berger, David W., Alain P. Chaboud, Sergey V. Chernenko, Edward Howorka, and Jonathan
    H. Wright (2006) “Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics in Electronic Brokerage
    System Data,” mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Bilson, John F. O. (1981) “The ‘Speculative Eﬃciency’ Hypothesis,” The Journal of Busi-
     ness, 54, (3, Jul.), 435-451.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2006a) “Currency Speculation:
    The Gains from Diversification,” mimeo, Northwestern University.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2006b) “Understanding the For-
    ward Premium Puzzle: A Microstructure Approach,” mimeo, Northwestern University.
Cao, H. Henry, Martin D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons (2006) “Inventory Information,”
    Journal of Business 79 (1, Jan.), 325—63.
Clinton, Kevin (1988) “Transactions Costs and Covered Interest Arbitrage: Theory and
     Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy 96 (2, Apr.), 358—70.
Cochrane, John H. (2005) Asset Pricing, revised edition. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
    versity Press.
Easley, David and Maureen O’Hara (1987) “Price, Trade Size, and Information in Securities
    Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics 19 (1, Sep.), 69—90.
Engel, Charles (1996) “The Forward Discount Anomaly and the Risk Premium: A Survey
    of Recent Evidence,” Journal of Empirical Finance 3 (2, June), 123—92.



                                          25
Evans, Martin D.D. and Richard K. Lyons (2002) “Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dy-
    namics,” Journal of Political Economy 110 (1, Feb.), 170—80.
Fama, Eugene F. (1984) “Forward and Spot Exchange Rates,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
   nomics 14 (3, Nov.), 319—38.
Fama, Eugene and Kenneth R. French (1993) “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
   Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1, Feb.), 3—56.
Frankel, Jeﬀrey A. and Andrew K. Rose (1994) “An Empirical Characterization of Nominal
    Exchange Rates,” in Gene Grossman and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds., The Handbook of
    International Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Galati, Gabriele and Michael Melvin (2004) “Why has FX Trading Surged? Explaining the
    2004 Triennial Survey,” BIS Quarterly Review (Dec.), 67—74.
Garman, Mark (1976) “Market Microstructure,” Journal of Financial Economics 3 (3,
   June), 257—75.
Grilli, Vittorio and Nouriel Roubini (1992) “Liquidity and Exchange Rates,” Journal of
     International Economics 32 (3/4, May), 339—52.
Hansen, Lars Peter (1982) “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments
    Estimators,” Econometrica 50 (4, July), 1029—54.
Hodrick, Robert J. (1987) “The Empirical Evidence on the Eﬃciency of Forward and Fu-
   tures Foreign Exchange Markets.” Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Ibbotson and Associates (2006) Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation Yearbook. Chicago, Ill.:
    Ibbotson Associates.
Kyle, Albert S. (1985) “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading,” Econometrica 53 (6,
    Nov.), 1315—35.
Lewis, Karen K. (1995) “Puzzles in International Financial Markets,” in Gene M. Grossman
    and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds., Handbook of International Economics. Amsterdam: North-
    Holland.
Lustig, Hanno and Adrien Verdelhan (2006) “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk
    Premia and Consumption Growth Risk,” mimeo, UCLA.
Lyons, Richard K. (2001) The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates. Cambridge,
    Mass.: MIT Press.
Maynard, Alex (2003) “Testing for Forward Rate Unbiasedness on Regression in Levels and
   in Returns,” Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2, May), 313—27.
McCallum, Bennett T. (1994) “A Reconsideration of the Uncovered Interest Rate Parity
   Relationship,” Journal of Monetary Economics 33 (1, Feb.), 105—32.



                                           26
Parker, Jonathan A., Yacine Aït-Sahalia and Motohiro Yogo “Luxury Goods and the Equity
    Premium,” (2004) Journal of Finance 59 (6, Dec.): 2959—3004.
Roll, Richard and Shu Yan (2000) “An Explanation of the Forward Premium ‘Puzzle’,”
     European Financial Management 6 (2, June), 121—48.
Sarno, Lucio and Mark Taylor (2001) The Microstructure of the Foreign Exchange Market,
    A Selective Survey of the Literature, Princeton Studies in International Economics, No.
    89, May.
Schlagenhauf, Don E. and Jeﬀrey M. Wrase (1995) “Liquidity and Real Activity in a Simple
    Open Economy Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics 35 (3, June), 431—61.
Stoll, Hans R. (1978) “The Supply of Dealer Services in Securities Markets,” Journal of
     Finance 33 (4, Sep.), 1133—51.
Taylor, Mark P. (1987) “Covered Interest Parity: A High-Frequency, High-Quality Data
    Study,” Economica 54 (216, Nov.), 429—38.
Taylor, Mark P. (1989) “Covered Interest Arbitrage and Market Turbulence,” Economic
    Journal 99 (396, June), 376—91.
Yao, Jian (1997) “Market Making in the Interbank Foreign Exchange Market,” mimeo, J.P.
    Morgan, New York.
Yogo, Motohiro (2006) “A Consumption-Based Explanation of Expected Stock Returns,”
    Journal of Finance 61 (2, April), 539—80.




                                           27
Appendix A: Data
Our data set is obtained from Datastream. Mnemonics are indicated in Table A1. The
original data are daily and represent end of day quotes from the London market. The foreign
exchange rate data are originally sourced by Datastream from the WM Company/Reuters,
with the exception of the euro, which is sourced from Barclay’s Bank International. The
interbank eurocurrency interest rate data are originally sourced by Datastream from the
Financial Times. With the exception of the euro each exchange rate is quoted as currency
units per British pound. The euro exchange rates are quoted as euro per U.S. dollar. These
quotes were converted to quotes against the British pound by assuming that trades of the
pound against the euro go through the U.S. dollar.
   The original data set includes observations on all weekdays regardless of whether they
are national holidays or not. There are obvious problems with data on the 1st of January,
as these usually appear to be repeats of the observations from the previous business day. To
avoid this problem, rather than sampling on the first of every month, to obtain our monthly
data set we sampled the monthly data on the 2nd of each month. If the 2nd was a Sunday,
we used the data from the 3rd. If the 2nd was a Saturday we used the data from the 4th.
   Upon examining the resulting monthly data set, of approximately 360 observations, we
observed a few dates on which the data appeared to be measured with error due to gross
violations of covered interest parity. As a result, we made the following departures from the
rule described above.

   • For 11/2/78 we noticed that the forward rate and spot rate for the Dutch guilder
     moved in opposite directions. The forward rate data appeared suspect, so we sampled
     the Dutch data on 11/3/78.

   • For 9/2/93, we noticed that the forward rate and spot rate for the Japanese yen moved
     in opposite directions. There appeared to be a data entry error, so we sampled the
     Japanese data on 9/3/93.

   • For 4/4/94, 5/4/98 and 8/2/02, the forward rate data for all countries (except the
     euro) appear to have been repeated from the previous day and do not represent genuine
     observations. Therefore we sampled the data for all countries from 4/1/94, 5/1/98 and
     8/1/02 instead.


                                             28
Appendix B: Assessing Covered Interest Parity
To assess whether CIP holds it is critical to take bid-ask spreads into account. The variables
Rta and Rtb denote the ask and bid interest rate in British pounds. The variables Rt∗a and
Rt∗b denote the ask and bid interest rate in foreign currency.
    In the presence of bid-ask spreads equation (2) is replaced with the following two inequal-
ities,
                                      ¡         ¢ 1
                           π CIP = Stb 1 + Rt∗b    a
                                                     − (1 + Rta ) ≤ 0,                    (29)
                                                 Ft
                                    1 ¡        ¢
                           π ∗CIP = a 1 + Rtb Ftb − (1 + Rt∗a ) ≤ 0.                      (30)
                                   St
Equation (29) implies that there is a non-positive payoﬀ (π CIP ) to the “borrowing pounds
covered strategy.” This strategy consists of borrowing one pound, exchanging the pound
into foreign currency at the spot rate, investing the proceeds at the foreign interest rate,
and converting the payoﬀ into pounds at the forward rate. Equation (30) implies that there
is a non-positive payoﬀ (π ∗CIP ) to the “borrowing foreign currency covered strategy.” This
strategy consists of borrowing one unit of foreign currency, exchanging the foreign currency
into pounds at the spot rate, investing the proceeds at the domestic interest rate, and
converting the payoﬀ into foreign currency at the forward rate. Table A2 reports statistics
for π CIP and π ∗CIP for nine currencies. We compute statistics pertaining to the Euro-legacy
currencies over the period January 1981 to December 1998. For all other currencies the
sample period is January 1981 to December 2005.
    Table A2 indicates that for all nine currencies, the median value for π CIP and π ∗CIP is
negative. Also the fraction of periods in which π CIP and π ∗CIP are positive is small. Even
in periods where the payoﬀ is positive, the median payoﬀ is very small. Similar results hold
for 3-month horizon investments and the post-1994 time period.
    Our finding that deviations from CIP are small and rare is consistent with the results in
Taylor (1987) who uses data collected at 10-minute intervals for a three-day period, Taylor
(1989) who uses daily data for selected historical periods of market turbulence, and Clinton
(1988) who uses daily data from November 1985 to May 1986.




                                               29
Appendix C: Defining the Carry Trade and BGT Strate-
gies with Transactions Costs
We let xt denote the number of pounds the speculator sells forward, and, as in the main
text, assume that xt is either 1, 0 or −1. When we ignore transactions costs the speculator’s
payoﬀ is xt (Ft /St+1 − 1).
                    −1
   Suppose that Et St+1 = St−1 . If this is true, the expected payoﬀ to the speculator is
xt (Ft /St − 1). This provides the motivation for carry trade, which, by setting xt according
to (12), ensures that the expected payoﬀ is always non-negative.
   The BGT regression directly forecasts the payoﬀ to selling domestic currency forward
and implies that Et (Ft /St+1 − 1) = a + b(Ft − St )/St . In this case the speculator ensures
that his expected payoﬀ is nonnegative by setting
                               ½
                                 +1 if a + b(Ft − St )/St ≥ 0,
                          xt =
                                 −1 if a + b(Ft − St )/St < 0.
   When transactions costs are taken into account the speculator’s payoﬀ is xt (Ftb /St+1
                                                                                      a
                                                                                          − 1)
if xt = 1 and xt (Fta /St+1
                        b
                            − 1) when xt = −1. When we ignored transactions costs we
                 −1
assumed that Et St+1 = St−1 so it is natural to assume that Et (St+1
                                                                 a
                                                                     )−1 = (Sta )−1 and
     b
Et (St+1 )−1 = (Stb )−1 when taking into account transactions costs. We think this is a reason-
able assumption given that bid-ask spreads are quite stable over time in our data set. Given
these assumptions, the speculator ensures that his expected payoﬀ is non-negative if he sets
xt according to                          ⎧
                                         ⎨ +1 if Ftb > Sta ,
                                    xt =   −1 if Fta < Stb
                                         ⎩
                                           0  otherwise.
This is the carry trade strategy modified for transactions costs.
   Notice that implicit in the BGT regression is an estimate
                                  −1
                              Et St+1 = [1 + a + b(Ft − St )/St ] Ft−1 .

Hence it is natural to assume that
                                                                  Ftb St
                       Et (Ftb /St+1
                                 a
                                     ) = [1 + a + b(Ft − St )/St ]
                                                                  Ft Sta
                                                                  F a St
                       Et (Fta /St+1
                                 b
                                     ) = [1 + a + b(Ft − St )/St ] t b ,
                                                                  Ft St
when taking into account transactions costs. Implicit in these expression is the speculator’s
belief that the percentage bid-ask spread tomorrow will be the same as today’s. With these

                                                 30
assumptions, the speculator ensures that his expected payoﬀ is non-negative if he sets xt
according to (14). This is the BGT strategy modified for transactions costs.


Appendix D: Details of Risk-Factor Analysis
Defining UK Pound Quarterly Real Returns The monthly payoﬀs to currency spec-
ulation, denoted generically here as zt , we studied in section 5, were defined for trades where
one pound is either bought or sold forward. It is useful, instead, to normalize the number of
pounds bought or sold to 1 + Rt−1 , where Rt−1 is the nominal interest rate at the time when
the currency bet is made. That is, we define

                                       rt = (1 + Rt−1 )zt .

To see that rt can be interpreted as an excess return, consider the case where one pound is
being sold forward, in which case zt = Ft−1 /St −1. This means rt = (1+Rt−1 ) (Ft−1 /St − 1).
                                    ∗
Assuming CIP, (2), holds rt = (1 + Rt−1 )St−1 /St − (1 + Rt−1 ). So when one pound is being
sold forward rt is the excess return, in pounds, from taking a long position in foreign T-bills
relative to the UK T-bill rate.
   Let t index months, and let s = t/3 be the equivalent index for quarters. To convert the
monthly excess return to a quarterly excess return we define:

                      rsq = Π2j=0 (1 + Rt−1−j + rt−j ) − Π2j=0 (1 + Rt−1−j ).

This expression corresponds to the appropriate excess return because it implies that the agent
continuously re-invests in the currency strategy by betting (in month t) his accumulated
funds from currency speculation times 1 + Rt . To define the quarterly real excess return,
notice that this is simply:
                                                        rsq
                                         rsq,real =
                                                      1 + πs
where π s is the inflation rate between quarter s − 1 and quarter s.
   To generate the returns we use the 1 month Sterling interbank lending rate (mean LI-
BID/LIBOR), published by the Bank of England (mnemonic IUDVNEA), as a measure of
R. Because this series only begins in January 3, 1978 we use the series IUDAMIH, which
is the daily average of 4 UK banks’ base rates, for the period prior to this date. We use
point-in-time data that are aligned with our exchange rate data.


                                                 31
   To convert nominal returns to real returns we use the inflation rate corresponding to the
deflator for consumption of nondurables and services found in the British national accounts.
   To deal with the fact that our exchange rate data are point in time, while inflation data re
time-averaged, we proceed as follows. Recall, from appendix A, that our exchange rate data
is sampled near the beginning of each month. To take an example, we might measure the
exchange rates on February 2nd, and March 2nd. We record the return generated between
these two dates as one generated during the month of February. Analogously, the quarterly
return for the 1st quarter is generated, say, between January 2nd and April 2nd. We use the
inflation rate between the 4th quarter and the 1st quarter to deflate this return.


Defining U.S. Dollar Nominal and Quarterly Real Returns To define monthly
nominal U.S. dollar returns, we first define the U.S. dollar payoﬀs to currency speculation.
When we defined the payoﬀs in pounds, each bet was normalized to 1 pound. The natural
analog is to consider bets whose size is normalized to 1 dollar. To do this we assume that
                                                                 US         US
at time t − 1 the speculator bets a number of pounds equal to 1/St−1 where St−1 is the spot
exchange rate as U.S. dollars per pound. This would give the speculator a payoﬀ (in pounds)
        US
of zt /St−1 . The value of this payoﬀ in dollars would be ztU S = zt StUS /St−1
                                                                            US
                                                                                . In converting
the pound payoﬀs to dollar payoﬀs in this way, we use the average of bid and ask prices for
StUS and St−1
          US
              so that the U.S. investor does not pay more bid-ask spreads than the British
investor.
   The monthly U.S. dollar excess returns is rtU S = (1 + Rt−1
                                                           US
                                                               )ztU S where RtU S is the U.S.
nominal interest rate. The quarterly excess return and the real quarterly excess return are
defined as
                     rsq,US = Π2j=0 (1 + Rt−1−j
                                          US       US
                                                + rt−j                 US
                                                       ) − Π2j=0 (1 + Rt−1−j ).

and
                                                          rsq,U S
                                       rsq,real,U S =
                                                        1 + πUs S ,
where π Us S is the U.S. inflation rate.
   To generate the U.S. returns we use 1-month Eurodollar deposit rates in London with a
1-month maturity as our measure of RU S . Daily quotes are published in the Federal Reserve
Board’s Statistical Release H.15, and correspond to bid rates. We use point-in-time data
that are aligned with our exchange rate data.
   We convert nominal returns to real returns using the inflation rate corresponding to the


                                                  32
deflator for consumption of nondurables and services found in the U.S. National Income and
Product Accounts.


Data Sources for Risk Factors and Monetary Variables The S&P500 (inclusive of
the dividend) return is measured monthly and is taken from Ibbotson and Associates (2006).
Recent observations can be found on the Standard and Poors website: http://www2.standard
andpoors.com/spf/xls/index/MONTHLY.xls. Monthly returns are converted to quarterly
returns by accumulating them geometrically within each quarter. Nominal returns are con-
verted to real returns as described above for our currency strategies, except that the inflation
rate is also subtracted from the return because it is not an excess return.
   The three Fama-French factors are from Kenneth French’s data library: http://mba.tuck.
dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html. The three factors are Mkt-RF
(the market premium, which we also use to define the CAPM factor), SMB (the size pre-
mium) and HML (the book to market premium). Each of these objects is an excess return.
Monthly returns are converted to quarterly returns by accumulating them geometrically
within each quarter. Nominal returns are converted to real returns as described above for
our currency strategies.
   Real per-capita consumption growth is from the U.S. National Income and Product Ac-
counts which can be found at the website of the Bureau of Economic Analysis: www.bea.gov.
We define real consumption as the sum of nondurables and services. We convert these to per
capita terms using the quarterly average of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (www.bls.gov)
series for the civilian noninstitutional population 16 years and over. We then compute the
quarterly growth rate of the series. The inflation series for all our U.S.-based calculations is
the deflator corresponding to this consumption measure.
   Real luxury retail sales growth is available from 1987Q1—2001Q4 and is obtained from
Parker, Aït-Sahalia and Yogo (2004).
   The growth rate of the per capita service flow from the stock of consumer durables was
estimated as follows. Annual end-of-year real stocks of consumer durables are available from
the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts, as are quarterly data on purchases of
durables by consumers. Within each year we determine the depreciation rate that makes
the quarterly purchases consistent with the annual stocks, and use this rate to interpolate
                                      D
quarterly stocks using the identity: Kt+1 = CtD + (1 − δ D )KtD . Here KtD is the beginning of
period t stock of consumer durables, CtD is purchases of durables, and δ D is the depreciation

                                              33
rate. We assume that the service flow from durables (per capita) is proportional to the stock
of durables (per capita).
   The risk factors proposed by Yogo (2006) are the market premium (the CAPM risk
factor above), the growth rate of per-capita consumption of nondurables and services, and
the growth rate of the per-capita service flow from the stock of consumer durables, each of
which was described above.
   The quarterly index of industrial production is from the Federal Reserve Board of Gov-
ernors (www.federalreserve.gov), Statistical Release Table G.17. We use the growth rate of
this series as a risk factor.
   For the UK we define per-capita real consumption growth using data published by the
UK Oﬃce for National Statistics (www.statistics.gov.uk). Consumption is defined in terms
of semi-durable goods, non-durable goods, and miscellaneous goods and services plus net
tourism. The real growth rate is computed as the weighted average of the real growth rates
of the individual components, where the weights are the shares in nominal consumption.
The inflation rate is computed as the same weighted average of the inflation rates of the
deflators for the individual components. As with our U.S. data, we convert the UK data to
per-capita terms using the population 16 years and older. This series is only available every
five years beginning in 1976, and annually since 1998, so we log-linearly interpolate it on a
quarterly basis between 1976 and 2005.
   The FTSE 100 price index is from Datastream (mnemonic FTSE100). We compute
its monthly ex-dividend return. Monthly returns are converted to quarterly returns by
accumulating them geometrically within each quarter. Nominal returns are converted to
real returns as described above for our currency strategies using the UK inflation rate.
   The average monthly value of the Fed funds rate is from the Federal Reserve Board of
Governors (www.federalreserve.gov), Statistical Release Table H.15 (Selected Interest Rates),
Eﬀective Federal Funds Rate (mnemonic FEDFUNDS). We convert this to the quarterly
frequency using the average of the three monthly values within each quarter.
   Seasonally-adjusted monthly data on the stocks of M1, M2, M3 and MZM are from
the Federal Reserve Board of Governors (www.federalreserve.gov), Statistical Release Table
H.6 (Money Stock Measures), (mnemonics M1SL, M2SL, M3SL and MZMSL). We compute
quarterly growth rates by taking the growth rate from the 3rd month of the previous quarter
to the 3rd month of the current quarter.



                                             34
   The term premium is defined as the diﬀerence between the 10-year T-bond rate and the
3-month T-bill rate. Data are from the Federal Reserve Board of Governors (www.federal
reserve.gov), Statistical Release Table H.15 (Selected Interest Rates) for the 3-Month Trea-
sury Bill Secondary Market Rate (mnemonic TB3MS) and the 10-Year Treasury Constant
Maturity Rate (mnemonic GS10). We convert this to the quarterly frequency using the
average of the three monthly values within each quarter.
   The UK 3 Month T-bill rate is from the UK Oﬃce for National Statistics (www.statistics.
gov.uk) and has mnemonic AJRP. We convert this to the quarterly frequency using the
average of the three monthly values within each quarter.


Appendix E: Details of Price Pressure Calculations
Let each period be an interval of unit length and let i denote the time within that interval.
Let Fit be the forward price at time i in period t, and let Sit the spot price at the same point
in time. Given the assumption of uniform trading, the rest of ours assumptions in the main
text imply that

                                          Fit = F0t exp(ibxt−1 )
                                          Sit = S0t exp(ibxt−1 )

where xt−1 is the total order flow from forward sales in period t − 1. If there were forward
purchases then xt−1 is negative. In what follows we assume that bid ask spreads are constant
so that Fita = Fit (1 + bf /2), Fitb = Fit (1 − bf /2), Sita = Sit (1 + bs /2) and Sitb = Sit (1 − bs /2).
The speculative monopolist observing Fit and Sit believes that Et (Sit+1 )−1 = [S0t exp(bxt−1 +
ibxt )]−1 where xt is the size of his order flow in period t.
   Suppose the agent considers selling the pound forward. His expected payoﬀ of breaking
up a total volume of xt into infinitesimal trades is
                              Z 1 ∙                                          ¸
                  sell                    F0t (1 − bf /2) exp(ibxt−1 )
                π e (xt ) =       xt                                      − 1 di
                                0      S0t (1 + bs /2) exp(bxt−1 + ibxt )
                              Z 1 ½ b                                     ¾
                                       F0t
                          =       xt     a
                                            exp [(i − 1)bxt−1 − ibxt ] − 1 di.
                                0      S0t
Evaluating this integral:
                                  (     Fb   exp(−bxt )−exp(−bxt−1 )
                                      xt S0t
                                          a       b(xt−1 −xt )
                                                                     − xt if xt 6= xt−1
                    π sell
                      e (xt ) =
                                          0t
                                         Fb
                                      xt S0t
                                          a    exp(−bxt−1 ) − xt         if xt = xt−1 .
                                          0t


                                                       35
   Now suppose the agent considers selling the pound forward. His expected payoﬀ of
breaking up a total volume of xt (keep in mind that xt < 0 in this case) into infinitesimal
trades is
                                        Z   1        ∙                         ¸
                                            F0t (1 + bf /2) exp(ibxt−1 )
                 πbuy
                  e (xt )        =    xt                                    − 1 di
                                    0    S0t (1 − bs /2) exp(bxt−1 + ibxt )
                                   Z 1 ½ a                                  ¾
                                         F0t
                                 =    xt   b
                                              exp [(i − 1)bxt−1 − ibxt ] − 1 di.
                                    0    S0t
Evaluating this integral:
                                   (            Fa
                                               exp(−bxt )−exp(−bxt−1 )
                                        xt S0t
                                            b        b(xt−1 −xt )
                                                                       − xt if xt 6= xt−1
                  π buy
                    e (xt ) =
                                                0t
                                                Fa                                                      .
                                            b exp(−bxt−1 ) − xt
                                        xt S0t                                           if xt = xt−1
                                                0t


   In practice we would the optimal value of xt by checking whether dπ sell
                                                                       e (0)/dxt > 0 or

π buy
  e (0)/dxt < 0. From the concavity of the profit functions, if neither of these conditions is

satisfied, the agent will chose xt = 0. If dπ sell
                                              e (0)/dxt > 0, the agent sells pounds forward,

and we numerically maximize π sell                                  buy
                              e (xt ) to find the optimal xt . If π e (0)/dxt < 0, the agent

buys pounds forward, and we numerically maximize πbuy
                                                  e (xt ) to find the optimal xt . The

events that dπsell                buy
              e (0)/dxt > 0 and π e (0)/dxt < 0 are mutually exclusive.

   If the agent sells pounds forward the actual payoﬀ is
                                    Z 1 ∙ b                     ¸
                           sell             F0t exp(ibxt−1 )
                          π (xt ) =     xt a                 − 1 di
                                     0      S0t+1 exp(ibxt )
Evaluating the integral we have
                             ⎧
                             ⎨ xt Fa0tb exp[b(xt−1 −xt )]−1 − xt if xt =
                                                                       6 xt−1
                    sell         S0t+1      b(xt−1 −xt )
                   π (xt ) =        b
                             ⎩ xt Fa0t − xt                      if xt = xt−1
                                 S                   0t+1


   If the agent buys pounds forward the actual payoﬀ is
                                Z 1 ∙ a                    ¸
                                       F0t exp(ibxt−1 )
                           π=      xt    b
                                                        − 1 di
                                 0     S0t+1 exp(ibxt )
Evaluating the integral we have
                             (                       Fa     exp[b(xt−1 −xt )]−1
                                            xt S b 0t           b(xt−1 −xt )
                                                                                  − xt if xt 6= xt−1
                        buy
                    π         (xt ) =              0t+1
                                                     a
                                                   F0t
                                            x   t Sb        − xt                        if xt = xt−1
                                                   0t+1


   We treat the end-of-period quotes as observed. Since F1t = exp(bxt−1 )F0t and S1t+1 =
exp(bxt )S0t+1 this means that profits expressed in terms of observable quotes are
                              ⎧
                              ⎨ xt Fa1tb 1−exp[b(xt −xt−1 )] − xt if xt 6= xt−1
                     sell          S1t+1    b(xt−1 −xt )
                    π (xt ) =        F b
                              ⎩ xt a − xt
                                      0t
                                                                  if xt = xt−1
                                   S                 0t+1



                                                                   36
and                       (        Fa     1−exp[b(xt −xt−1 )]
          buy
                              xt S b 0t      b(xt−1 −xt )
                                                                − xt if xt 6= xt−1
      π         (xt ) =            0t+1
                                  Fa
                              xt S b 0t   − xt                        if xt = xt−1 .
                                  0t+1




                                                 37
                                                                TABLE 1

                                                         Median Bid-Ask Spreads


                               1 month        3 month                          1 month       3 month
                  Spot         Forward        Forward            Spot          Forward       Forward          Units
                            100 x ln(Ask/Bid)                                    foreign currency units

                                                          Full Sample Period                                             Dates
Belgium             0.159           0.253        0.291             10.00            15.93        20.00    Centimes    76:01-98:12
Canada              0.053           0.096        0.111              0.10             0.20         0.23    Cents       76:01-05:12
France              0.100           0.151        0.176              1.00             1.50         1.88    Centimes    76:01-98:12
Germany             0.213           0.311        0.319              1.00             1.12         1.13    Pfennig     76:01-98:12
Italy               0.063           0.171        0.208              1.00             4.00         5.00    Lire        76:01-98:12
Japan               0.216           0.272        0.280              1.00             1.08         1.13    Yen         78:06-05:12
Netherlands         0.234           0.344        0.359              1.00             1.25         1.25    Cents       76:01-98:12
Switzerland         0.255           0.412        0.456              1.00             1.13         1.13    Centimes    76:01-05:12
USA                 0.055           0.074        0.082              0.10             0.12         0.13    Cents       76:01-05:12
Euro*               0.043           0.060        0.070              0.04             0.06         0.07    Cents       99:01-05:12

                                                             1999-2005
Canada              0.066           0.071        0.076             0.15              0.16          0.17   Cents
Japan               0.061           0.066        0.070             0.11              0.12          0.13   Yen
Switzerland         0.087           0.094        0.103             0.21              0.22          0.24   Centimes
USA                 0.023           0.027        0.027             0.04              0.04          0.05   Cents
Euro*               0.043           0.060        0.070             0.04              0.06          0.07   Cents


*Euro quotes are Euro/USD, whereas other quotes are originally in FCU/British pound
Note : Results are based on daily data
                                          TABLE 2

                               UIP Regressions, 1976-2005

                        1 Month Regression                      3 Month Regression
                      α          β        R2                  α          β        R2
Belgium†           -0.002     -1.531     0.028             -0.005     -0.625     0.008
                    (0.002)     (0.714)                     (0.006)     (0.669)


Canada             -0.003      -3.487      0.045           -0.007      -2.936      0.072
                    (0.002)     (0.803)                     (0.005)     (0.858)


France†             0.000      -0.468      0.004            0.001      -0.061      0.000
                    (0.002)     (0.589)                     (0.005)     (0.504)


Germany†           -0.005      -0.732      0.005           -0.012      -0.593      0.007
                    (0.003)     (0.704)                     (0.008)     (0.650)


Italy†              0.005      -0.660      0.010            0.008      -0.012       0.000
                    (0.002)     (0.415)                     (0.006)     (0.392)


Japan*             -0.019      -3.822      0.030           -0.063      -4.482      0.100
                    (0.005)     (0.924)                     (0.014)     (1.017)


Netherlands†       -0.009      -2.187      0.029           -0.018      -1.381      0.026
                    (0.004)     (1.040)                     (0.009)     (0.816)


Switzerland        -0.008      -1.211      0.012           -0.020      -1.050      0.022
                    (0.003)     (0.533)                     (0.008)     (0.536)


USA                -0.003      -1.681      0.017           -0.008      -1.618      0.037
                    (0.002)     (0.880)                     (0.006)     (0.865)



* Data for Japan begin 7/78
† Data for Euro legacy currencies ends 12/98
Notes : Regression of [S(t+1)/S(t)-1] on [F(t)/S(t)-1]. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                          TABLE 3

                              BGT Regressions, 1976-2005

                        1 Month Regression                      3 Month Regression
                      a         b         R2                  a         b         R2
Belgium†            0.003     2.617      0.076              0.007     1.676      0.051
                    (0.002)     (0.746)                     (0.006)     (0.677)


Canada              0.004       4.392       0.068           0.010       3.914       0.119
                    (0.002)     (0.815)                     (0.005)     (0.923)


France†             0.001       1.534       0.040           0.001       1.122       0.047
                    (0.002)     (0.590)                     (0.005)     (0.508)


Germany†            0.005       1.689       0.024           0.014       1.542       0.045
                    (0.003)     (0.722)                     (0.009)     (0.682)


Italy†             -0.004       1.707       0.060          -0.006       1.041       0.058
                    (0.002)     (0.424)                     (0.006)     (0.403)


Japan*              0.020       4.753       0.043           0.065       5.333       0.125
                    (0.005)     (0.957)                     (0.015)     (1.060)


Netherlands†        0.009       3.232       0.060           0.020       2.377       0.067
                    (0.004)     (1.090)                     (0.010)     (0.849)


Switzerland         0.008       2.130       0.035           0.021       1.954       0.067
                    (0.003)     (0.550)                     (0.008)     (0.556)


USA                 0.004       2.584       0.038           0.011       2.503       0.079
                    (0.002)     (0.920)                     (0.006)     (0.940)



* Data for Japan begin 7/78
† Data for Euro legacy currencies ends 12/98
Notes : Regression of [F(t)/S(t+1)-1] on [F(t)/S(t)-1]. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                                  TABLE 4

                             Payoffs to the Carry Trade Strategies 76:01-05:12

                                    No Transactions Costs                     With Transactions Costs
                                            Standard      Sharpe                       Standard      Sharpe
                                Mean        Deviation      Ratio          Mean         Deviation      Ratio
Belgium*                         0.0044          0.028       0.157         0.0029           0.021       0.140
                                 (0.0019)       (0.002)      (0.068)        (0.0015)       (0.002)      (0.072)


Canada                           0.0053         0.032        0.169          0.0042         0.026        0.161
                                 (0.0018)       (0.002)      (0.059)        (0.0014)       (0.002)      (0.055)


France*                          0.0054         0.027        0.201          0.0031         0.023        0.134
                                 (0.0016)       (0.002)      (0.060)        (0.0015)       (0.002)      (0.066)


Germany*                         0.0011         0.028        0.038          0.0014         0.024        0.060
                                 (0.0018)       (0.002)      (0.066)        (0.0016)       (0.002)      (0.068)


Italy*                           0.0029         0.028        0.105          0.0024         0.024        0.102
                                 (0.0017)       (0.002)      (0.058)        (0.0014)       (0.002)      (0.056)


Japan†                           0.0022         0.036        0.061          0.0017         0.034        0.049
                                 (0.0022)       (0.003)      (0.063)        (0.0020)       (0.003)      (0.060)


Netherlands*                     0.0024         0.028        0.087          0.0014         0.023        0.062
                                 (0.0018)       (0.002)      (0.068)        (0.0015)       (0.002)      (0.067)


Switzerland                      0.0019         0.030        0.063          0.0008         0.027        0.028
                                 (0.0017)       (0.002)      (0.060)        (0.0015)       (0.002)      (0.057)


USA                              0.0039         0.031        0.124          0.0030         0.029        0.103
                                 (0.0017)       (0.002)      (0.058)        (0.0016)       (0.002)      (0.059)


Euro‡                            0.0014         0.021        0.066          0.0024         0.016        0.153
                                 (0.0017)       (0.002)      (0.083)        (0.0013)       (0.002)      (0.090)


Average                          0.0031         0.029        0.107          0.0023         0.025        0.099

Equally-weighted portfolio       0.0031         0.017        0.183          0.0029         0.020        0.145
                                 (0.0009)       (0.001)      (0.061)        (0.0011)       (0.001)      (0.057)



* Euro legacy currencies available 76:1-98:12
† Japanese yen available 78:7-05:12
‡ Euro available 99:1-05:12
Notes : Other currencies and the equally-weighted portfolio are available for 76:1-05:12. Standard errors in
parentheses.
                                                 TABLE 5

                                Payoffs to the BGT Strategies 76:01-05:12

                                   No Transactions Costs                    With Transactions Costs
                                         Standard    Sharpe                        Standard     Sharpe
                               Mean      Deviation     Ratio             Mean      Deviation     Ratio
Belgium*                        0.0051        0.027      0.188            0.0029        0.026       0.114
                                 (0.0017)       (0.002)    (0.066)        (0.0017)       (0.002)     (0.065)


Canada                          0.0060          0.031      0.194          0.0038         0.029       0.130
                                 (0.0017)       (0.002)    (0.055)        (0.0017)       (0.002)     (0.058)


France*                         0.0047          0.027      0.173          0.0032         0.023       0.137
                                 (0.0018)       (0.002)    (0.065)        (0.0016)       (0.002)     (0.073)


Germany*                        0.0012          0.028      0.043          0.0005         0.022       0.021
                                 (0.0019)       (0.002)    (0.070)        (0.0015)       (0.002)     (0.067)


Italy*                          0.0043          0.026      0.163          0.0026         0.024       0.108
                                 (0.0017)       (0.002)    (0.069)        (0.0016)       (0.002)     (0.069)


Japan†                          0.0017          0.036      0.049          0.0008         0.029       0.028
                                 (0.0020)       (0.003)    (0.058)        (0.0017)       (0.003)     (0.058)


Netherlands*                    0.0030          0.027      0.115          0.0000         0.023       0.000
                                 (0.0018)       (0.002)    (0.065)        (0.0015)       (0.002)     (0.067)


Switzerland                     0.0018          0.029      0.064         -0.0008         0.026      -0.031
                                 (0.0017)       (0.002)    (0.056)        (0.0015)       (0.002)     (0.059)


USA                             0.0057          0.031      0.185          0.0049         0.029       0.166
                                 (0.0018)       (0.002)    (0.064)        (0.0017)       (0.003)     (0.064)


Euro‡                           -0.0011         0.021      -0.052        -0.0012         0.016      -0.078
                                 (0.0017)       (0.002)    (0.083)        (0.0015)       (0.002)     (0.100)


Average                         0.0032          0.028      0.112          0.0017         0.025       0.059

Equally-weighted portfolio      0.0027          0.013      0.202          0.0017         0.017       0.103
                                 (0.0008)       (0.001)    (0.057)        (0.0010)       (0.001)     (0.061)



* Euro legacy currencies available 76:1-98:12
† Japanese yen available 78:7-05:12
‡ Euro available 99:1-05:12
Notes : Other currencies available 76:1-05:12. To run the first BGT regression 30 observations are used, so
equally-weighted portfolio returns are generated over the period 78:07-05:12. Standard errors in
parentheses.
                                          TABLE 6

              Sharpe Ratios of the Portfolio Strategies with Transactions Costs
                          Over a Common Sample (79:10-05:12)

                       Equally Weighted          Optimally Weighted          Difference

Carry trade                  0.154                      0.197                     0.043
                             (0.060)                    (0.057)                   (0.037)


BGT                          0.096                      0.137                     0.041
                             (0.062)                    (0.063)                   (0.032)


Difference                   0.058                      0.060
                             (0.069)                    (0.065)




Notes : Standard errors in parentheses. The equally-weighted carry trade portfolio is
available over the period 76:1-05:12. For the optimally-weighted carry trade 16
observations are used to compute the first covariance matrix for the optimal portfolios,
so optimally-weighted returns are generated over the period 77:04-05:12. For the equally-
weightd BGT strategy 30 observations are used to run the first BGT regression, so
returns are generated over the period 78:07-05:12. For the optimally-weighted BGT
strategy 16 observations are used to compute the first covariance matrix for the optimal
portfolio, so optimally-weighted returns are generated over the period 79:10-05:12. For
comparability this shorter common sample is used to generate the statistics in the table
for all portfolios.
                                                          TABLE 7

                                        Skewness, Kurtosis and Tests for Normality

                                       Payoffs to Carry Trade                           Payoffs to BGT Strategy
                                      With Transactions Costs                           With Transactions Costs
                                             Excess       Jarque-Bera                          Excess      Jarque-Bera
                                Skewness     Kurtosis         Test                Skewness     Kurtosis        Test
Belgium*                            0.078          1.27            10.7               0.287          2.66           61.5
                                      (0.312)        (0.44)          (0.005)            (0.472)        (1.58)          (0.000)


Canada                                -0.247          0.50              5.0            -0.114           0.34              2.1
                                      (0.179)        (0.35)          (0.082)            (0.160)        (0.30)          (0.351)


France*                               -0.140          0.70              4.5            -0.122           1.19            12.4
                                      (0.233)        (0.35)          (0.105)            (0.303)        (0.47)          (0.002)


Germany*                              -0.402          1.44            22.3              1.159           4.43           165.7
                                      (0.227)        (0.52)          (0.000)            (0.527)        (2.42)          (0.000)


Italy*                                0.445           1.60            25.8             -0.310           1.26            16.6
                                      (0.291)        (0.86)          (0.000)            (0.251)        (0.72)          (0.000)


Japan†                                -1.253          5.60           411.2             -0.399           5.20           259.2
                                      (0.458)        (1.62)          (0.000)            (0.792)        (2.69)          (0.000)


Netherlands*                          -0.094          1.13              9.8             1.262           4.68           222.9
                                      (0.236)        (0.48)          (0.007)            (0.512)        (2.60)          (0.000)


Switzerland                           -0.759          1.84            69.5              1.179           3.85           217.5
                                      (0.200)        (0.62)          (0.000)            (0.379)        (1.62)          (0.000)


USA                                   -0.546          2.33            77.8             -0.585           2.97           124.7
                                      (0.454)        (1.40)          (0.000)            (0.519)        (1.72)          (0.000)


Euro‡                                 -0.289         -0.54              1.7             0.156          -0.62              1.0
                                      (0.156)        (0.31)          (0.424)            (0.210)        (0.28)          (0.593)


Average                               -0.321          1.59            63.8              0.251           2.60           108.4

Equally-weighted portfolio            -0.824          4.03           283.6              0.620           2.20            87.6
                                      (0.428)        (1.93)          (0.000)            (0.275)        (0.74)          (0.000)


Optimally-weighted portfolio          -0.220          1.02            17.6             -0.001           1.81            42.7
                                      (0.202)        (0.36)          (0.000)            (0.355)        (1.10)          (0.000)



* Euro legacy currencies available 76:1-98:12
† Japanese yen available 78:7-05:12
‡ Euro available 99:1-05:12
Notes : Other currencies available 76:1-05:12. Payoffs in periods of zero trade are excluded. Standard errors in parentheses
for skewness and kurtosis statistics. P-values in parentheses for Jarque-Bera statistics. See the footnotes to Tables 4, 5 and
6 for the sample periods used for the equally and optimally weighted portfolios.
                                                                             TABLE 8

                                        Quarterly Real Excess Returns to Currency Speculation and U.S. Risk Factors

                                               Carry Trade Equally-Weighted Portfolio                       Carry Trade Optimally-Weighted Portfolio
                                       Intercept         Slope Coefficient(s)             R2         Intercept        Slope Coefficient(s)           R2

S&P500                                      0.010      -0.007                             0.000          0.013      -0.017                             0.001
                                            (0.003)    (0.039)                                           (0.004)      (0.049)
CAPM                                        0.010      -0.006                             0.000          0.013      -0.019                             0.002
                                            (0.003)    (0.038)                                           (0.004)      (0.046)
Fama-French factors                         0.010      -0.008     -0.019       -0.019     0.002          0.010        0.047     -0.024     0.150       0.045
                                            (0.003)    (0.051)     (0.075)      (0.069)                  (0.004)      (0.057)   (0.093)    (0.071)
Per-capita consumption growth               0.012      -0.548                             0.005          0.015      -0.545                             0.004
                                            (0.004)    (0.673)                                           (0.005)      (0.746)
Luxury retail sales growth                  0.008      0.009                              0.001          0.012      -0.010                             0.001
                                            (0.007)    (0.045)                                           (0.008)      (0.052)
Per-capita durables services growth         0.014      -0.463                             0.004          0.014      -0.096                             0.000
                                            (0.007)    (0.664)                                           (0.009)      (0.772)
Yogo factors                                0.015      -0.004     -0.412       -0.341     0.007          0.015      -0.016      -0.533     0.061       0.005
                                            (0.007)    (0.036)     (0.747)      (0.732)                  (0.009)      (0.048)   (0.847)    (0.847)
Industrial production                       0.009      0.150                              0.003          0.013      -0.062                             0.000
                                            (0.003)    (0.203)                                           (0.004)      (0.234)


                                              BGT Strategy Equally-Weighted Portfolio                      BGT Strategy Optimally-Weighted Portfolio
                                       Intercept        Slope Coefficient(s)          R2             Intercept        Slope Coefficient(s)           R2

S&P500                                      0.005      0.021                              0.003          0.010      -0.036                             0.005
                                            (0.003)    (0.044)                                           (0.004)      (0.056)
CAPM                                        0.006      0.010                              0.001          0.010      -0.047                             0.010
                                            (0.003)    (0.042)                                           (0.004)      (0.052)
Fama-French                                 0.005      0.024       0.004        0.037     0.005          0.009      -0.021      -0.028     0.044       0.014
                                            (0.003)    (0.044)     (0.069)      (0.050)                  (0.004)      (0.062)   (0.094)    (0.064)
Per-capita consumption growth               0.005      0.071                              0.000          0.006        0.828                            0.008
                                            (0.004)    (0.777)                                           (0.006)      (0.966)
Luxury retail sales growth                  0.003      -0.005                             0.000          0.007      -0.020                             0.003
                                            (0.005)    (0.038)                                           (0.006)      (0.048)
Per-capita durables services growth         0.016      -1.030                             0.025          0.017      -0.743                             0.008
                                            (0.007)    (0.679)                                           (0.010)      (0.834)
Yogo factors                                0.015      0.005       0.538       -1.194     0.030          0.016      -0.058      1.462      -1.229      0.041
                                            (0.007)    (0.038)     (0.857)      (0.782)                  (0.010)      (0.049)   (1.045)    (0.940)
Industrial production                       0.006      -0.029                             0.000          0.008        0.165                            0.003
                                            (0.003)    (0.235)                                           (0.004)      (0.314)



Notes : See the appendix for definitions of real excess returns in US dollars. Standard errors in parentheses. Fama-French factors are Rm-Rf, SMB and HML,
respectively (see Fama and French 1992 for details). Yogo factors are the CAPM factor, the growth rate of per capita consumption of nondurables and services,
and the growth rate of the per capita consumption (service flow) of durables. See appendix D for the definition of the service flow of durables.
                                                                         TABLE 9

                                       Quarterly Real Excess Returns to Currency Speculation and U.K. Risk Factors

                                            Carry Trade Equally-Weighted Portfolio                        Carry Trade Optimally-Weighted Portfolio
                                    Intercept         Slope Coefficient(s)            R2           Intercept        Slope Coefficient(s)           R2

Per-capita consumption growth            0.006      0.581                              0.018            0.006     1.242                            0.064
                                         (0.004)    (0.400)                                             (0.004)   (0.415)
FTSE return                              0.010      -0.011                             0.001            0.013     -0.003                           0.000
                                         (0.003)    (0.036)                                             (0.004)   (0.046)


                                           BGT Strategy Equally-Weighted Portfolio                       BGT Strategy Optimally-Weighted Portfolio
                                    Intercept        Slope Coefficient(s)             R2           Intercept        Slope Coefficient(s)           R2

Per-capita consumption growth            0.003      0.409                              0.010            0.006     0.568                            0.011
                                         (0.004)    (0.341)                                             (0.005)   (0.489)
FTSE return                              0.006      -0.028                             0.005            0.011     -0.101                           0.041
                                         (0.003)    (0.034)                                             (0.004)   (0.047)



Notes : See the appendix for definitions of real excess returns in UK pounds. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                          TABLE 10

        Quarterly Real Excess Returns to Currency Speculation and Risk Factors
                              Panel Analysis using GMM

                                                    Carry-Trade Strategy
                                            b                            R2        J-test
S&P500                             3.9                                  -3.46          23.3
                                  (4.5)                                              (0.006)
CAPM                               4.0                                  -3.53          23.0
                                  (3.8)                                              (0.006)
Fama-French factors                7.7           8.4         -8.6       -5.42           4.1
                                 (29.3)         (43.0)      (25.2)                   (0.763)
Consumption growth             -419.3                                   -3.09          10.8
                                (142.5)                                              (0.287)
Luxury retail sales                5.4                                  -2.64          17.2
                                  (4.2)                                              (0.045)
Durables services growth         -64.3                                  -3.59          23.8
                                 (61.2)                                              (0.005)
Yogo factors                      -5.0      -439.6         -240.1       -2.88           2.8
                                 (17.9)     (280.5)        (304.7)                   (0.899)
Industrial production            -11.9                                  -3.99          18.5
                                 (25.3)                                              (0.030)


                                                         BGT Strategy
                                            b                            R2        J-test
S&P500                           12.8                                   -0.36          13.4
                                  (6.4)                                              (0.143)
CAPM                             10.1                                   -0.66          15.4
                                  (6.2)                                              (0.081)
Fama-French factors              25.6        -18.9           19.0          0.40         4.8
                                  (8.8)         (18.9)      (15.3)                   (0.681)
Consumption growth              412.4                                      0.49         3.6
                                (138.9)                                              (0.937)
Luxury retail sales                1.4                                  -0.37          17.2
                                  (3.3)                                              (0.045)
Durables services growth         49.7                                   -1.02          16.2
                                 (58.8)                                              (0.062)
Yogo factors                       7.2      355.1             1.4          0.58         2.2
                                 (10.2)     (277.4)        (184.6)                   (0.947)
Industrial production            39.1                                   -1.21          18.6
                                 (27.0)                                              (0.029)



Notes : Panel analysis uses 9 country returns and the return on the optimally weighted
portfolio. Optimal weighting matrix takes into account the estimation of the means of the
risk factors. The R 2 is a measure of cross-sectional fit of the model's predicted mean
excess returns to the actual mean excess returns. For b numbers in parentheses are
standard errors. For the J-test of overidentifying restrictions, the numbers in parentheses
are p-values.
                                                   TABLE 11

                       Real Excess Returns to Currency Speculation and Monetary Variables

                           Carry-Trade Equally-Weighted Portfolio           Carry-Trade Optimally-Weighted
                                          Slope                                          Slope
                            Intercept   Coefficient      R2              Intercept    Coefficient      R2
U.S. Variables

Fed funds rate                   0.000          0.147       0.025             0.005          0.111        0.012
                                 (0.006)        (0.071)                       (0.007)        (0.085)
Inflation                        0.000          0.997       0.032             0.008          0.505        0.007
                                 (0.006)        (0.415)                       (0.007)        (0.531)
M1 Growth                        0.012          -0.178      0.006             0.015          -0.165       0.004
                                 (0.004)        (0.221)                       (0.004)        (0.210)
M2 Growth                        0.010          0.004       0.000             0.009          0.281        0.004
                                 (0.007)        (0.397)                       (0.008)        (0.453)
M3 Growth                        0.005          0.242       0.005             0.011          0.135        0.001
                                 (0.007)        (0.352)                       (0.009)        (0.466)
MZM Growth                       0.012          -0.118      0.007             0.011          0.080        0.002
                                 (0.003)        (0.105)                       (0.004)        (0.116)
Term Premium                     0.016          -0.326      0.015             0.016          -0.195       0.004
                                 (0.005)        (0.249)                       (0.007)        (0.306)

UK Variables

Inflation                        0.007          0.117       0.002             0.015          -0.177       0.002
                                 (0.005)        (0.296)                       (0.005)        (0.313)
UK 3 Mo. T-bill rate             0.002          0.080       0.007             0.006          0.077        0.006
                                 (0.007)        (0.073)                       (0.008)        (0.086)


                           BGT Strategy Equally-Weighted Portfolio         BGT Strategy Optimally-Weighted
                                           Slope                                        Slope
                            Intercept    Coefficient      R2             Intercept    Coefficient     R2
U.S. Variables

Fed funds rate                  -0.011          0.247       0.088            -0.016          0.387        0.134
                                 (0.006)        (0.078)                       (0.007)        (0.101)
Inflation                       -0.006          1.202       0.054            -0.012          2.378        0.098
                                 (0.005)        (0.462)                       (0.007)        (0.607)
M1 Growth                        0.004          0.141       0.005             0.005          0.332        0.018
                                 (0.003)        (0.205)                       (0.004)        (0.228)
M2 Growth                        0.001          0.324       0.008             0.000          0.644        0.021
                                 (0.005)        (0.330)                       (0.006)        (0.423)
M3 Growth                        0.005          0.047       0.000             0.003          0.364        0.008
                                 (0.005)        (0.290)                       (0.007)        (0.403)
MZM Growth                       0.004          0.063       0.002             0.007          0.110        0.005
                                 (0.003)        (0.128)                       (0.005)        (0.164)
Term Premium                     0.006          -0.037      0.000             0.018          -0.471       0.021
                                 (0.005)        (0.260)                       (0.008)        (0.348)

UK Variables

Inflation                       -0.001          0.471       0.025            -0.005          1.226        0.067
                                 (0.005)        (0.350)                       (0.007)        (0.549)
UK 3 Mo. T-bill rate            -0.013          0.211       0.064            -0.016          0.311        0.083
                                 (0.007)        (0.079)                       (0.009)        (0.103)



Notes : See appendix D for definitions of real excess returns in U.S. dollars and UK pounds. Standard errors in
parentheses.
                                              Table 12

                                        Bid-ask Spread Matrix

ASIA : 10:00 pm to 3:00 am, New York time
 Amounts
    (USD
   million) EURUSD USDJPY GBPUSD AUDUSD NZDUSD USDCHF USDCAD EURJPY EURGBP EURCHF EURSEK EURNOK
         10        1         1          3  1  3     3      3      2      2      3     100    100
         30        3         3         10  3  7     7     10      4      4     10     200    200
         50        4         5         20  5 12    10     15      7      5     18     300    300
       100         7         9         35  9 25    20     30     18     10     30     500    500
       150        12        15            15 37    30            25     15
       200        18        20            20 50    40            35     20
       300        25        30            30                     50     30

EUROPE: from 3:00 am to 8:00 am, New York time
 Amounts
   (USD
  million) EURUSD USDJPY GBPUSD AUDUSD NZDUSD USDCHF USDCAD EURJPY EURGBP EURCHF EURSEK EURNOK
        10       1         2         3          2   5 to 7  3        3  3  1   2      25     25
        30       2         3         5          4 12 to 15  5   7 to 8  4  2   3      40     50
        50       3         4         8          5 25 to 30  7       12  5  3   4      75    100
      100        4         8        12         10          12 20 to 25 10  6   7     100    200
      150        7        10        15         15          20          15  8  10     200    300
      200       10        15        20         25          30          20 10  12     250
      300       15        25        30         35          40          25 12  17     400

NORTH AMERICA: from 8:00 am to 12 pm, New York Time
 Amounts
   (USD
  million) EURUSD USDJPY GBPUSD AUDUSD NZDUSD USDCHF USDCAD EURJPY EURGBP EURCHF EURSEK EURNOK
        10      1        2          3        2       7  3  3     3      1      2      25     25
        30      2        3          5        4      15  7  5     4      2      3      40     50
        50      3        4          8        5      30 10 12     5      3      4      75    100
      100       4        8         12      12          15 20    10      6      7     100    200
      150       7       10         15      15          20 25    15      8     10     200    300
      200      10       15         20      25          30 40    20     10     12     250
      300      15       20         30      35          40 50    25     12     17     400
      400      20       30                             50 70    35
      500      25       40                             60 80    45

NORTH AMERICA: from 12:00 pm to 2:00 pm, New York Time
 Amounts
   (USD
  million) EURUSD USDJPY GBPUSD AUDUSD NZDUSD USDCHF USDCAD EURJPY EURGBP EURCHF EURSEK EURNOK
        10               2          3        4         7  3  3   3      3      3      75     50
        30               5          5       10       15  10  5   5      5      6     100     75
        50               8         10       20       35  12 10   8      7     10     125    100
      100               12         20       30           20 20  15     10     15     175    150
      150               15         25       60           30 30  30     15     20
      200               20         30                    40 45  40
      300               30         60                    50 60  50
      400               45                               60 70  55
      500               55                               80 80  60
                                                  TABLE 13

                          Effects of Price Pressure on Payoffs to Carry Trade Strategy

                                   Bet Size (millions pounds)                Profit per Pound Bet
                                                    Standard                      Standard
Individual country results          Mean            Deviation           Mean      Deviation Sharpe Ratio
 Belgium*                                 121                239         0.0031        0.0207      0.152
 Canada                                   128                178         0.0041        0.0253      0.163
 France*                                  218                339         0.0040        0.0231      0.172
 Germany*                                 208                228         0.0014        0.0234      0.062
 Italy*                                   283                442         0.0028        0.0228      0.124
 Japan†                                   283                217         0.0031        0.0304      0.102
 Netherlands*                             141                156         0.0014        0.0224      0.062
 Switzerland                              263                272         0.0010        0.0261      0.040
 USA                                      226                240         0.0032        0.0289      0.112
 Euro‡                                    130                152         0.0024        0.0167      0.142

Portfolio with all currencies
 using b =0.0054                         1340             1103            0.0127         0.0921     0.138
                                          (110)             (93)          (0.0059)       (0.0147)   (0.060)
  using b =0.002                         3618             2979            0.0127         0.0921     0.138
                                          (297)            (251)          (0.0059)       (0.0147)   (0.060)
  using b =0.001                         7236             5958            0.0127         0.0921     0.138
                                          (593)            (502)          (0.0059)       (0.0147)   (0.060)



* Euro legacy currencies available 76:1-98:12
† Japanese yen available 78:7-05:12
‡ Euro available 99:1-05:12
Notes : Individual country results use b =0.0054. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                          TABLE A1

                       Mnemonics for Data Obtained from Datastream

Currency                  Spot Exchange Rate       Forward Exchange Rate        Interest Rate
Belgian franc                  BELGLUX                   BELXFn F                ECBFRn M
Canadian dollar               CNDOLLR                    CNDOLn F                ECCADn M
French franc                   FRENFRA                   FRENFn F                ECFFRn M
German mark                   DMARKER                   DMARKn F                ECWGMn M
Italian lira                    ITALIRE                   ITALYn F                ECITLn M
Japanese yen                   JAPAYEN                   JAPYNn F                ECJAPn M
Netherlands guilder            GUILDER                   GUILDn F                ECNLGn M
Swiss franc                    SWISSFR                   SWISFn F                ECSWFn M
UK pound                           ...                       ...                 ECUKPn M
U.S. dollar                    USDOLLR                   USDOLn F                ECUSDn M
euro                           BBEURSP                   BBEURn F                ECEURn M

Notes : Here n indicates the number of months (either 1 or 3) forward in the case of the
forward rate, and the term of the contract in the case of the eurocurrency interest rates. To
obtain bid and ask (offer) quotes for the exchange rates the suffixes (EB) and (EO) are
added to the mnemonic indicated. To obtain the average of bid and ask quotes the suffix
(ER) is used. For the interest rates the equivalent suffixes are (IB), (IO) and (IR).
                                           TABLE A2

                        Covered Interest Arbitrage at the 1-Month Horizon

                      Median return to          Fraction of periods          Median of positive
                    borrowing covered in       with positive returns        returns to borrowing
                                             to borrowing covered in             covered in
                    Pounds      FX             Pounds          FX            Pounds        FX
Currency                percent                       percent                     percent

                                                   Full Sample
Belgium                 -0.21      -0.22            1.92         2.19            0.12       0.14
Canada                  -0.11      -0.08            0.37         1.38            0.06       0.02
France                  -0.14      -0.12            1.00         1.00            0.26       0.07
Germany                 -0.23      -0.22            0.15         0.04            0.09       0.37
Italy                   -0.16      -0.13            0.81         0.66            0.10       0.04
Japan                   -0.26      -0.27            0.43         0.11            0.09       0.31
Netherlands             -0.30      -0.29            0.06         0.15            0.11       0.10
Switzerland             -0.32      -0.32            0.30         0.18            0.20       0.46
USA                     -0.07      -0.07            0.72         0.67            0.01       0.11

Average                 -0.20      -0.19           0.64          0.71            0.11       0.18

                                                 1994:1-2005:1

Belgium                 -0.18      -0.19           2.07          2.76            0.05       0.05
Canada                  -0.11      -0.09           0.48          1.00            0.12       0.01
France                  -0.10      -0.10           0.92          0.61            0.22       0.05
Germany                 -0.11      -0.11           0.31          0.08            0.14       0.28
Italy                   -0.16      -0.13           0.31          0.23            0.07       0.21
Japan                   -0.10      -0.12           0.83          0.24            0.19       0.31
Notes : Individua       -0.11      -0.11           0.23          0.08            0.11       0.20
Switzerland             -0.12      -0.12           0.42          0.31            0.17       0.17
USA                     -0.05      -0.05           1.25          0.62            0.01       0.13

Average                 -0.12      -0.12           0.76          0.66            0.12       0.16
                                                        FIGURE 1

    Realized Nominal (GBP) Payoffs to Currency Speculation (12-month Moving Average), 1976–2005

         Carry Trade: Equally-Weighted Portfolio                             Carry Trade: Efficient Portfolio
0.03                                                           0.03

0.02                                                           0.02

0.01                                                           0.01

   0                                                               0

-0.01                                                          -0.01

-0.02                                                          -0.02
    75     80      85     90     95     00         05              75   80        85      90      95      00    05


         BGT Strategy: Equally-Weighted Portfolio                        BGT Strategy: Efficient Portfolio
0.03                                                           0.03

0.02                                                           0.02

0.01                                                           0.01

   0                                                               0

-0.01                                                          -0.01

-0.02                                                          -0.02
    75     80      85     90     95     00         05              75   80        85      90      95      00    05
                                       FIGURE 2

     Cumulative Realized Nominal (USD) Returns to Currency Speculation (May 1977=1)


40
      LIBOR
      S&P500
35    Carry Trade-Equally Weighted
      Carry Trade-Optimally Weighted

30


25


20


15


10


5


0
75          80             85             90            95             00             05
                                       FIGURE 3

     Cumulative Realized Nominal (USD) Returns to Currency Speculation (Nov. 1979=1)


30
      LIBOR
      S&P500
      Carry Trade-Optimally Weighted
25    BGT-Optimally Weighted



20



15



10



5



0
75           80            85             90             95            00              05
                                                                   FIGURE 4

                           Realized Sharpe Ratio for Nominal (USD) Excess Returns (Three-Year Rolling Window)

                       Carry Trade, Equally-Weighted Portfolio                                 Carry Trade, Optimally-Weighted Portfolio
               0.8                                                                     0.8

               0.6                                                                     0.6
Sharpe Ratio




                                                                        Sharpe Ratio
               0.4                                                                     0.4

               0.2                                                                     0.2

                 0                                                                       0

               -0.2                                                                    -0.2

               -0.4                                                                    -0.4
                      80       85     90     95       00      05                              80     85       90      95      00      05


                      BGT Strategy, Optimally-Weighted Portfolio                                               S&P 500
               0.8                                                                     0.8

               0.6                                                                     0.6
Sharpe Ratio




                                                                        Sharpe Ratio
               0.4                                                                     0.4

               0.2                                                                     0.2

                 0                                                                       0

               -0.2                                                                    -0.2

               -0.4                                                                    -0.4
                      80       85     90     95       00      05                              80     85       90      95      00      05
                                                                               FIGURE 5

                                     Sampling Distributions of the Payoffs to Carry Trade


                      Belgium           42.9% periods excluded                                       Canada           32.0% periods excluded
              15                                                                            10

                                                                                             8
              10
                                                                                             6
        (%)




                                                                                      (%)
                                                                                             4
               5
                                                                                             2

              0                                                                              0
              -0.1           -0.05               0           0.05              0.1           -0.2   -0.15     -0.1     -0.05        0       0.05      0.1   0.15

                       France           30.9% periods excluded                                       Germany           28.4% periods excluded
              10                                                                             8

               8
                                                                                             6
               6
        (%)




                                                                                       (%)
                                                                                             4
               4
                                                                                             2
               2

              0                                                                              0
              -0.1           -0.05               0           0.05              0.1           -0.1           -0.05              0             0.05           0.1

                        Italy          32.7% periods excluded                                         Japan           20.7% periods excluded
              15                                                                            15


              10                                                                            10
        (%)




                                                                                      (%)




               5                                                                             5


              0                                                                              0
              -0.1      -0.05            0           0.05          0.1         0.15          -0.2   -0.15     -0.1     -0.05        0       0.05      0.1   0.15

                     Netherlands 34.5% periods excluded                                              Switzerland 18.4% periods excluded
              10                                                                            10

               8                                                                             8

               6                                                                             6
        (%)




                                                                                      (%)




               4                                                                             4

               2                                                                             2

              0                                                                              0
              -0.1           -0.05               0           0.05              0.1          -0.15      -0.1           -0.05             0          0.05     0.1

                       USA             21.7% periods excluded                                         Euro            38.1% periods excluded
              10                                                                            10

               8                                                                             8

               6                                                                             6
        (%)




                                                                                      (%)




               4                                                                             4

               2                                                                             2

              0                                                                              0
              -0.2   -0.15      -0.1     -0.05       0      0.05         0.1   0.15         -0.03   -0.02     -0.01      0         0.01     0.02     0.03   0.04




Note: Periods of no trade excluded. The percentage of such periods is indicated in figure titles.
                                                                                FIGURE 6

                             Sampling Distributions of the Payoffs to the BGT Strategy


                      Belgium           18.8% periods excluded                                        Canada           10.0% periods excluded
             15                                                                              10

                                                                                              8
             10
                                                                                              6
       (%)




                                                                                       (%)
                                                                                              4
              5
                                                                                              2

             0                                                                                0
             -0.1       -0.05            0           0.05           0.1         0.15          -0.2   -0.15      -0.1    -0.05       0      0.05         0.1   0.15

                       France           17.1% periods excluded                                        Germany           35.1% periods excluded
             10                                                                              15

              8
                                                                                             10
              6
       (%)




                                                                                       (%)
              4
                                                                                              5
              2

             0                                                                                0
             -0.1            -0.05               0            0.05              0.1           -0.1      -0.05            0          0.05          0.1         0.15

                        Italy          18.0% periods excluded                                          Japan           25.1% periods excluded
             10                                                                              15

              8
                                                                                             10
              6
       (%)




                                                                                       (%)




              4
                                                                                              5
              2

              0                                                                               0
             -0.15      -0.1           -0.05             0          0.05        0.1           -0.2   -0.15      -0.1    -0.05       0      0.05         0.1   0.15

                     Netherlands 22.9% periods excluded                                               Switzerland 22.5% periods excluded
             15                                                                              10

                                                                                              8
             10
                                                                                              6
       (%)




                                                                                       (%)




                                                                                              4
              5
                                                                                              2

             0                                                                                0
             -0.1       -0.05            0           0.05           0.1         0.15          -0.1      -0.05            0          0.05          0.1         0.15

                       USA             10.9% periods excluded                                          Euro            38.1% periods excluded
             10                                                                               8

              8
                                                                                              6
              6
       (%)




                                                                                        (%)




                                                                                              4
              4
                                                                                              2
              2

             0                                                                                0
             -0.2    -0.15      -0.1     -0.05       0       0.05         0.1   0.15         -0.05                              0                             0.05




Note: Periods of no trade excluded. The percentage of such periods is indicated in figure titles
                                             FIGURE 7

Sampling Distributions of the Payoffs to Portfolios of Currency Speculation Strategies

            Equally Weighted Carry Trade                      Optimally Weighted Carry Trade
        8                                                 8


        6                                                 6
  (%)




                                                    (%)
        4                                                 4


        2                                                 2


     0                                                    0
    -0.15      -0.1   -0.05      0    0.05   0.1          -0.1     -0.05           0       0.05    0.1


            Equally Weighted BGT Trade                        Optimally Weighted BGT Trade
        8                                                 8


        6                                                 6
  (%)




                                                    (%)




        4                                                 4


        2                                                 2


     0                                                 0
    -0.05         0       0.05       0.1     0.15     -0.15       -0.1     -0.05       0    0.05   0.1
