NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WELFARE REFORM, WORK REQUIREMENTS,
AND EMPLOYMENT BARRIERS
Ellen Meara
Richard G. Frank
Working Paper 12480
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12480
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006

We are grateful to Shelly Greenfield, Steven Haider, Tom McGuire, and Harold Pollack for helpful
discussions and comments on earlier drafts of the paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from
the MacArthur Network on Mental Health Policy and the National Institute on Drug Abuse grants DA
10233-06 and DA019485-01. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Ellen Meara and Richard G. Frank. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Welfare Reform, Work Requirements, and Employment Barriers
Ellen Meara and Richard G. Frank
NBER Working Paper No. 12480
August 2006
JEL No. I3, J08
ABSTRACT
The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act imposed work requirements
on welfare recipients. Using 1999-2001 data from Boston, Chicago, and San Antonio, we compared
the labor market and welfare experience of women with four employment barriers: poor mental
health, moderate to heavy drug and alcohol use, a child with a behavior problem, and a child under
the age of 3. Women with poor mental health and drug and alcohol users were much less likely to
move into work than other groups, and more likely to be sanctioned for noncompliance with welfare
requirements in 2000-2001 as federal work participation requirements increased.
Ellen Meara
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115-5899
and NBER
meara@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Richard G. Frank
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
frank@hcp.med.harvard.edu

I. Introduction

It has been about ten years since Congress passed landmark legislation altering
the landscape of income assistance in the United States. The Personal Responsibility,
and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA) replaced the entitlement
program, Aid to Families with Dependent Children, with Temporary Assistance to Needy
Families (TANF), financed by block grants to the states, with the goals of increasing selfsufficiency, reducing public program participation, and increasing incentives to work.
Key features of PRWORA toward those goals included: a 60-month lifetime limit on
receiving TANF benefits, work requirements for welfare recipients, and a federal
requirement that states impose sanctions (partial or full reduction of cash and in-kind
benefits for several months, or termination of benefits) for recipients who do not comply
with program requirements. 1 States have had the latitude to exempt up to 20 percent of
the pre-legislation caseload from requirements by deeming them unable to work. Typical
reasons for exemptions include caregiver responsibilities for young or disabled children,
for example, or health problems.
In the early years after PRWORA, a consensus emerged among policy makers
and researchers that the legislation was a success based on an extensive literature
demonstrating reduced caseloads, more work among income support recipients, and
declines in the public program participation rate of single mothers (Blank 2002; Moffitt

1

Under PRWORA, states are permitted to impose shorter lifetime limits, and stricter sanctions than those

described in the legislation, and some do. By 2002, states were required to meet 50% work participation
requirements. That is, 50% of the 1995 welfare caseload had to be engaged in work activity.

1

2003) . Caseloads dropped by nearly 60 percent between 1996 and 2005 (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services 2006). Employment among single mothers
grew and poverty rates did not rise (Blank 2002). The economic expansion of the late
1990s played a role in this early success, but most agree that the reform had few if any of
the disastrous consequences feared by advocates for low-income families.
The literature to date focuses on the average impact of welfare reform, though
recent work acknowledges that the mean impact likely misses variation in welfare
outcomes (Bitler, Gelbach and Hoynes 2005). The population receiving welfare is
heterogeneous and changing. Several studies from the mid-1990s document a wide range
of employment barriers among this population. These barriers include caregiver
responsibilities for family members (i.e. children or disabled), poor health, including
mental illness and substance abuse, and low human capital that hinder employment. Also
important are barriers such as a lack of transportation or child care that impede women
from maintaining employment (Danziger, Corcoran, Danziger and al. 2000; Gutman,
McKay, Ketterlinus and McLellan 2003; Zedlewski and Loprest 2001). Only a handful
of these barriers, such as caring for an infant, received explicit attention in PRWORA.
Despite the lack of federal attention to employment barriers, the presence of work
barriers has been widely discussed by state policy makers, welfare program
administrators, and advocates for low-income families. Many have predicted that over
time the TANF caseload would become increasingly disadvantaged as the most workready recipients leave welfare, but research does support that prediction (Zedlewski
2003). In this paper, we focus on the response to PRWORA of two important groups of
recipients that carry work barriers related to mental illness and substance use disorders.

2

It is estimated that these groups represent 30 percent and 20 percent of TANF recipients,
respectively (Metsch and Pollack 2005; Zedlewski 1999).
Most states recognize that some TANF recipients face substantial barriers to
employment, but states take dramatically different approaches to addressing these issues
depending on the nature of employment barriers. For example, federal legislation
exempts women from work requirements to care for an infant, and some states exempt
caregivers of older children. Some states screen for mental health disorders and
substance use disorders (SUDs) and allow treatment activity to count towards work
requirements. In some cases, work requirements are suspended completely while
recipients seek treatment. In other states, there is neither screening nor exemption from
work requirements for individuals with mental disorders or SUDs.
There are several reasons why the states’ approaches to employment barriers in
TANF have attained additional policy salience recently. First, economic conditions and
the job opportunities for low skilled workers are not as favorable as they were following
the enactment of PRWORA in the late 1990s. Second, states will be under much greater
pressure to reduce caseloads and increase work among TANF recipients when work
participation targets are established based on 2005 caseloads, which are a fraction of the
1995 caseloads used in the early years of TANF. Third, the June 2006 interim final rules
and regulations for TANF reauthorization explicitly limit states’ flexibility to address
employment barriers in the TANF population by defining work activities more narrowly
than the original PRWORA legislation. For example, if a state allows mental health or
addiction treatment to count towards work activity, as some do now, the new regulations

3

would limit this exemption to a four week consecutive period, or six weeks out of a fiscal
year, defining this as job readiness and not work activity.

In this paper, we ask, did the successes claimed for PRWORA extend to women
with groups that may have been disadvantaged by work barriers that received little
attention in the PRWORA legislation? Specifically, the goal of the paper is to: describe
the transitions into/out of work and income assistance for women with the following
employment barriers: mental health problems, moderate to heavy drug or alcohol use, a
child with a behavior problem, or a children under age 3 at home. We compare women
facing these barriers to women without any of these barriers, and we compare the work
and income assistance patterns of women across barrier groups. To make these
comparisons we examine several questions. Do women with these barriers respond to
work incentives during a period of increasingly binding work requirements, and an
improving economy? Do women with these barriers who use TANF get sanctioned for
noncompliance with welfare requirements more than other TANF recipients? We also
compare the barriers, since of those mentioned previously, only the presence of a young
child at home receives special attention in PRWORA, which allows states to exempt
recipients from work requirements when they are caring for an infant.
Using longitudinal data on low-income women in Boston, Chicago, and San
Antonio in the 3-Cities study, we document several important patterns. First, women
with children under age three and women with a child who has a behavior problem
resemble other low-income women in terms of work status, welfare use, and the rate of
being sanctioned for noncompliance with welfare requirements. They work and use

4

TANF at rates that mirror women without these particular barriers. Second, women with
mental health problems and those who are moderate to heavy drug and alcohol users are
unlikely to move into work compared with other low-income women. They experience
greater rates of TANF use, lower rates of work, and are less likely to move out of a
“detached” state of neither work nor aid. Finally, though women with mental health
problems and drug and alcohol users appear to have been protected from sanctions in the
earlier time period, 1999, these women were much more likely than other groups to be
sanctioned, compared with other women on TANF, 12 to 18 months later. We consider
the implications of our findings for welfare program design.

II. Background
Policies aimed at increasing work and reducing public income support have
particular importance for women with mental health problems and those who are
moderate to heavy users of drugs and alcohol since these women have a lower probability
of finding work, lower earnings conditional on working, and in same cases, they may
need additional time to obtain mental health or substance abuse treatment (Ettner, Frank
and Kessler 1997; Frank and Koss 2005). Women with mental health and substance
abuse problems have conflicting factors pushing them into work and aid. Because of the
lower likelihood of finding work, and because they earn less when working, compared to
similar women (Ettner, Frank and Kessler 1997; Frank and Koss 2005), they have fewer
incentives to work. However, because women with mental health and substance abuse
problems have historically had longer welfare spells (Loprest and Zedlewski 1999) they
are more likely to hit TANF time limits, and be pushed off of welfare sooner. If women

5

with employment barriers mirror the typical welfare recipient and act rationally by
leaving welfare in anticipation of time limits (Grogger 2003), we could expect looming
time limits to push women with employment barriers into work sooner.
In 1999, approximately 28 percent of adult TANF recipients had poor mental
health status (Zedlewski 1999) and an estimated 20 percent of adult TANF recipients
reported recent use of illicit drugs, though less than 5 percent met criteria for drug
dependence, and about 9 percent met criteria for alcohol dependence (Metsch and Pollack
2005). Cross-sectional evidence from the National Survey of Drug Abuse in the mid
1990s showed that psychiatric disorders and cocaine use increased the likelihood of
welfare participation by 6 to 8 percentage points (Jayakody, Danziger and Pollack 2000).
Recent work based on the National Survey of Drug Abuse suggests that the rate of
welfare participation declined faster among users of illicit drugs compared to other lowincome women between 1996 and 2001 (Pollack and Reuter 2006), but this provides
limited evidence demonstrating how women with mental health problems and drug and
alcohol users have fared in the post-welfare reform era.
Much of the extant evidence on women with employment barriers in the postPRWORA period comes from community-based samples of women. A rich source of
information on employment barriers is the Women’s Employment Study (WES), a
longitudinal survey of women residing in one Michigan county (Danziger, Corcoran,
Danziger and al. 2000; Danziger 2004; Jayakody, Danziger and Pollack 2000; Pollack,
Danziger, Jayakody and Seefeldt 2002). The WES provides cross sectional evidence that
women with depression and drug dependence are less likely to work 20 or more hours per
week (Danziger, Corcoran, Danziger and al. 2000) compared with otherwise similar

6

women. The longitudinal experience of these same women in Michigan shows that
women with mental health problems were no more likely to be disconnected from income
assistance and work compared with other women. In contrast, women in the study who
used heroin or cocaine were more likely to be disconnected from work and aid (Danziger
et al., forthcoming).
A second community-based study sampled TANF recipients in Houston, Texas
(Montoya, Atkinson and Streuse 2001; Montoya, Bell, Atkinson, Nagy and Whitsett
2002; Montoya, Atkinson, Lichtiger and Whitsett 2003). This study of about 500 welfare
recipients reported that drug users and psychologically distressed recipients were slower
to move into work and their earnings profiles grow more slowly than other welfare
recipients in the post-PRWORA era (Montoya, Bell, Atkinson, Nagy and Whitsett 2002).
An important limitation of the study is that it observed only those women who applied for
TANF in the post-PRWORA period. Researchers have been quick to point out the
importance of changes in welfare entry to changing caseloads and labor market outcomes
(Grogger, Haider and Klerman 2003; Haider and Klerman 2005; Klerman and Haider
2004; Pollack and Reuter 2006), but most studies of employment barriers, like those in
Houston have focused on welfare exit only. To the extent that women do not apply for
welfare or are discouraged from completing the application process due to an
environment with stringent work requirements, time limits, sanctions, and policies
designed to exclude heavy drug and alcohol users from receiving cash benefits, we know
little about this important group of women.
A series of studies on the CASAWORKS program, a multi-service intervention
for TANF recipients in 11 sites around the country provides additional evidence on work

7

barriers of recipients, and evidence regarding outcomes of women receiving a specific
intensive assessment and case management intervention (Gutman, Ketterlinus and
McLellan 2003; McLellan, Gutman, Lynch, McKay, Ketterlinus, Morgenstern and
Woolis 2003). It confirms that a diverse set of barriers to work are highly prevalent
among the welfare population, and the literature shows some improvement in work
outcomes among women receiving intensive case management. However, this work has
no control group, making comparisons of these women to other potential welfare
recipients around the country difficult.
Another survey of low-income families in Boston, Chicago, and San Antonio, the
Welfare of Children and Families, or 3-Cities, provides rich information about women
living in poor neighborhoods in these cities in 1999-2001. An early study from the
survey described characteristics of women who were sanctioned in 1999 (Cherlin, Bogen,
Quane and Burton 2002), and later work examined the relationship between recipient
characteristics and work requirements, and whether these or other non-financial factors in
TANF affected TANF exit (Moffit 2003). Though work requirements had an important
affect on women’s work activity, Moffit (2003) demonstrated little relationship between
recipient characteristics and being subject to a work requirement. Like other literature
after PRWORA, this work tends to focus on the welfare population overall, though
Moffit (2003) demonstrated that those who were exempt from work requirements tended
to be exempt for health-related reasons. There is little evidence since PRWORA about the
role of employment barriers that received less attention in federal law, such as mental

8

health problems or substance abuse, 2 even though they are commonly cited barriers to
self-sufficiency in the welfare population and a focus of attention in recent Federal
regulations.
Because state TANF programs vary greatly in approach to employment barriers
such as mental health and substance abuse, in contrast to the relatively uniform
agreement that mothers of infants should be exempt from work requirements, and
because of the attention to these barriers by both interest groups and policy makers, we
use data on welfare recipients from Boston, Chicago, and San Antonio to augment our
understanding of how women with different types of employment barriers respond to
work incentives after PROWRA.

III. Description of the data and sample characteristics
We use panel data for 1999-2001 from the 3-Cities describing the circumstances
of low-income women living in Boston, Chicago and San Antonio (Winston, Angel,
Burton, Chase-Landsdale, Cherlin, Moffitt and Wilson 1999). The 3-Cities surveyed
nearly 2,400 families with children aged 0-4 or 10-14 in 1999 in low- and moderateincome neighborhoods in Boston, Chicago, and San Antonio. The survey deliberately
over-sampled blacks and Hispanics, yielding roughly equal numbers of blacks and
2

Women who use illicit drugs are of particular interest because many aspects of PRWORA and related

legislation of the mid 1990s targeted them. For example, PRWORA allows states to deny benefits to
convicted felons, the legislation allows state programs to test recipients for the presence of illicit drugs and
deny benefits on the basis of such tests (though few states perform suspicionless drug testing), and related
legislation abolished drug and alcohol disorders as qualifying disabilities for the receipt of SSI, eliminating
other potential sources of income assistance among women with SUDs.

9

Hispanics with the remaining 10 percent of respondents reporting white non-Hispanic
race and ethnicity. For each “focal” child, the child’s female caregiver, usually the
mother, provided information on work, public program participation, mental health,
alcohol and drug use, child behavior and other information about work patterns, incomes,
and a rich set of outcomes. Each family’s income was below 200 percent of the federal
poverty level at the time of the Wave 1 interview, conducted between March and
December 1999. Wave 2 interviews were conducted with the same focal children and
caregivers between September 2000 and June 2001.
Because many states did not fully implement welfare reform in 1997 and 1998,
we view the period between 1999 and 2001 as reflecting a period of tightening
constraints in the states as the first women reached lifetime limits and states
simultaneously began to feel the fiscal pressure of the recession that began in 2001. 3 We
compare how different women fared during a time of increasingly binding work
requirements and time limits. Specifically, we adopt a framework that compares changes
over time among women with and without various types of baseline employment barriers.
We interpret differences by barrier group over time as the differential response to welfare
reform by women with a particular employment barrier, such as poor mental health,
compared with other women likely to use welfare. We use the timing of the presence of a
barrier at the initial interview to explain subsequent work and program participation
outcomes, at the second interview.

3

Ideally one would like data from before and after PRWORA, but similarly rich longitudinal data

spanning the 1990s do not exist.

10

For our analyses, we restrict the sample to women present in both waves,
excluding 348 female caregivers from our sample because the caregivers (n=152) or
someone else in their household (n=196) received Supplemental Security Income (SSI) in
Wave 1. Once on SSI, which provides income assistance for poor disabled individuals,
recipients typically do not transition out of it, since strict eligibility requirements for SSI
stipulate that a recipient’s disability must prevent her from working (or performing usual
activities in the case of children) for at least 12 months or until death. We further
restricted the sample to the 1,637 female caregivers present in both waves.
Employment barriers
The literature on welfare use and work documents a long list of possible barriers
to employment among likely recipients of welfare ranging from physical health problems,
mental health problems, problems with substance abuse, transportation, child care, low
levels of work experience and education, the need to care for young children or disabled
family members, to the presence of domestic violence in one’s household. We do not
consider the full range of possible employment barriers. Instead we focus on a set of
potentially important barriers that receive widely varying treatment across state TANF
programs. With these goals in mind, we chose to examine four barriers: the presence of
children under age 3, the presence of a child with a behavioral problem, the presence of
symptoms indicating poor mental health, and moderate to heavy drug and/or alcohol use
in the past 12 months.
Regarding young children, there is a relatively clear consensus that welfare
recipients should receive exceptions from certain requirements when an infant is present
in the household. We contrast this barrier with poor mental health and heavy substance

11

use because there is widespread evidence that both reduce productivity, because state
welfare programs address these barriers very differently, and because these barriers have
received relatively little attention in academic studies despite debate between
PRWORA’s advocates and critics about the possible adverse consequences of PRWORA
for women with mental health problems and SUDs. 4 Furthermore, in light of recently
proposed regulations, states will soon lose the ability to exempt women with mental
health or substance use issues from work requirements, with the exception of a brief
period of treatment, not to exceed 4 weeks. States also provide exemptions to families
caring for disabled children, though it is less clear how states might deal with women
caring for a child with a behavior problem as opposed to a physical disability. The child
behavior barrier incorporates the widespread desire to link work exemptions to the care
of children, with the more ambiguous treatment of mental health problems across state
programs. Although we will refer to the group without the four barriers described here as
“barrier-free,” we realize that the women in our sample can and do experience any
number of other barriers.
One strength of the 3-Cities data set is its rich information on public program use,
demographics, and living arrangements combined with rigorous measures of mental
health symptoms. Using the Brief Symptom Inventory, or BSI (Derogatis and Derogatis
1996), female caregivers are surveyed about 18 items relating to anxiety, depression, and
somatization. These items are converted into an overall measure of poor mental health,

4

For an example of the discussion surrounding these barriers, see Legal Action Center. 1995. "State, local

welfare officials see important role for drugs and treatment in welfare reform." Unpublished, Zedlewski,
Sheila R., and Pamela Loprest. 2001. "Will TANF Work fo the Most Disadvantaged Families?"

12

which is highly correlated with the existence of a diagnosable mental health disorder.
The cutoff measure of poor mental health, or “caseness” represents a fairly stringent
measure of poor mental health, and thus excludes many women with moderate mental
health issues. We use one, general, dichotomous measure of poor mental health in most
analyses, but we also show results with a continuous mental health measure. Other
studies have reported that 28 percent of the welfare population suffer from mental health
problems (Zedlewski and Loprest 2001), but the measure used here applies to less than
10 percent of the welfare caseload, a stringent cutoff for mental health problems. One
way to increase the precision of our estimates, and to provide information more generally
about the impact of mental health status is to use a continuous measure of mental health
as described above. For each analysis, we present the change in probability of an outcome
implied by moving from the mean natural log-transformed BSI score to one standard
deviation above the mean (something akin to the 28 percent estimate of mental health
problems in the welfare population).
To measure child behavior problems, we use caregiver responses to a multi-item
Child Behavior Checklist (Achenbach and Edlebroch 1979, 1978). This validated
instrument can be used to form a measure of whether children likely fall within the
clinical range for serious behavior problems.
To develop a measure of moderate to heavy substance use, we use questions about
caregiver use of alcohol, marijuana, and other illicit drugs in last 12 months. Women
were asked, “In the last 12 months, how often were you drunk?” Possible responses
include “never”, “once or twice”, “several times”, or “often”. Women were asked,
separately for marijuana and other illicit substances, “In the last 12 months, how often did

13

you use marijuana/other illicit drugs?” Possible responses were the same as those for
alcohol. Moderate to heavy use of alcohol and drugs equals 1 when respondents respond
“several times” or “often” to any of the three questions on alcohol, marijuana, and other
illicit drugs. We distinguish moderate to heavy use of alcohol and drugs from any use
because previous research suggests that only moderate to heavy substance use is
disruptive to labor market activities (Kaestner 1999). Furthermore, evidence suggests
self-reported moderate to heavy substance use is correlated with diagnoses of substance
use disorders (Epstein and Gfroerer 1994), something we confirmed in a national
population-based survey of drug use. 5

Descriptive characteristics of women
Table 1 describes basic characteristics of 3-Cities respondents both unweighted
and weighted to make respondents representative of the sample frame of women in lowincome neighborhoods in Boston, Chicago, and San Antonio. For the remainder of the
paper, all analyses presented are weighted. Work status changed markedly over the brief
period between Wave 1 when 42.7 percent of the sample was working and Wave 2, when
55.3 percent of the weighted sample worked. At the same time, TANF receipt in this
sample nearly halved, from 25.8 percent to 14.7 percent. Among our sample, 23.9
percent were sanctioned in Wave 1 and 21.1 percent were sanctioned in Wave 2. Nearly
63 percent of women reported the most common employment barrier, having a child
5

Among low-income women (those with under $20,000 in household income) in the 2002 National Survey

of Drug Use and Health, the authors’ calculations indicate that use measures similar to those described here
have a correlation coefficient of .45 with diagnostic measures of abuse or dependence of alcohol, drugs, or
both.

14

under age 3 in the household, and 17.5 percent had a child with a behavior problem. Less
common barriers were mental health problems, 7.8 percent, and moderate to heavy use of
marijuana, drugs, or alcohol, about 9.4 percent. By Wave 2, 5.4 percent of women in our
sample reported that they, or someone in the household, received SSI.
Table 2 shows information on TANF use, work, and income by survey Wave and
contemporaneous employment barrier status. In 1999, the barrier groups look relatively
similar on TANF use (about 14-17 months in last 2 years), but they have used TANF
more than their barrier-free counterparts, who used an average of 10.3 months of TANF
in the last 2 years. Respondent income from all sources differs little in Wave 1, though
women with young children, mental health, or drug/alcohol use have the lowest income.
What is striking in Table 2 is the difference in sanction rates both across employment
barriers and between waves. In Wave 1, women with Mental Health Problems appear to
be protected from sanctions relative to other groups, with sanction rates of 15 percent
compared with 27 percent among women with children under age 3. In Wave 2 however,
61 percent of women with a mental health problem report being sanctioned. A similar,
but less striking pattern is observed among women who used drugs and/or alcohol.
Similar to national trends, household income, respondent earned income, and work rose
in the 18 months after 1999, within each barrier group.

Welfare Environment in Boston, Chicago and San Antonio
The 3 cities were chosen deliberately to differ from each other in terms of the
environment and implementation of welfare reform. For example, Massachusetts
obtained a waiver for its welfare program in 1995, and the waiver only recently expired

15

in September, 2005. On paper, Massachusetts’ waiver imposed stringent work
requirements, requiring work activity within 60 days of welfare receipt. It further
restricted welfare receipt to 24 months out any 5-year period. Massachusetts imposed
sanctions for failure to comply with work requirements, failure to cooperate with child
support enforcement, or failure to meet child immunization schedules. In practice,
however, the Massachusetts waiver exempts much of the caseload, including caregivers
of children up to age 6, from work requirements and time limits (Kirby, Pavetti, Maguire
and Clark 1997). In 2004, 74 percent of the Massachusetts caseload was exempt from
both time limits and work requirements (Joblessness and Urban Poverty Research
Program 2004). Because of high exemption rates, Boston can be thought of as an
example of a city that has not yet fully weathered welfare reform.
Chicago has more stringent requirements for its TANF recipients. Illinois
requires work activity at some point within 2 years of receiving benefits. It enforces the
60-month time limit on benefits, but work and school activities do not count against
lifetime limit. Important features of the Illinois TANF program include: families with
children under age 1 and caregivers of disabled children or other disabled family
members are exempt from work requirements, and, in contrast to the other cities, mental
health and substance abuse treatment count as allowable work activity for up to 24
months (Administration for Children & Families 2002).
San Antonio has the most stringent welfare climate. Texas is a work first state
that requires immediate work activity. Like most states, Texas has a 60-month lifetime
limit on benefits, but Texas imposes the most stringent time limits of the 3 cities. Time
limits on continuous benefits are 12, 24, or 36 months depending on the age of children in

16

the family and other household characteristics. After continuous benefit time limits are
reached, there is a 5-year “freeze out” period when individuals may not access TANF
(Rowe and Roberts 2004). There are some exemptions for caregivers with children up to
age 4. In Texas, drug felons can be denied benefits, as stipulated by PRWORA, and there
is no screening for mental health or substance use disorders (Legal Action Center 2002).
During the study period, Texas imposed sanctions on adult caregivers only, for a period
of at least 6 months. Recently Texas has imposed more stringent full-family sanctions,
including the temporary termination of in-kind benefits such as Medicaid.
Economically, the poverty rates in the three cities do not differ as much as one
might think. Poverty rates ranged from 15 percent in Chicago to 19 percent in San
Antonio, and child poverty was 26 to 30 percent in the three cities (Winston, Angel,
Burton, Chase-Landsdale, Cherlin, Moffitt and Wilson 1999). Chicago and Boston were
similar, with the lowest poverty rates, and San Antonio had slightly higher poverty rates
of the three cities. During the 1990s, Massachusetts showed the strongest employment
growth among the three states (Joblessness and Urban Poverty Research Program 2004).
Figures 1-3 depict welfare use in each city with Kaplan-Meier survival curves of
TANF spell length by employment barrier group. The figure shows continuous months
on TANF during the first TANF spell respondents’ experienced after welfare reform. 6
The figures show the heterogeneity in the welfare response across the three cities. In
Boston, for example, women with young children resemble other groups in the first 12
6

We measure this period as June 1996, or 12 months before the first Texas families hit Texas’ 12 month

time limit under its state waiver, December 1996, or 24 months before the first Massachusetts families hit
the 24 month time limit, and 60 months before the first Illinois families hit time the lifetime limit, as
reported by the Administration on Children and Families.

17

months of TANF receipt, but they are more likely to remain on TANF in later months.
This stands in contrast to San Antonio, where women with children under 3 move quickly
off of welfare, similar in nature to work showing that women with young children
respond most to time limits (Grogger 2003). In Chicago, women with children under age
3 differ little from other low-income women in their welfare use.
In Boston and San Antonio, women who have children with behavior problems
exit TANF more rapidly than other groups. The other pattern that stands out is the lack
of movement off TANF among women with mental health or substance use barriers in
Chicago. Chicago seems to have longer continuous spells of TANF compared with the
other cities. Next we describe our analyses that consider TANF use, work, and the
likelihood of being detached from work and aid among all women in our sample, and not
just those using TANF.

IV. Work, income support, and being detached
Ideally, we would specify a model of four work-income support states (work only,
work and income assistance, income assistance only, or none of the above) as a function
of all employment barriers simultaneously. A complete model would include effects for
employment barriers entered alone and interacted with each other to reflect the common
situation of multiple barriers. In practice, the limited sample size will not yield precise
estimates using this strategy. We take two steps to address this problem. First, we
collapse the two “work” categories into one category indicating that respondents are
working now. In practice, only about 3-5 percent of respondents report working and
receiving TANF simultaneously. Second, we estimate a separate model for each

18

employment barrier.

We estimate multinomial logit models of work and income

assistance of the following form:
(1)

⎛ Pr ( yW 2 = m | employment _ barrierW 1 , xW 1 ) ⎞
⎟⎟ = xβ m|work
ln Ω m|work ( X ) = ln⎜⎜
⎝ Pr ( yW 2 = work | employment _ barrierW 1 , xW 1 ) ⎠

The relative likelihood (compared with working) of receiving income assistance or
neither working nor receiving income assistance in Wave 2 is specified to be a function
of the following non-mutually exclusive respondent employment barriers in Wave 1:
•

Respondent has poor mental health (n=124),

•

Respondent is moderate to heavy use of alcohol and/or drugs (n=153),

•

Respondent has a child under the age of 3 in the household (n=904),

•

Respondent has a child with a serious behavior problem in the household
(n=352), or

•

Respondent has none of the above barriers, or is “barrier-free” (n=468).

We estimate separate specifications for each employment barrier to increase the
precision of our estimates. One should note several characteristics of this approach.
First, the reference group differs for each employment barrier. For example, the
reference group in a model of the impact of poor total mental health is everyone without a
mental health barrier. This includes women with no barriers and women with one or
more of the remaining three barriers. 7 Second, because many women have more than
one barrier, the coefficient estimates on a barrier such as mental health reflect both that
the direct effect of a mental health problem on work and aid, and the impact of having

7

We also estimated models with a constant reference group, those women with no barriers. We found

similar results qualitatively and quantitatively, but the standard errors are much larger in these results.

19

other barriers in addition to a mental health problem. From the standpoint of a welfare
administrator who seeks to efficiently target clients least able to fulfill work
requirements, the interpretation of effects may not pose any problem. Instead of
identifying multiple barriers, they might simply identify the single barrier that is most
indicative of an employment problem. We also estimated models including all four
barriers simultaneously, and find qualitatively similar patterns to those presented here,
with larger standard errors.
We deliberately estimate models with parsimonious sets of covariates, depicted in
the vector X in equation 1, because some cell sizes are very small and thus we have
relatively few degrees of freedom. The covariates in X included: marital status (yes, no),
race and ethnicity (black non-Hispanic or Hispanic of any race, with white non-Hispanic
omitted), whether a respondent had a high school degree, city dummies (Boston omitted),
whether or not the respondent is a U.S. citizen, and the presence of preschool-aged kids,
or children under age 5, in the household (this covariate was omitted in models of the
effect of having a child under age 3 in the household). By conditioning our labor market
outcomes in Wave 2 on employment barriers and other Wave 1 characteristics, we
mitigate the potential for reverse causation, or the possibility that a respondent’s
movements in or out of work and TANF/SSI caused employment barriers such as poor
mental health, alcohol and drug use, or child behavior problems. To aid interpretation of
our results, we report results by transforming the model’s estimated coefficients into the
average predicted probability of work, aid, or neither (being detached) implied by a given
barrier, using the actual sample covariates.

20

In some specifications, we explicitly estimate the transition from Wave 1 work,
TANF or neither to work, TANF/SSI or the detached state in Wave 2. To accomplish
this, we add terms to equation 1 for whether a respondent collected TANF in Wave 1,
whether a respondent was detached from work and aid in Wave 1, and interactions
between these variables and the barrier group of interest in equation 1. Each
specification is used to derive a transition matrix, or the predicted probability of
transitioning into work, aid, or neither in Wave 2, given Wave 1 work, aid, or detached
status. We show the implied transition probabilities both with and without each
employment barrier, adjusting for the covariates described earlier.

Results on Wave 2 work and income assistance
Tables 3 and 4 show coefficients from the multinomial logit models of TANF/SSI
receipt or being detached compared with the probability of working, with and without
covariates. Each pair of columns comes from a different model comparing a different
barrier group to the rest of the sample. Women in the barrier-free group are slightly less
likely to be on TANF or SSI in Wave 2, but overall, this group does not differ
significantly from the remaining women in the sample. Women with mental health or
substance use problems, in contrast, are much more likely to be on TANF in Wave 2
relative to work, and these differences are statistically significant at conventional levels.
Women with either young children, or children with behavioral problems do not differ
significantly from other women in the sample with respect to their use of income
assistance or the likelihood that they will be detached from work or welfare in Wave 2.

21

Table 5 summarizes the magnitude of these differences across barrier groups by
presenting the predicted probabilities of work, TANF/SSI, or being detached based on the
multinomial logit models with covariates shown in Table 4. Women with mental health
problems are least likely to be working in Wave 2, when 27 percent of them work and 54
percent collect income assistance, compared with 59 percent of the barrier-free women
who work in Wave 2. Women who use alcohol and/or drugs are also relatively likely to
be on TANF and less likely to be working. About 39 percent of these women work in
Wave 2, when 34 percent receive TANF or SSI. There is no difference in the work
patterns between barrier-free women and women with child-related barriers. This result
is interesting in light of the fact that women with young children are most likely to
receive exemptions from work requirements. Based on similar models using the
continuous BSI measure described earlier, a one standard deviation increase in the Wave
1 mental health scale (a deterioration in mental health), coincides with a 10.2 percentage
point increase in the use of TANF or SSI in Wave 2. The continuous mental health scale
is highly significant in the multinomial models predicting income support or no support
relative to work.

Transitions between work, aid, and being detached from work and income assistance
Table 6 presents the coefficient of interest on multinomial models used to
estimate the adjusted transition matrix by barrier group. The signs of the coefficients
suggest that women experience a high degree of inertia during the period between waves.
That is, the most significant predictor of where women will end up in Wave 2 is where
they started in Wave 1. Two other results stand out. The interaction of Wave 1 TANF

22

and a mental health problem suggests that these women are much more likely to remain
on TANF compared with other women. In contrast, women with a drug or alcohol
barrier who start out in the detached state are significantly less likely to move onto TANF
than other women.
Table 7 presents the adjusted transition probabilities by barrier group based on the
results in table 6, and it reports implied probabilities based on models using the
continuous mental health measure. Among those on TANF, 81 percent of women with
mental health problems stayed on TANF, compared with 38 percent in the barrier-free
group. A one standard deviation increase in the BSI score coincided with a statistically
significant 13.5 percentage point increase in the likelihood of remaining on TANF among
those on TANF in Wave 1. Among women using drugs and alcohol, 51 percent of those
on TANF in Wave 1 remained there. For women in the mental health and drug/alcohol
groups, there is very little movement out of the detached state. Among women starting
out in the detached state, 71 percent of women with mental health problems and 64
percent of women with drug and alcohol problems remain detached compared with 42
percent in the barrier-free group. The women with child-related barriers show
remarkably little difference from the barrier-free group since 37 percent of women with
children who have behavior problems and 35 percent of women with children under age 3
remained on TANF in both waves.

V. Employment barriers and sanctions
A cornerstone of PRWORA is that state welfare programs must impose sanctions
on recipients who do not comply with program requirements. One might expect higher

23

rates of sanctions among women in all of the employment barrier groups examined here,
particularly those that are not explicitly exempt from certain program requirements by
state TANF rules. We examined whether the probability of sanction differs by type of
employment barrier. Earlier evidence from the 3-Cities study documents that nearly one
fifth of respondents receiving TANF after Wave 1 were sanctioned (Moffit 2003).
Cherlin et al. (2002) studied sanctions during the Wave 1 interview in some detail,
determining that women with health problems, more children in the household, and
spousal interference in the household experienced greater rates of sanctions than other
women. The study examined use of marijuana and other illicit drugs, finding that
individuals reporting any marijuana use were also more likely to be sanctioned. This
work did not distinguish between light and moderate to heavy use of illicit drugs, nor did
it examine how sanctions related to alcohol use. Some evidence suggests that women
who use illicit drugs or alcohol are more likely to be sanctioned than other welfare
recipients (Metsch and Pollack 2005), and mental health advocates fear the same is true
for women with mental health disorders, but much of the evidence to date is anecdotal.
This debate would be enhanced by considering how rates of sanction, and the relationship
of sanctions to employment barriers, change over time.
We computed the probability of being sanctioned, given recent welfare use in
each wave, as a function of Wave 1 employment barriers. To address the fact that fewer
women were using TANF by Wave 2, and thus the caseload differed between waves, we
restricted the sample to women who used TANF sometime since Wave 1 (n=548). This
approach allowed us to describe how the sanction environment changed over the study

24

period for women with a given employment barrier. We estimated the probability of a
full or partial-sanction (SANCTION) using the equation:
(2)

Pr( SANCTION)Wt = f (employment _ barrier, X , months _ on _ welfare)W 1 ,

where the specification and covariates in X match those in equation 1, and
months_on_welfare measures the months a respondent was on welfare beginning 24
months prior to the Wave 1 interview and ending with the Wave 2 interview, and f(.) is a
logit function. We estimated this separately for Waves 1 and 2, using the covariates
measured at Wave 1, and limiting the sample to 548 women present in both waves with
any TANF use after Wave 1.

Sanction results
Recall from Table 2 that the rate of sanctions among women with mental health or
drug and alcohol problems increased dramatically between waves. Based on logit models
of whether women were sanctioned in Wave 1 or Wave 2 as a function of Wave 1 work
barriers, Table 8 reports the coefficient, standard error, and the predicted probability of
being sanctioned by barrier group. These results were estimated somewhat imprecisely,
but confirm the broad pattern shown in Table 2. Although women with mental health and
drug and alcohol users were less likely to be sanctioned in Wave 1 relative to other
groups, the rates of sanctioning increased substantially in Wave 2. Women with a mental
health problem had only a 3.8 percent chance of being sanctioned in Wave 1, but a 26.4
percent chance in Wave 2. Based on the continuous BSI measure, a one standard
deviation rise in the BSI accompanied an 8.5 percentage point increase in the probability
of being sanctioned compared with women at the mean BSI measure. Women who use

25

drugs and alcohol faced an adjusted probability of sanction of 13.3 percent in Wave 1 and
28.6 percent in Wave 2. This pattern of increasing sanctions between Waves 1 and 2 was
reversed among the barrier-free group, and among women with children who have
behavior problems.
Although our models can describe the rate of sanctions as a function of
employment barriers, the results do not yield information on the magnitude of deleterious
effects of the sanctions, and the relatively small cell sizes for some barrier groups
preclude a detailed analysis of how subgroups of women fare. Prior work based on about
100 women in Wave 1 of the 3 Cities study who did not recover benefits after being
sanctioned revealed that caregivers handled this loss of income by either obtaining a job
or cutting down on necessities (Cherlin, Bogen, Quane and Burton 2002). For women
with mental health and substance use barriers, few transitioned from TANF into work,
and thus the latter approach seems more likely.

Multiple barriers
In many settings women on welfare have been shown to have multiple
employment barriers. 8 In fact, the vast majority of women in our sample have more than
one barrier. We have estimated most of our specifications with interaction terms between
mental health problems and each of the remaining three barriers. We included similar
interaction terms for substance use problems and other barriers. From these models, one
can compare women who have no barriers, women with either a MH or SA problem only,
women with MH and SA (which commonly occur together) and women who have MH or
SA combined with each of the remaining barriers. However, a notable drawback to this
8

See for example Zedlewski and Loprest 2001, Zedlewski 1999 or Gutman et al. 2003.

26

approach is that individual cell sizes (i.e. substance use barrier alone, or substance abuse
and mental health) are small, with 20 or fewer women in some cases. Though the overall
patterns support what we find elsewhere, the results are highly sensitive to our choice of
specification and unstable, so we omit the results here.

VI. Conclusions and Implications
Our findings on welfare reform and employment barriers document several
important patterns. Women with child-related barriers transition into work in ways that
differ little from women without child, mental health, or drug use barriers. Federal
legislation provides exemptions from work requirements for the parents of infants, and
many state welfare programs expand this further for other young children and to care for
children with health problems. In contrast, many states offer no exemptions from work
requirements for mental health problems and substance abuse, and the states that do offer
exemptions will be limited in their ability to make exceptions if the regulations for TANF
reauthorization remain unchanged.
Our second set of results demonstrated that women with mental health problems
and women who use drugs or alcohol heavily stayed on TANF longer than otherwise
similar women, and in later periods were sanctioned more frequently than other groups.
Women in the “detached” state who had mental health or substance use barriers
transitioned slowly from this state. In the unprecedented boom economy of the late
1990s and an era when women faced many new penalties for not going to work, women
with mental health and substance use barriers showed little behavioral response to those
incentives. For this subgroup of women, welfare-to-work policies neither moved them

27

into work nor protected them from financial hardship of having TANF benefits
sanctioned.
Our work raises attention to one dimension of the optimal welfare program
design, sanctions of benefits for women who fail to meet program requirements. Unless
states explicitly wish to punish welfare recipients, optimal work requirements and
sanctions should target those groups that are most responsive to these policies. In other
words, among the welfare population, incentives to work, including sanctions, are best
targeted at women with relatively elastic labor supply. In an era where both policy and
the economic expansion of the late 1990s combined with PRWORA’s regulations created
unprecedented incentives for low-skilled single mothers to work, women with mental
health and substance users changed their behavior little. They continued to collect TANF
and did not work, even as the probability of being sanctioned increased after 1999.
Rather than creating behavioral change, sanctions imposed on unresponsive groups are
punitive.
Until now, the federal government has been agnostic about recognizing
“exceptional” circumstances in welfare reform. States have taken very different
approaches toward granting exceptions to the work requirement features of welfare
reform, and if anything, new federal regulations regarding TANF reauthorization will
reduce the flexibility of states to address the needs of women with employment barriers.
Our results raise questions regarding whether the program incentives can motivate the
desired behaviors for important subpopulations of TANF recipients. The failure to
observe the desired response raises questions about the efficiency and fairness of
applying the same policy provisions to all population segments over time.

28

References
Achenbach, Thomas M., and CS Edlebroch. 1979. "The Child Behavior Profile II: Boys
Aged 12-16 and Girls Aged 6-11 and 12-16." Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 47(223-233.
---. 1978. "The Child Behavior Profile: Boys 6-11." Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 46(476-488.
Administration for Children & Families. 2002. Chapter Eleven: The TANF Application
Process and Results in Cook County, Illinois Washington, D.C.: April 27, 2006.
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa/ifr/IFR-CH11.htm
Bitler, Marianne P., Jonah B. Gelbach, and Hilary W. Hoynes. 2005. "Distributional
Impacts of the Self-Sufficiency Project." NBER Working paper #11626
Blank, Rebecca. 2002. "Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States." Journal of
Economic Literature 60(1105-1166.
Cherlin, Andrew, Karen Bogen, James M. Quane, and Linda Burton. 2002. "Operating
within the Rules: Welfare Recipients' Experiences with Sanctions and Case
Closings." Social Service Review September 2002(387-405.
Danziger, Sandra, Mary Corcoran, Sheldon Danziger, and et al. 2000. "Barriers to the
Employment of Welfare Recipients." Unpublished.
Danziger, Sheldon. 2004. What Has Happened to Welfare Recipients After Welfare
Reform? Ann Arbor, Michigan: Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy,
University of Michigan. May 13, 2004, 2004.
Derogatis, Leonard R, and MF Derogatis. 1996. "SCL-90-R and the Brief Symptom
Inventory." Unpublished.

29

Epstein, Joan F., and Joseph C. Gfroerer. 1994. "Estimating Substance Abuse Treatment
Need from the NHSDA." Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods
of the American Statistical Association 559-564.
Ettner, Susan, Richard G. Frank, and Ronald Kessler. 1997. "The Impact of Psychiatric
Disorders on Labor Market Outcomes." Industrial and Labor Relations Review
51(1):64-81.
Frank, Richard G., and Catherine Koss. 2005. "Mental Health and Labor Markets
Productivity Loss and Restoration." Unpublished.
Grogger, Jeffrey. 2003. "The Effects of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy
Changes on Welfare Use, Work, and Income among Female-headed Families."
Review of Economics and Statistics 85(2):394-408.
Grogger, Jeffrey, Steven J. Haider, and Jacob Alex Klerman. 2003. "Why Did the
Welfare Rolls Fall during the 1990's? The importance of entry." American
Economic Review 93(2):288-292.
Gutman, Marjorie A., Robert D. Ketterlinus, and A. Thomas McLellan. 2003.
"Characteristics of Substance-Abusing Women on Welfare: Findings from the
Evaluation of CASAWORKS for Families Pilot Demonstration." Evaluation
Review 27(6):597-628.
Gutman, Marjorie A., J. McKay, Robert D Ketterlinus, and A. Thomas McLellan. 2003.
"Potential Barriers to Work for Substance Abusing Women on Welfare: Findings
from the ‘CASAWORKS for Families’ pilot demonstration." Evaluation Review
27(6):681-706.

30

Haider, Steven J., and Jacob Alex Klerman. 2005. "Dynamic Properties of the Welfare
Caseload." Labour Economics 12(5):629-648.
Jayakody, Rukmalie, Sheldon Danziger, and Harold A. Pollack. 2000. "Welfare Reform,
Substance Use and Mental Health." Journal of Health Policy, Politics, and Law
25(4):623-51.
Joblessness and Urban Poverty Research Program. 2004. After Welfare Reform: A
Snapshot of Low-income Families in Boston Cambridge, MA: July 11, 2006.
http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/urbanpoverty/Boston_report.pdf
Kirby, Gretchen G., LaDonna A. Pavetti, Karen Maguire, and Rebecca A. Clark. 1997.
"Income Support and Social Services for Low-Income People in Massachusetts."
Unpublished.
Klerman, Jacob Alex, and Steven J. Haider. 2004. "A Stock-Flow Analyis of the Welfare
Caseload." Journal of Human Resources 39(4):865-86.
Legal Action Center. 2002. "The State of State Policy on TANF & Addiction."
Unpublished.
---. 1995. "State, local welfare officials see important role for drugs and treatment in
welfare reform." Unpublished.
McLellan, A.Thomas , Marjorie Gutman, Kevin Lynch, James R. McKay, Robert D.
Ketterlinus, Jon Morgenstern, and Diana Woolis. 2003. "One-year Outcomes
from the CASAWORKS for Families Intervention for Substance-abusing Women
on Welfare." Evaluation Review 27(6):656-680.
Metsch, Lisa R., and Harold A. Pollack. 2005. "Welfare Reform and Substance Abuse."
The Milbank Quarterly 83(1):65-99.

31

Moffitt, Robert A. 2003. Means-tested Transfer Programs in the United States Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Montoya, Isaac D., John S. Atkinson, and Heidi M. Struse. 2001. "A comparison of
psychosocial barriers among welfare recipients: Implications for drug treatment."
Substance Use & Misuse 36(6-7):771-788.
Montoya, Isaac D., David C. Bell, John S. Atkinson, Carl W. Nagy, and Donna D.
Whitsett. 2002. "Mental Health, Drug Use, and the Transition from Welfare to
Work." Journal of Behavioral health Services and Research 29(2):144-156.
Montoya, Isaac. D., John S. Atkinson, Benjamin Lichtiger, and Donna D. Whitsett. 2003.
"Prevalence of hepatitis C in a drug using and non-using welfare population."
Health Policy 64(2):221-8.
Pollack, Harold A., Sheldon Danziger, Rukmalie Jayakody, and Kristin S. Seefeldt. 2002.
"Substance Use Among Welfare Recipients: Trends and Policy Responses."
Social Service Review 76(2):256-274.
Pollack, Harold A., and Peter Reuter. 2006. "Welfare Receipt and Treatment among
Substance-Using Mothers: Did Welfare Reform Make a Difference?" American
Journal of Public Health forthcoming(
Rowe, Gretchen, and Tracy Roberts. 2004. "The Welfare Rules Databook: State Policies
as of July 2000." Unpublished.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2006. "45 CFR parts 261, 262, 263,
265, Reauthorization of the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program."
Federal Register 71(125):37454-37483.

32

Winston, Pamela, Ronald Angel, Linda Burton, Lindsay Chase-Landsdale, Andrew
Cherlin, Robert Moffitt, and William Julius Wilson. 1999. "Welfare, Children,
and Families, A THree City Study. Overview and Design." Unpublished.
Zedlewski, Sheila R. 2003. Work and Barriers to Work among Welfare Recipients in
2002 Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.
---. 1999. "Work-related Activities and Limitations of Current Welfare Recipients"."
Unpublished.
Zedlewski, Sheila R., and Pamela Loprest. 2001. "Will TANF Work fo the Most
Disadvantaged Families?" Unpublished.

33

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Wave 1 work/aid status
Working at time of survey
Receiving TANF, not working
Neither work nor TANF
Wave 2 work/aid status
Working at time of survey
Receiving TANF, not working
Household receives SSI, not working
Neither work nor TANF/SSI
Sanctioned in wave 1
Sanctioned in wave 2
Employment barriers*
Mental health problem
Marijuana use (moderate/heavy)
Other illicit drug use (moderate/heavy)
Alcohol use (moderate/heavy)
Marijuana, drug, or alcohol use
(moderate/heavy)
Child with a behavioral problem
Children under age 3 in household
None of the above employment barriers
Site
Chicago
San Antonio
Boston
Age
< 30
30-39
40+
Married
Any kids < age 5 in household
High school degree or more education
Race/Ethnicity
White non-Hispanic
Black non-Hispanic
Hispanic of any race
Other race/ethnicity
Not a US Citizen

Unweighted %

Weighted %

46.4
26.1
27.5

42.7
25.8
31.5

59.7
14.2
4.1
22.0
19.1
20.0

55.3
14.7
5.4
24.7
23.9
21.1

7.6
3.8
0.9
6.2
9.4

7.8
5.8
1.2
4.4
9.4

21.5
55.2
28.6

17.5
62.8
26.2

30.6
32.0
37.4

62.6
28.8
8.6

45.9
34.6
19.5
16.7
67.8
64.6

46.2
34.2
19.6
33.2
73.7
57.8

7.5
42.5
48.1
1.8
16.5

2.5
54.0
40.9
2.6
14.0

1,637
Total number of observations
* Note: Mental health problem is based on the Brief Symptom Inventory and whether
respondents meet cutoff for mental health “caseness”. Marijuana, drug and alcohol
questions refer to moderate or heavy use in last 12 months. See text for details.

36

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics by Employment Barrier
Wave 1 Barrier Group
No
Mental Drug/ Child <
Barrier Health alcohol
age 3
Months on TANF last
10.3
17.7
17.5
15.0
2 yrs
(14)
(16)
(15)
(15)
On TANF now
Working now
Respondent Income
(all sources)
Earned Income
% sanctioned*
N

On TANF now
Working now
Respondent Income
(all sources)
Earned Income
% sanctioned*

Child
Behavior
14.6
(15)

16.3%
53.9%

72.8%
13.8%

76.7%
21.0%

45.6%
36.0%

42.9%
59.8%

$657
(628)
$448
(626)
19%
468

$638
(560)
$287
(558)
15%
124

$713
(589)
$336
(595)
23%
153

$580
(522)
$289
(502)
27%
904

$701
(610)
$419
(617)
22%
352

15.9%
58.7%

Wave 2 Barrier Group
46.2%
56.6%
31.4%
22.6%
34.9%
52.1%

29.9%
62.3%

$990
(745)
$792
(737)
16%

$837
(637)
$503
(702)
61%

$954
(716)
$716
(743)
26%

$932
(711)
$666
(763)
34%

$884
(680)
$666
(720)
23%

594
127
162
756
N
* This variable refers to sub-sample of recent TANF recipients only.

355

37

Table 3: Models of likelihood of TANF/SSI or being detached in Wave 2 relative to work, by employment barriers
Wave 1
Characteristic*
Barrier group
Constant

Poor Mental Health

Drug/alcohol use

Child under 3

Child behavior

Barrier-free

TANF
or SSI
2.400b
(0.780)
-1.270b
(0.202)

TANF
or SSI
1.566 b
(0.790)
-1.205b
(0.204)

TANF
or SSI
0.567
(0.405)
-1.390
(0.269)

TANF
or SSI
-0.138
(0.437)
-0.989b
(0.268)

TANF
or SSI
-0.808
(0.453)
-0.839
(0.265)

Detached
0.557
(0.545)
-0.827
(0.138)

Detached
0.386
(0.411)
-0.831b
(0.141)

Detached
0.094
(0.268)
-0.862
(0.200)

Detached
-0.444
(0.370)
-0.733b
(0.147)

Detached
-0.050
(0.291)
-0.791
(0.161)

Chi-squared tests for whether transition matrix differs for barrier group compared to others in sample χ2 (p-value)
9.46 (0.009)

4.26 (0.119)

1.97 (0.374)

1.44 (0.486)

3.24 (0.198)

Note: Estimates from multinomial logit models. Models estimated separately for each employment barrier group. Robust standard errors in (). a-significant at
10% level, b-significant at 5% level.

Table 4: Models of likelihood of TANF/SSI or being detached in Wave 2 relative to work, by employment barriers
Wave 1
Characteristic*
Barrier group
Chicago
San Antonio
Caregiver age 30-39
Caregiver age 40+
Black race
Hispanic
Other race
High school grad
Child under age 5 in
household
Married
Not US citizen
Constant

Poor Mental Health

Drug/alcohol use

Child under 3

Child behavior

Barrier-free

TANF
or SSI
2.290 b
(0.607)
-0.141
(0.307)
0.791 a
(0.458)
-0.373
(0.489)
0.166
(0.406)
-0.004
(0.691)
-1.107
(0.883)
2.675b
(1.195)
-0.672b
(0.345)
0.619a
(0.375)
0.049
(0.439)
-0.352
(0.715)
-1.124
(0.906)

TANF
or SSI
1.318 b
(0.617)
-0.127
(0.295)
0.615
(0.443)
-0.564
(0.507)
0.042
(0.415)
0.013
(0.690)
-0.885
(0.867)
2.765 b
(1.205)
-0.749 b
(0.361)
0.634 a
(0.379)
0.263
(0.473)
-0.483
(0.686)
-1.037
(0.914)

TANF
or SSI
0.164
(0.409)
-0.128
(0.300)
0.629
(0.443)
-0.712
(0.521)
-0.337
(0.442)
0.061
(0.689)
-0.962
(0.844)
2.957 b
(1.279)
-0.888 b
(0.384)

Detached
0.197
(0.329)
0.314
(0.256)
0.754 b
(0.309)
-0.379
(0.355)
0.426
(0.405)
-0.056
(0.517)
0.008
(0.488)
-0.946
(0.837)
-0.319
(0.291)

0.375
(0.600)
-0.641
(0.705)
-0.339
(0.827)

0.154
(0.340)
0.782b
(0.368)
-1.289 b
(0.644)

TANF
or SSI
0.605
(0.469)
-0.175
(0.294)
0.571
(0.434)
-0.583
(0.572)
-0.106
(0.441)
0.066
(0.705)
-0.981
(0.862)
2.784b
(1.245)
-0.893b
(0.389)
0.689a
(0.395)
0.369
(0.602)
-0.629
(0.671)
-0.805
(0.921)

TANF
or SSI
-0.060
(0.552)
-0.174
(0.294)
0.584 b
(0.438)
-0.570
(0.519)
-0.089
(0.436)
0.823
(0.704)
-0.970
(0.846)
2.780 b
(1.240)
-0.890 b
(0.382)
0.643
(0.527)
0.371
(0.606)
-0.612
(0.693)
-0.774
(1.001)

Detached
0.592
(0.586)
0.325
(0.254)
0.772b
(0.315)
-0.393
(0.342)
0.427
(0.426)
-0.060
(0.514)
-0.032
(0.483)
-0.924
(0.833)
-0.294
(0.290)
-.166
(0.361)
0.130
(0.353)
0.816b
(0.373)
-1.309 b
(0.648)

Detached
0.578
(0.441)
0.327
(0.254)
0.752 a
(0.310)
-0.404
(0.342)
0.443
(0.427)
-0.069
(0.510)
0.018
(0.480)
-0.903
(0.832)
-0.277
(0.289)
0.161
(0.362)
0.148
(0.345)
0.807b
(0.369)
-1.350
(0.644)

Detached
-0.561
(0.357)
0.312
(0.257)
0.803b
(0.325)
-0.407
(0.348)
0.462
(0.428)
-0.001
(0.525)
-0.0005
(0.499)
-0.983
(0.845)
-0.322
(0.291)
0.141
(0.366)
0.105
(0.345)
0.854b
(0.385)
-1.208a
(0.659)

Chi-squared tests for whether transition matrix differs for barrier group compared to others in sample χ2 (p-value)
14.3 (0.0008)
5.26 (0.072)
0.42 (0.81)
2.93 (0.23)

Detached
-0.032
(0.354)
0.323
(0.256)
0.749 b
(0.310)
-0.394
(0.358)
0.417
(0.431)
-0.064
(0.514)
-0.004
(0.485)
-0.928
(0.838)
-0.313
(0.290)
0.153
(0.384)
0.148
(0.339)
0.781b
(0.367)
-1.127 a
(0.661)

0.02(0.99)

*See table 3 notes. Boston is the omitted city, Age <30 is the omitted age group, and Non-Hispanic White is the omitted racial/ethnic group.

39

Table 5: Percent Working, Receiving TANF/SSI, or Neither,
by Wave 1 Barrier Group
Working
TANF/SSI
Detached
Wave 1 barrier group
Barrier-free
59%
17%
24%
Mental Health
27
54
19
Alcohol/Drugs
39
34
27
Child < 3
57
18
25
Child behavior
63
20
17
Effect of 1 SD rise in continuous measure of mental health*
χ2 (p-value) = 18.2 (0.0001)

-3.4

10.2

-6.8

*This measures the change in predicted probability of work, aid, or being detached for a 1 SD rise in the log-transformed Brief Symptom Inventory measure
compared to mean.
Percentages reported here are predicted probabilities based on multinomial logit models in table 4 of the likelihood of TANF/SSI or neither TANF/SSI nor work
(being detached) relative to work. All models control for covariates in Table 3, except for Child<3 models which omit covariate for preschool aged children
(under age 5).

40

Table 6: Multinomial logit models of likelihood of TANF/SSI or being detached in Wave 2 relative to work, conditional on
wave 1 work/TANF status and employment barriers

Wave 1
work/aid status
TANF
Detached
Barrier group in W1
TANF*barrier group
Detached*
barrier group

Poor Mental Health

Drug/alcohol use

Child under 3

Child behavior

Barrier-free

TANF
or SSI Detached
1.64 b
0.87 a
(0.49) (0.41)
0.93 a
1.99 b
(0.48) (0.35)
-0.02
0.91
(0.70) (0.68)
2.45 b -1.79
(1.16) (1.30)
0.19
0.48
(1.17) (1.07)

TANF
or SSI Detached
2.05b
0.74
(0.50) (0.43)
1.04 b
1.98 b
(0.50) (0.35)
1.78 a
0.62
(0.97) (0.81)
-1.12
-0.22
(1.23) (1.14)
-2.28 a
0.15
(1.22) (1.01)

TANF
or SSI
2.87b
(0.64)
1.73b
(0.76)
0.60
(0.72)
-1.10
(0.88)
-1.41
(0.94)

TANF
or SSI
2.28 b
(0.54)
1.12 b
(0.53)
0.70
(0.87)
-0.75
(1.14)
-0.50
(1.08)

TANF
or SSI
1.92 b
(0.53)
0.46
(0.51)
-0.60
(0.73)
0.67
(0.96)
1.39
(1.02)

Detached
1.34b
(0.57)
1.98 b
(0.46)
0.03
(0.49)
-0.73
(0.79)
0.01
(0.67)

Detached
0.69
(0.48)
1.99b
(0.38)
-0.27
(0.55)
0.46
(0.92)
-0.22
(0.83)

Detached
0.47
(0.41)
1.93b
(0.41)
-.27
(0.55)
0.43
(0.87)
0.23
(0.69)

Chi-squared tests for whether transition matrix differs for barrier group compared to others in sample χ2 (p-value)
15.66 (0.02)
7.81 (0.25)
4.41
(0.62)
2.23
(0.89)
2.51 (0.88)
a=significant at 10% level, b=significant at 5% level
Note: Robust standard errors in (). Recipients of SSI in wave 1 are excluded from the sample. Each pair of columns represents a
different multinomial logit model of wave 2 outcomes as a function of a single wave 1 employment barrier interacted with wave 1
status (TANF/SSI, or neither). All models include covariates in table 3. Note that “child < age 5” is not included in models of the kids
< age 3 barrier.

41

Table 7: Probability of transitioning between states | work/TANF status in Wave 1
and Covariates
Barrier free
Wave 2 status
Wave 1 status
Work
TANF/SSI no work
Neither aid or work
Work
81.8%
7.2%
11.0%
TANF
44.2
38.4
17.6
Neither aid or work
39.2
18.5
42.3
Mental health
problem
Wave 2 status
Wave 1 status
Work
TANF/SSI no work
Neither aid or work
Work
66.0
9.5
24.5
TANF
15.3
82.6
2.2
Neither aid or work
18.8
8.0
73.2
Marijuana, drug,
alcohol use*
Wave 2 status
Wave 1 status
Work
TANF/SSI no work
Neither aid or work
Work
53.9
30.8
15.3
TANF
35.9
47.4
16.7
Neither aid or work
29.3
6.0
64.7
Child behavior
problem
Wave 2 status
Wave 1 status
Work
TANF/SSI no work
Neither aid or work
Work
75.1
14.9
10.0
TANF
45.9
35.7
18.4
Neither aid or work
47.8
16.9
35.2
Children under 3 in
household
Wave 2 status
Wave 1 status
Work
TANF/SSI no work
Neither aid or work
Work
75.4
12.2
12.3
TANF
48.7
37.3
14.0
Neither aid or work
42.6
9.5
47.9
Effect of 1 SD rise in continuous measure of mental health*, χ2 (p-value) = 17.0 (0.0002)
Wave 2 status
Wave 1 status
Work
TANF/SSI no work
Neither aid or work
Work
-3.2
6.2
-2.9
TANF
-8.2
13.5
-5.3
Neither aid or work
-0.3
9.4
-9.1
*This measures the change in predicted probability of work, aid, or being detached for a 1 SD rise in the
log-transformed Brief Symptom Inventory measure compared to mean.
Table shows predicted probability of work, TANF/SSI, or neither, conditional on wave 1 work/TANF
status, based on multinomial logit models in Table 6.

Table 8: Probability of sanctions by barriers for those on TANF some time between
Waves 1 and 2
Wave 1
Wave 2
Coefficient
Coefficient
(SE)
(SE)
Wave 1 barrier group
[predicted prob %]
[predicted prob %]
No barrier
0.424
-0.59
(0.562)
(0.509)
[23.8]
[14.5]
Mental health
-2.11
0.371
(1.33)
(1.10)
[3.8]
[26.4]
Drug/alcohol use
-0.521
0.537
(0.867)
(0.693)
[13.3]
[28.6]
Child < 3
-0.163
-0.106
(0.608)
(0.490)
[18.0]
[20.6]
Child behavior
0.642
-0.650
problem
(0.557)
(0.532)
[26.5]
[13.8]
Continuous mental
health measure*

-0.05
(0.17)
[-0.7]

0.50a
(0.27)
[8.5]

N
548
*Continuous mental health measure is the natural log transformation of the Brief
Symptom Inventory. The predicted probability in brackets for this continuous measure
shows the change in the probability of sanction for a 1 SD rise in this measure compared
to the mean.
Note: Sample includes women using any TANF between waves 1 and 2. Model adjusts
for covariates in table 3 and months on TANF. a=significant at 10% level.

43

