                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE CONSEQUENCES OF TEENAGE CHILDBEARING

                                             Adam Ashcraft
                                              Kevin Lang

                                          Working Paper 12485
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12485


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




We are grateful to Carlos Sepulveda-Rico for excellent research assistance and to Joshua Angrist, Donna
Ginther, Jonathan Guryan, John Johnson IV, Karen Norberg, Robert Pollak and participants in informal labor
lunches at Boston University and MIT and workshops and seminars at Harvard, the NBER and Washington
University for helpful comments and suggestions. This research was supported in part by NSF grant
SEC-0339149. The usual caveat applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Adam Ashcraft and Kevin Lang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Consequences of Teenage Childbearing
Adam Ashcraft and Kevin Lang
NBER Working Paper No. 12485
August 2006
JEL No. I3, J13

                                           ABSTRACT


We examine the effect of teenage childbearing on the adult outcomes of a sample of women who
gave birth, miscarried or had an abortion as teenagers. If miscarriages are (conditionally) random,
then if all miscarriages occur before teenagers can obtain abortions, using the absence of a
miscarriage as an instrument for a live birth provides a consistent estimate of the effect of teenage
motherhood on women who give birth. If all abortions occur before any miscarriage can occur, OLS
on the sample of women who either have a live birth or miscarry provides an unbiased estimate of
this effect. Under reasonable assumptions, IV underestimates and OLS overestimates the effect of
teenage motherhood on adult outcomes. For a variety of outcomes, the two estimates provide a
narrow bound on the effect of teenage motherhood on adult outcomes and which is relatively modest.
The bounds can also be combined to provide consistent estimates of the effects of teen motherhood.
These effects are generally adverse but modest.


Kevin Lang
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
lang@bu.edu
1       Introduction
Most policy-makers view teenage childbearing in the United States as an
important issue. President Clinton called it “our most serious social problem”
in his 1995 State of the Union address. Adult outcomes among women who
gave birth as teenagers are in most respects much worse than those of women
who delay childbearing. However, these di¤erences may not re‡ect the causal
e¤ect of teenage childbearing on the mothers. Teenagers who engage in risky
sexual behavior and do not turn to abortion if they become pregnant may
be very di¤erent from those who either avoid pregnancy or have an abortion.
In particular, girls who do not expect to …nish high school, get married or
…nd a good job, may be more likely to become teenage mothers. In fact,
social scientists have failed to establish convincing evidence of a causal link
between teenage childbearing and the mother’s educational, labor market,
and marital outcomes.
    The most careful attempts to isolate a causal e¤ect have found at most
modest positive e¤ects of delaying childbirth and in some cases …nd nega-
tive e¤ects. Geronimus and Korenman (1992) compare outcomes for sisters
and …nd little di¤erence in outcomes between the sister who gave birth as a
teenager and the sister who did not. Ribar (1994) uses age at menarche as
an exogenous source of variation in age at …rst birth and …nds no causal link
between teenage childbearing and high school completion. Hotz, McElroy,
and Sanders (1998, 2005) use miscarriage as an instrument for birth among
girls who become pregnant as teens.1 They …nd that delaying childbearing
reduces the probability that girls complete high school and adversely a¤ects
a number of other adult outcomes. Both Ribar and HMS capture the e¤ect
of teen childbearing on those who would choose not to have an abortion.
Therefore they should obtain similar results. The di¤erence between the
Ribar and HMS results may re‡ect the fact that the di¤erent choice of in-
struments captures the e¤ects of childbirth at di¤erent ages2 or, as we will
discuss shortly, bias in the HMS estimator.
    We note in passing that identi…cation in Levitt and Donohue (2001) is
quite di¤erent. They exploit state-time variation in the legalization of abor-
    1
    See also Hotz et al (1997).
    2
    While both estimates measure the e¤ect of motherhood on women who would bring a
child to term, Ribar (1994) implicitly focuses on much younger women than HMS (1997)
as most of the variation in age at menarche occurs between the ages of 12 and 14 compared
to a median age of 16 in the HMS sample.


                                           1
tion and thus estimate the causal e¤ect of abortion access on the children of
women who want to have an abortion. Women who would choose to delay
childbearing by having an abortion should have more to gain by doing so
than those who do not. This is consistent with more negative e¤ects of child-
bearing in Levitt and Donohue than in Ribar or HMS. Unfortunately there
is no way to compare the estimated parameters across instrumental variables
strategies directly because there are no common outcomes of interest among
them. Levitt and Donahue focus on criminal activity of the woman’s children
while Ribar and HMS focus on labor market and educational outcomes of
the woman.
    The HMS results tell a story of the e¤ect of teenage motherhood that is
very di¤erent from the one implicit in President Clinton’s characterization
of the issue. They …nd that teenage motherhood has only a small e¤ect
on completed fertility. Most of the e¤ect is on the timing of births. The
literature suggests that the presence of young children reduces female labor
supply.3 Therefore we should not be surprised that, as HMS …nd, delaying
childbirth initially raises labor supply but later decreases it. In a Ben-Porath
style human capital investment model, early childbirth can be a wealth-
maximizing strategy (Buckles, 2005).
    But is teenage childbirth really as benign as the HMS results suggest?
We argue that miscarriage is not a valid instrument for birth and that the
estimates in HMS are biased in the direction of …nding bene…cial e¤ects
of teenage childbearing. The essence of the argument is as follows. We
accept (and provide evidence in support of) the view expressed in HMS that,
from a medical perspective, miscarriages are random (at least given a few
behavioral factors such as smoking, drinking, and contraceptive behavior).
In the absence of abortion, miscarriage would therefore be a valid instrument
for (the absence of) birth.
    However, when abortion is an option, teenagers who miscarry are less
likely to be girls who would otherwise abort their pregnancy than are teenagers
who either abort or carry the child to term. Since, as we will see, teenagers
who have abortions, on average, come from more favored backgrounds than
those who do not, girls who miscarry are not a random sample of pregnant
   3
    Angrist and Evans (1998) use the randomness of sex mix of the …rst two children as
an instrument for having a third child and …nd that motherhood has small but notable
e¤ect on female labor supply. Similarly, Bronars and Grogger (1994) use the randomness of
twins at …rst birth as a natural experiment and conclude there are small, albeit short-lived,
e¤ects on the labor supply of unwed mothers.


                                             2
teenagers but are, instead, drawn from more disadvantaged backgrounds.
The IV estimator therefore underestimates the true costs of teenage child-
bearing. The HMS estimates are biased towards a benign view of teenage
childbearing.
    Our message, however, is not entirely negative. We propose an alternative
estimator that is biased against the benign view. We present OLS estimates
of the e¤ect of teenage childbearing using a sample of women who either
gave birth or miscarried as teenagers. Some women who would otherwise
have had an abortion, miscarry before the abortion can take place, but, of
course, by de…nition women who give birth would not have had an abortion.
The sample of women who miscarried is therefore more favorably selected
than the sample of women who gave birth, and thus our estimates are biased
towards …nding adverse e¤ects of teenage childbearing.
    We compare our OLS estimates from the miscarriage/live-birth sample
with HMS-style IV estimates. In most cases, the IV estimates suggest a
positive e¤ect of teenage childbearing while the OLS estimates suggest a
negative e¤ect. However, the bounds are relatively tight. For example, the
IV estimate is that teenage motherhood raises high school graduation by six
percentage points among women who give birth as teens. In contrast, the
OLS estimate is that teen childbearing reduces this rate by …ve percentage
points. When we take into account later teen births among those who abort
or miscarry, the range expands somewhat. The HMS IV approach gives a
positive nine percentage point e¤ect on a diploma while the OLS estimate
on the restricted sample produces an estimate of a seven percentage point
reduction. This lower-bound estimate, while not trivial, does not suggest
that delaying childbirth would dramatically improve outcomes for the types
of girls who give birth as teens.
    Under the assumption that, given that a teenager has an abortion, its
timing is independent of her adult outcomes, we can use the bounds from our
two estimates and some auxiliary information to obtain a consistent estimate
of the e¤ect of teen motherhood on those teenagers who would choose to give
birth. In particular, we de…ne women who would miscarry in the absence of
abortions as miscarriage types and women who would have an abortion in
the absence of miscarriages as abortion types. We require an estimate of the
fraction of women who are both miscarriage and abortion types who end up
having an abortion. We use a simple competing risks framework to estimate
this fraction.
    In most dimensions our results suggest a modest adverse e¤ect on adult

                                     3
outcomes from giving birth as a result of a …rst teen pregnancy. The prob-
ability of getting a high school diploma is una¤ected but the probability of
getting a GED is reduced by about …ve percentage points and average edu-
cation is lower by about .15 years. The probability of working is reduced by
about …ve percentage points and weekly hours by about four, but the e¤ect
on income conditional on working is close to zero. Women who give birth as
teens are about three percentage points less likely to be currently married,
but conditional on being married have husbands who earn more than the
husbands of women who do not give birth as teens. Overall, there is almost
no e¤ect on family income but since women who give birth as teens have
larger families, their income relative to an index of family needs is a mar-
ginally lower. Few of these di¤erences approach statistical signi…cance. The
one exception is number of children, where we …nd that having a child as a
teenager increases the expected number of live births by about eight-tenths.
    One reason that births may not have a large e¤ect on adult outcomes is
that many teens who have an abortion or miscarry on their …rst pregnancy
subsequently nevertheless give birth as teens. When we use miscarriage on
…rst pregnancy as an instrument for any teen birth, the results do not change
substantially although the bounds become wider, and our consistent esti-
mates of the e¤ects tend to be slightly more negative.
    The next section gives a mostly intuitive explanation of the statistical
issues. Section three describes the data we use. In contrast with the earlier
literature, we use the 1995 National Survey of Family Growth which is better
suited than the NLSY for measuring pregnancy outcomes. In section four
we present evidence in support of the argument that miscarriages are condi-
tionally random. The …fth section presents the results using the upward and
downward-biased estimators while the consistent estimates are discussed in
the sixth. Sections seven and eight extend our approach to account for births
from a second pregnancy and present the results of that extension. Section
nine addresses a number of potential problems with our estimation. Section
ten concludes.


2    Methods
We will restrict our analysis to women who became pregnant as teenagers.
We are interested in the di¤erence in outcomes between women who became
pregnant as teenagers and gave birth and those who did not. We will not ad-


                                     4
dress the e¤ect of pregnancy, itself, on adult outcomes. We will also initially
ignore the problem of multiple teen pregnancies but will return to this topic
after laying out the groundwork.
    Let Y 1 be some outcome of interest (e.g. educational attainment) for a
particular woman if she gives birth, and let Y 0 be the outcome for the same
women if she does not give birth. Note that this implies that miscarriages and
abortions a¤ect potential outcomes in the same way and that the important
di¤erence is between births and non-births.
    HMS make a convincing case that miscarriages are random with respect
to most factors that are likely to a¤ect adult outcomes, especially if one con-
trols for alcohol use, smoking and form of contraception.4 For the moment,
we maintain the assumption that miscarriage is conditionally random. We
return to this issue below.
    If so, in the absence of abortions, measuring the e¤ect of a live birth on
women who became pregnant as teenagers would be straightforward. We
would simply compare outcomes for those who gave birth with those who
miscarried.5 More formally, let Bi be an indicator variable for the pregnancy
ending in birth. Then, in the absence of abortions, the mean outcome for
those giving birth ( Bi =1 Yi =N1 ) is a consistent estimate of E(Y 1 jB = 1) and
similarly for the mean outcome for those not giving birth and the di¤erence
between the two means is a consistent estimator of the e¤ect of giving birth
on teenagers who become pregnant.
    When pregnancies can end in any of three ways, a live birth, abortion,
or miscarriage, the situation is more complicated. In the absence of miscar-
riages, some teenagers would carry the pregnancy to term and others would
have an abortion, We represent this miscarriage-free outcome by Bi which
equals one for live birth and zero for abortion and will use the terminology
latent-birth type for B = 1 and latent-abortion type for B = 0 or just
birth or abortion-type when dropping the modi…er “latent”is unlikely to be
confusing.
    We cannot hope to identify the e¤ect of giving birth on women who would
choose abortions. Since they either miscarry or have an abortion, we never
   4
     A related paper, Hotz et al (1997) allows for a proportion of miscarriages to be non-
random and estimates bounds on the e¤ects of teen motherhood and reaches broadly the
same conclusions as HMS.
   5
     We ignore for the moment the problem of multiple pregnancies. In fact, as can be
seen in Table III, teenagers may have multiple pregnancies. Initially, we examine only the
…rst pregnancy. We address multiple pregnancies in the extensions section.


                                            5
observe them having a child. However, since some women who would choose a
live birth do not give birth because they miscarry, there is some prospect that
we could identify the average e¤ect of having a child on women who would
choose to have a child (E[Y 1 Y 0 jB = 1]). It is important to note that
for many policy purposes, notably the value of teen pregnancy prevention
programs, the parameter we wish to measure is the one we have identi…ed
above: the e¤ect of giving birth on a teen who becomes pregnant and would
choose to have the child.
    E(Y 1 ) is readily obtained as the mean outcome for women who gave birth
as teenagers. E(Y 0 ) poses a greater challenge because the women who would
choose to give birth but do not are not directly identi…able from the data.
    The statistical problem arises because we do not expect B to be inde-
pendent of the potential outcomes Y 1 and Y 0 . Instead, economic theory
strongly suggests that teenagers for whom the cost of giving birth (Y 0 Y 1 )
is relatively large will be more likely to choose abortions (B = 0). We
strongly suspect that this di¤erence tends to be larger for teenagers whose
prospects are more favorable (E(Y 0 jB = 0) > E(Y 0 jB = 1)). For no-
tational simplicity, we will use YB to refer to E(Y 1 jB = 1) the expected
outcome from a birth among women who would choose to give birth, Y0 to
refer to E(Y 0 jB = 1), the expected outcome in the absence of a birth among
women who would choose to give birth and YA to refer to E(Y 0 jB = 0), the
expected outcome in the absence of a birth among women who would choose
an abortion.

2.1    Special Cases
Before addressing the general identi…cation problem, let us consider two cases
where estimation is straightforward. Assume …rst that all miscarriages hap-
pen early in pregnancy and therefore before any teenager is able to arrange
for an abortion. This means that miscarriage is independent of whether a
teenager is a latent-birth or latent-abortion type and, given the assumption
that miscarriage is random, therefore a valid instrument for birth. Somewhat
more formally, let b be the fraction of latent-birth types in the population
and denote a miscarriage by M equals 1. Then

                     E(Y jM = 0) = bYB + (1          b)YA                  (1)
                     E(Y jM = 1) = bY0 + (1         b)YA                   (2)


                                      6
so that
                 E(Y jM = 0)     E(Y jM = 1) = bYB          bY0          (3)
or
                              E(Y jM = 0)          E(Y jM = 1)
                 YB    Y0 =                                :              (4)
                                            b
Note that in this case, we can estimate b by the di¤erence between the birth
rate among those not miscarrying and those miscarrying (which is, of course,
zero). Substituting for b in (4) gives the Wald estimator and shows that the
HMS IV estimator provides a consistent estimate of the treatment e¤ect.
    Now assume the opposite: all miscarriages occur late in pregnancy so that
all latent abortions are realized. Then teenagers who miscarry are a random
sample of latent-birth types, and OLS on the sample of women who either
miscarried or gave birth as teenagers is a consistent estimator.

2.2       Finding Bounds
Unfortunately, neither of these two cases is accurate. Miscarriages occur
both early and late in pregnancy. Some miscarriages prevent abortions that
would otherwise have taken place but there are also miscarriages that would
have happened had the teenager not had an abortion. Let us examine the
two estimators in this case.
    Consider …rst the IV estimator. The teenagers who miscarry are not a
random sample of the (pregnant) population. They are disproportionately
women who would not have an abortion. Put di¤erently, among women who
miscarry, latent-birth types are over-represented relative to their fraction
in the population. This, in turn, means that among women who do not
miscarry, latent-abortion types are over-represented. Since latent-abortion
types come from more favored backgrounds than latent-birth types, the IV
estimator will underestimate any adverse impact of teenage childbearing.
    Again, somewhat more formally, let M = 1 represent a teenager who
would miscarry in the absence of abortion and m be the fraction of teenagers
who would miscarry. Further assume that if the woman is both a latent-
miscarriage and a latent-abortion type (M (1 B ) = 1), then she has an
abortion with probability and a miscarriage with probability 1       .
    Then the expected outcome given a miscarriage is

                                   (1       b)(1    )YA + bY0
                  E(Y jM = 1) =                                          (5)
                                             1      +b

                                        7
while the expected outcome given no miscarriage is
                                  (1    b)(1    m + m )YA + b(1          m)YB
             E(Y jM = 0) =                                                         (6)
                                               1 m+m      bm
The Wald estimate of the e¤ect of a birth on the outcome is given by
            E(Y jM = 0)         E(Y jM = 1)   E(Y jM = 0) E(Y jM = 1)
   IV   =                                   =                         :            (7)
            E(BjM = 0)          E(BjM = 1)          E(BjM = 0)
Substituting for (5) and (6) in (7) and using the fact that
                                                      b(1 m)
                        E(BjM = 0) =                                               (8)
                                               1     m+m     bm
yields that the IV estimate of the e¤ect of teenage childbearing is given by
                                                     (YA Y0 ) (1 b)
                 p lim(   IV )   = YB     Y0 +                       :             (9)
                                                    (1 m) (1    + b)
If expected outcomes in the absence of a birth are more favorable for latent-
abortion than latent-birth types, then IV will be a biased estimator of YB Y0
unless either equals zero (all miscarriages precede all abortions) or b equals
one (there are no abortions).
    What about OLS on the set of women who gave birth or miscarried as
teenagers? Needless to say, the group of women who gave birth consists
only of latent-birth types. On the other hand, those who miscarried are a
mixture of latent-birth and latent-abortion types and therefore drawn from
a more favored population. OLS on this sample will therefore over-estimate
the adverse e¤ect of teenage childbearing. It is straightforward to show that
                                                   (YA    Y0 )(1   )(1   b)
               p lim(   ols )   = YB    Y0                                    :   (10)
                                                         (1      + b)
OLS will be downward-biased (exaggerate the negative impact of a teen birth)
unless all abortions come before all miscarriages ( = 1) or there are no
abortions (b = 1).

2.3     Consistent Estimation
The calculations of the bias assume that the expected outcome among latent-
abortion types is independent of whether they have the abortion early or late.

                                               8
One can imagine that more advantaged teenagers would get abortions earlier
in their pregnancy because they are more likely to have the resources to
obtain an abortion quickly. One can equally imagine that since late abortions
are more complicated and expensive, they would be more likely to be available
to more advantaged teenagers. The issue is unimportant for determining
the direction of the bias for the two estimators provided that latent-abortion
types are more advantaged teenagers regardless of whether they have early or
late abortions, but is important for our attempts to get consistent estimates
of the e¤ects. We examine evidence on this issue below.
    For the moment we assume that YA is independent of the timing of the
abortion. Then the treatment e¤ect is given by

                                ols   + (1        m+m )   IV
                 YB    Y0 =                                    :          (11)
                                         1      m+m
In line with our previous reasoning, when equals 1, all abortions preceed all
miscarriages, and the consistent estimator reduces to OLS. When equals 0,
all miscarriages preceed all abortions, and the consistent estimator reduces
to the HMS instrumental variables estimator.
    In all other cases, to obtain a consistent estimate of the treatment e¤ect,
we require consistent estimates of the fraction of pregnant teenagers who
are latent-birth types (b), the fraction of pregnant teenagers who are latent-
miscarriage types (m) and the fraction of those who are both latent-abortion
and latent-miscarriage who have abortions ( ).
    We use a competing risks model to identify these parameters: Our data
are weekly so that there is a nontrivial possibility that a miscarriage and
abortion would both be “scheduled” for the same week. We present our
calculation for the case where in this event we observe a miscarriage which
we refer to as “miscarriage …rst.” The case where we observe an abortion
(abortion …rst) is analogous. We use both approaches in the empirical work.
    The probability of a miscarriage in the …rst week is just

                                  P (M1 ) = m1

while the probability of an abortion is

                              P (A1 ) = a1 (1    m1 ):

More generally the probabilities of miscarriage and abortion in week t are

                                         9
given by
                                              t 1
                        P (Mt ) = mt (1       i=1 ai )
                                             t
                        P (At ) = at (1      i=1 mi ):

Note that the fractions of latent-miscarriage and latent-abortion types are
given by

                                   m =      mt                           (12)
                              (1   b) =     at :                         (13)

    Inserting these estimates into equations (9) and (10) provides consistent
estimates of YB Y0 and of YA Y0 : These consistent estimates are based
on the assumption that when an abortion and miscarriage are “scheduled”
for the same week, we observe a miscarriage. The estimates of m, b and
are slightly di¤erent if we assume instead that we observe an abortion when
both are scheduled for the same week. Fortunately, as we will see, the results
are not sensitive to this assumption.


3    Data
The data employed in this analysis are from the 1995 wave of the National
Survey of Family Growth, a survey administered by the National Center
for Health Statistics (NCHS), an agency of the Department of Health and
Human Services. The purpose of the survey is to produce national estimates
and information on factors a¤ecting pregnancy, including sexual activity,
contraceptive use, infertility, and sources of family planning services, and on
the health of women and infants.
    A national probability sample of 10,847 civilian non-institutionalized women
ages 15 to 44 was interviewed between mid-January and October 1995. The
interviews were conducted in person by trained female interviewers using lap-
top or notebook computers. The interview, which lasted an average of 105
minutes, collected data on each pregnancy; contraceptive use by the intervie-
wee and her partner; her ability to bear children; the use of medical services
for contraception; infertility and prenatal care; her marriage, cohabitation,
living situation, and work history; and a variety of demographic and economic
characteristics. Additional data were collected in a short self-administered in-
terview in which the respondent heard questions over headphones and entered

                                     10
her own answers into the notebook computer. This approach is designed to
reduce the underreporting of abortions which is a serious problem that must
be acknowledged in any study using fertility microdata. While between 54
and 62 percent of abortions that actually occurred were probably reported in
the NSFG, it is unlikely that the more commonly used NLSY does anywhere
near that well.6
    We focus on twelve outcome variables. The …rst three are measures of
education: whether the individual has a high school diploma, has a GED
and years of educational attainment. The next two concern marital status:
whether the woman is currently married and whether she is currently di-
vorced or separated. We also examine spouse’s earnings conditional on the
woman being married or living with a partner. We examine whether the
woman is working, and conditional on working how many hours she works
per week and what she earns annually. In addition, we look at total family
income and income relative to the poverty line given family composition. The
data set contains imputed family income for those who do not answer the
question. Our early experiments showed little di¤erence between the results
with and without the imputed data. There are well known advantages and
disadvantages to relying on imputed data. We compromise by using only
actual data when examining family income and including the imputed data
when reporting income relative to the poverty line. Unfortunately, income
data are reported only in intervals. We impute income using these intervals.7
Finally, we examine the number of live births.
    Table I presents weighted means and standard deviations for key vari-
ables. The information is presented for the all women who were at least 20
years old at the time of the survey and for the teen pregnancy sub-sample,
which consists of women who had their …rst pregnancy before their 18th
birthday. This is conceptually the same sample HMS extract from the Na-
tional Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) in their analysis, and will be
   6
     These statistics are computed by comparing the total number of abortions implied by
NSFG data with institutional sources, and are reported in user documentation.
   7
     There are eighteen intervals which we impute as follows: less than $7,000
($3500), $7,000-$8,499 ($7,750), $8,500-$9,999 ($9,250), $10,000-$11,999 ($10,999),
$12,000-$13,999 ($12,999), $14,000-$15,999 ($14,999), $16,000-$17,999 ($16,999), $18,000-
$19,999 ($18,999), $20,000-$24,999 ($22,499), $25,000-$29,999 ($27,499), $30,000-
$39,999 ($34,499), $40,000-$49,999 ($44,499), $50,000-$59,999 ($54,499), $60,000-
$69,999 ($64,499), $70,000-$79,999 ($74,499), $80,000-$89,999 ($84,499), $90,000-$99,999
($94,499), $100,000 and up ($124,499).



                                           11
the basis for much of our empirical work below. Note that not all of the
women in the teen pregnancy sample were teen mothers. On average, they
…rst gave birth at eighteen, approximately four and half years earlier than
the average for the full sample.
    The top panel of Table I illustrates the well-known di¤erences in outcomes
for women who were teen mothers and women as a whole. Relative to the
full sample, women in the teen pregnancy sample are more likely to be di-
vorced and less likely to be currently married and have lower spousal income
conditional on being married or with a long-term partner, are less likely to
be working and work fewer hours and have lower personal income conditional
on working, have lower family income, are less likely to have obtained a high
school diploma, a di¤erence that is not fully o¤set by their greater tendency
to have a GED.
    The lower panel of Table I reveals that there are also signi…cant di¤erences
in family background between the women who became pregnant as teens
and the sample as a whole. The teen pregnancy sample contains a higher
proportion of blacks and a somewhat higher proportion of Hispanics than
the full sample. It is somewhat more Protestant and less Catholic than the
full sample. Women in the teen pregnancy sample are much more likely to
have had an absent father and/or mother and had less educated parents on
average.8 Their mothers were more likely to have worked.
    Since women who become pregnant as teens are not a representative sam-
ple of the teen population, di¤erences in adult outcomes between those who
become pregnant as teens and those who do not should not be ascribed to
their pregnancy. More signi…cantly, we are measuring the e¤ect of teen child-
bearing on a select group, not on a random teen, and, as we emphasized in
the previous section, within this select group on those who would not choose
to have an abortion.
    Table II provides important sample statistics for the Teen Pregnancy
Sample. Each of the variables is constructed in a straightforward manner
except for the smoking dummy variable. In the survey, women are asked
if they have smoked more than 100 cigarettes in their life, and if so when
they started smoking. A smoker is de…ned as a woman who started smoking
before the age at which the pregnancy started. There is more detailed data on
smoking during pregnancy, but these questions were not asked of women who
   8
    The no mother and no father variables are drawn from responses to parental education
questions that are coded no mother (father) …gure.


                                          12
end the pregnancy with an abortion. Therefore, we use the “smoked before
pregnancy” variable which is similar to that employed by HMS. While over
60 percent of girls had smoked 100 cigarettes in their lifetime, only 27 percent
started smoking before the pregnancy, a risk factor for miscarriage.9
    In addition to smoking, using certain drugs (notably cocaine and heroine,
possibly ca¤eine, but probably not marijuana), using an IUD before preg-
nancy (in some studies) and being less than …fteen years old at conception
are believed to be risk factors for miscarriage. Unfortunately, the NSFG
does not include data on drinking behavior before pregnancy. The NSFG
does include information on use of an IUD before pregnancy but only three
members of our teen pregnancy had used an IUD before their pregnancy and
none of these reported miscarrying. Table II reveals that almost 86 percent
of pregnancies occur after a girl’s 15th birthday, the cuto¤ for the …rst risk
factor of assigned miscarriage.
    Miscarriage occurred in about 10 percent of …rst teen pregnancies, abor-
tion in 25 percent, and birth in 65 percent. Table III gives average outcomes
separately for teen mothers, those who had abortions and those who mis-
carried. Outcomes are generally similar for women who gave birth or mis-
carried. Those who miscarried have a slightly higher probability of having a
high school diploma or GED and marginally higher personal and family in-
comes. They are also marginally more likely to be currently working, married
and work somewhat more hours per week. They had their …rst child three
years later than those who gave birth but actually have their next pregnancy
somewhat earlier.
    The group that stands out as distinct in Table III is the set of women
who terminated their …rst pregnancy by having an abortion. This group is
much more likely than the others to have obtained a high school diploma, has
   9
     Our summary of the literature relies primarily on Regan and Rai (2000) and Garcia-
Enguidanos et al (2002) but also on Porter and Hook, 1980 and Kline, Stein and Susser
(1989) and conversations with phyicians. The consensus is that about 75% of conceptions
do not result in a live birth and that the vast majority of these concpetions are never
recognized. About 12-15% of miscarriages are clinically recognized. The risk factors for
miscarriage are not well-established, in part because there are few prospective studies, and
because some of the recognized risk factors are highly collinear. For example, almost all
cocaine users smoke, recognized as a risk factor, but studies of the e¤ect of cocaine have
generally not controlled for smoking. Similarly, among adult women age does appear to be
a risk factor but its importance may be exaggerated by women who have had miscarriages
being more likely to continue to conceive later in life. The summary in this section is, of
necessity, subject to these limitations.


                                            13
substantially higher personal and family income, is somewhat more likely to
be working and works more hours. Both their next pregnancy and their …rst
birth occurred later than for the other two groups. The …gures in Table III
highlight the importance of how abortions are treated in the analysis because
of the much more favorable outcomes for this group.
    The lower part of Table III shows that there are also big di¤erences in
the family backgrounds of teens associated with the outcomes of their preg-
nancies. In particular, teens whose pregnancy ends in abortion are more
likely to be white and have more educated parents and are less likely to have
grown up without a mother or a father. Consistent with our argument that
some of the women who miscarry would otherwise have had abortions, the
women who miscarry are somewhat more advantaged than those who give
birth but less advantaged than those who have abortions. In particular, they
are more likely to be white than those who give birth but less likely than
those who have abortions. Their parents’education levels fall between those
of the other two groups. The only exception is that women who miscarry
are more likely to have grown up without their mother than are either of the
other two groups.
    Figure 1 shows the timing of abortions and miscarriages. We can see that
neither occurs earlier in the sense of stochastic dominance. The distribution
of miscarriages is more dispersed than that of abortions. Very early miscar-
riages are more common than very early abortions while very late miscar-
riages, including stillbirths, are also more common than very late abortions.
Therefore, it is not possible that all women who miscarry do so before they
would choose to have an abortion or vice versa. On the other hand, over-
all abortions tend to be somewhat earlier than miscarriages which suggests
that the implicit assumption in HMS that miscarriages precede abortions is
problematic.
    We have shown that if early and late abortions are drawn from the same
pool, then we can obtain consistent estimates of the e¤ect of teen motherhood
on women who would not have an abortion as a teen. The two right-hand
columns of Table III present some evidence on this.
    Outcomes appear to be somewhat more favorable for women who had
early abortions than for women who had late abortions as teens, but most
of the di¤erences are statistically insigni…cant. In fact, the only di¤erence
in outcomes that achieves signi…cance at the .05 level is that those who had
late abortions are less likely to be divorced or separated. There is also some
evidence that they are less likely to have a high school diploma and more

                                     14
Figure 1: Density Functions: Abortions and Miscarriages




                          15
likely to have a GED. On the other hand, their average education level is
higher. Given that we are looking at twelve di¤erent outcomes, we …nd Table
III reasonably supportive of the assumption that outcomes for women who
have early and late abortions are similar.
    There are also statistically signi…cant di¤erences in background character-
istics. Most notably, those having late abortions are less likely to be Catholic
and more likely to have a working mother.


4    Are Miscarriages Random?
Our approach assumes that, in the absence of abortions, miscarriages would
be random. In particular, we must assume that they are not correlated with
other factors that predict adult outcomes. Below we present some direct
evidence on this question, but we begin by pointing out that the di¤erence
in outcomes between early and late abortions already provides some indirect
evidence.
    Early abortions contain a higher fraction of teens who are also miscar-
riage types than do late abortions. If conditional on being an abortion type,
miscarriage types are selectively drawn from teens with worse expected out-
comes, then we would expect that early abortions would be associated with
worse outcomes than are late abortions. We have seen that, if anything, they
are associated with somewhat better outcomes. Of course, it is possible that
late abortions are more adversely selected than early abortions and that this
outweighs the negative e¤ect of including miscarriage types among the early
abortions. But Occam’s razor pushes us to the simpler explanation that
there are no large di¤erences in outcomes between early and late abortions
and between latent-miscarriage and latent-nonmiscarriage types. We must
also recognize that there could be a di¤erence between latent-birth types
who do and do not miscarry although Occam’s razor also rules against this
argument. Still, we turn now to direct evidence.
    The teen pregnancy sample is too small to allow us to examine directly
the relation between individual characteristics and miscarriage. Therefore,
we begin by using the entire pregnancy sample, not just the sample of women
who …rst became pregnant as teens.
    Table IV presents a series of probit estimates of the relation between
individual characteristics and miscarriage. The …rst column looks at this
relation for the entire sample and thus represents the e¤ect on the probability


                                      16
of miscarrying versus either giving birth or having an abortion. The second
column repeats the exercise but excludes those who terminated their …rst
pregnancy through an abortion.
    There are only two factors that are related to miscarriage. As already
noted, smokers are more likely to miscarry. More strikingly, there are large
e¤ects of not having a mother although these coe¢ cients must be interpreted
with caution since parental education is zero when there is no parent, and
mothers are recorded as not working if they are absent. Using an IUD before
pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of miscarriage but falls short of
statistical signi…cance. Perhaps more importantly, miscarriage risk is similar
across race/ethnic groups, and having more educated parents is associated
with a greater likelihood of miscarriage although this e¤ect is only statisti-
cally signi…cant for fathers and only when abortions are excluded from the
sample.
    However, as we have already stressed, the relation between miscarriage
and personal characteristics may not re‡ect a direct or indirect medical rela-
tion between miscarriage and these characteristics. Instead, they may re‡ect
the relation between those characteristics and abortion. Any factor that
makes a woman more likely to have an abortion also makes her less likely to
have a miscarriage.
    Therefore in the third column we restrict ourselves to a sample for whom
abortion is not a consideration, women who have been pregnant for at least
twenty-four weeks. There are only four abortions recorded after the twenty-
fourth week of pregnancy in our data. Such abortions are su¢ ciently rare
that we expect that they are either errors or cases where the mother’s life
was in danger or the fetus was not viable. These four cases are excluded from
the sample in column three.
    Strikingly the equation has no explanatory power for miscarriages in the
last trimester of pregnancy. None of the personal characteristics is indi-
vidually statistically signi…cant and the estimated magnitudes are generally
small. The likelihood ratio 2 for the equation is 14.5, well short of statistical
signi…cance. The evidence in the third column suggests that miscarriages are
random.
    One concern is that third trimester miscarriages are su¢ ciently rare that
our approach may be inadequate to …nd factors that predict them. Column
four extends the sample to women who carried the fetus for at least sixteen
weeks and did not subsequently have an abortion. Only about 1.5% of women
who are pregnant after sixteen weeks have an abortion, so the risk of bias

                                       17
from selection remains modest. Sixteen weeks is also the latest period for
which we can obtain meaningful estimates for the teen sample.
    The results here are consistent with our expectations from reading the lit-
erature. Girls who conceive while less than …fteen are more likely to miscarry.
Smoking is also a risk factor. Women who used an IUD before pregnancy
are also more likely to miscarry. These e¤ects are large although in some
cases signi…cant only at the 10% level. The remaining characteristics are
insigni…cant individually and jointly.
    Finally, in column …ve, we replicate column four for our teen pregnancy
sample except that we drop IUD use since it is too rare in this sample. The
results are similar to those obtained for the full sample except that there is
no evidence that smoking promotes miscarriages among our teen pregnancy
sample. Although, the t-statistic indicates that the e¤ect of conceiving prior
to age …fteen is statistically signi…cant, we cannot reject the hypothesis that
all the coe¢ cients in column …ve are jointly insigni…cant. Moreover, we
cannot reject the hypothesis that the coe¢ cients in columns four and …ve
are identical.
    The results in Table IV provide strong evidence that, with the possible
exception of the e¤ects of smoking, IUD use and age at conception, miscar-
riages after the …rst four months of pregnancy (when most abortions have
already taken place) are random. This, of course, does not demonstrate that,
in the absence of abortions, earlier miscarriages would be uncorrelated with
factors that in‡uence adult outcomes.
    As a …nal test, we estimate a competing risk model along the lines of the
one presented earlier except that we multiply the probability of being sched-
uled to have an abortion in each period by exp(Xi Ba ) and the probability of
being scheduled to have a miscarriage in each period by exp(Xi Bm ). This
proportional hazard formulation is restrictive but standard in the literature.10
    The next to last column shows that a number of variables predict abor-
tion. Whites are substantially more likely to have abortions than are ei-
ther blacks or “other” racial/ethnic groups. Those describing themselves as
protestant or catholic are less likely to have an abortion. Teens with more
educated parents, working mothers and who conceive before age …fteen are
more likely than other teens to have an abortions.
    In contrast, the variables in Table IV have relatively little power to predict
  10
    The approach here parallels the semi-parametric Cox proportional hazard model
(1972) but most parametric models also imply a proportional hazard.


                                       18
miscarriage, and there is no consistent pattern that suggests more or less
advantaged teens have a greater probability of miscarrying. One exception
is that the very small number of teens who have no mother …gure for whom
they report education are noticeably more likely to miscarry. In contrast,
the probability of miscarrying is increasing in father’s education. For the
remaining (insigni…cant) variables, there is no consistent pattern relating
the sign of the coe¢ cient to whether the variable is associated with a more
favorable or unfavorable background.
    Since the number of women who report having no mother …gure in their
lives is small, it is unlikely that a positive relation between this report and
miscarriage has any e¤ect on the results. However, in order to ensure that
our later results were not driven by the very small number of women with no
mother …gure, we replicated our principal estimates dropping from the sam-
ple all women reporting no mother …gure. The results do not change in any
substantive way. When these observations are dropped from the competing
risks model, the coe¢ cients on the factors explaining miscarriage are jointly
signi…cant at the .05 level but not the .01 level. The only variable to be
individually signi…cant is father’s education which shows a positive correla-
tion with miscarriage. If anything, the results of the competing risks model
therefore suggest a positive correlation between miscarriage and family back-
ground (at least once the observations without mother …gures are dropped).
We therefore …nd no evidence that our approach unbderestimates the ad-
verse e¤ects of teen motherhood on the mothers by relying on an adversely
selected comparison group.
    In what follows, we will present estimates in which we assume that miscar-
riages are random and also estimates in which we assume that miscarriages
are random conditional on smoking behavior and age at conception. As a
further check on our results, we will also experiment with limiting our OLS
(birth vs. miscarriage) results to late miscarriages.
    We do not, however, present results in which we control for other known
correlates of outcomes such as race and parental education. Since these
factors also predict abortion, it is easy to develop examples in which including
them as controls worsens the bias or changes the sign of the bias.11 Therefore,
  11
     The simplest case is when there are two groups of abortion types, some with outcomes
that are better than those of the birth types in the absence of a birth and some whose
outcomes are worse. In this case, if we can only predict one abortion type, the IV estimator
will be either more biased or biased in the opposite direction depending on which type of
abortion we can predict.


                                            19
estimates with additional controls do not necessarily even provide bounds.
We have, however, experimented with such controls, and the results do not
change in any substantive way. In general, when we add additional controls
our estimates suggest that the e¤ects of teen births are even less adverse than
we estimate with no controls or controls for known risk factors.


5    IV and OLS Estimates
Table V presents our initial estimates of the e¤ects of teen motherhood on
twelve adult outcomes for the women in our sample. The results are divided
into two panels. The …rst panel makes no use of controls and thus provides the
Wald estimates which, in the absence of weighting, could be gleaned directly
from Table III. The second adds controls for smoking prior to conception and
conception prior to age …fteen.
    Within each panel, the …rst column shows standard OLS estimates of
the e¤ect of teen motherhood on outcomes. In contrast with the standard
OLS approach, the sample is limited to teens experiencing a pregnancy and
is therefore less biased towards …nding a large adverse e¤ect of teen moth-
erhood. Nevertheless, the results indicate that the adverse e¤ects are large.
If we took these results at face value, we would conclude that teen moth-
erhood substantially reduces the probability of graduating high school with
only a small o¤setting e¤ect on the likelihood of obtaining a GED and that
education is reduced by over a year. Teen motherhood, we would conclude,
greatly increases the probability of being divorced or separate. reduces the
probability of working, hours worked conditional on working, individual and
family income and spousal income conditional on having a spouse.
    Of course, we do not believe that births even conditional on pregnancy
are random. Therefore in the second column of each panel we present the
results from replicating the instrumental variables procedure in HMS using
our data. In comparing our results with those in HMS, it is important to
keep in mind that the women in our sample are, on average, thirty-two years
old and thus younger than the women in HMS. HMS generally …nd that the
positive e¤ects of teen motherhood increase with age (an issue we discuss in
the extensions section). The third column in each panel shows the results
of restricting the sample to women who either gave birth or miscarried and
estimating the equation by OLS.
    The results using the IV approach are generally consistent with those


                                      20
obtained in HMS. With the exception of number of births and a shift from
GED to an actual high school diploma, none of the e¤ects of teenage moth-
erhood is statistically signi…cant at the .05 level. We …nd that being a teen
mother increases total number of live births by about seven-tenths. Since
many of the women in our sample have not yet completed their childbearing,
it is likely that the di¤erence in completed fertility will be smaller and thus
comparable to the three-tenths di¤erence found in HMS. We provide support
for this expectation in the extensions section.
     We also …nd that, conditional on having a spouse or cohabiting partner,
spousal earnings are over $5,000 higher for women who were teen mothers,
and this di¤erence is signi…cant at the 10% level both with and without
risk controls. Family income is close to $3,000 higher and almost one-eighth
higher gauged relative to the poverty threshold. Although the di¤erences fall
short of signi…cance at conventional levels, their magnitude is nontrivial. The
estimated family income di¤erential is about 10% of average family income
for this sample.
     We also …nd statistically insigni…cant but positive e¤ects of teen mother-
hood on education as measured by either highest grade completed or having
a high school diploma although this is o¤set by a reduction in the probability
of having a GED. Having been a teen mother has an insigni…cantly negative
e¤ect on being married, working and hours worked conditional on working.
     Because of its larger sample, we have relied on the NSFG instead of the
NLSY used by HMS. Our results are nevertheless similar to those in HMS
in that they suggest a benign view of teen motherhood. If anything, we
should conclude that motherhood has positive e¤ects on women who would
choose to give birth. The change in sample has little e¤ect on the results.
Saul Ho¤man (2003) has pointed out some di¢ culties with the data used
by HMS. He …nds, using the HMS approach and the corrected data that at
age 28, teen motherhood has modest and statistically insigni…cant positive
e¤ects on earnings, spousal earning and the probability of having a high
school diploma or GED and but reduces the probability of being married.
The one statistically signi…cant e¤ect is a positive e¤ect on hours worked
which is not replicated in our data.
     However, as we have argued, the estimates in the second column of each
panel in Table V are biased towards a benign view of teen motherhood. The
third column, which shows the results of comparing women who miscarried
with those who gave birth, presents a noticeable contrast.
     Using the OLS approach in the second column, we …nd a somewhat larger

                                      21
di¤erence in total fertility than using the HMS IV approach. More impor-
tantly, instead of …nding an insigni…cant positive e¤ect on education, we …nd
a negative e¤ect that in one cases reaches signi…cance at the .05 level. Giv-
ing birth as a teen lowers the probability of obtaining a high school diploma
by four or …ve percentage points, and the probability of having a diploma
or GED by about eight percentage points (statistically signi…cant at the .05
level) and lowers educational attainment by about one-third year.
    In contrast with the positive e¤ects on income reported in the second col-
umn, we …nd negative, albeit insigni…cant e¤ects on own and family income.
Teen motherhood reduces adult family income relative to the poverty line by
23%, although this estimate only attains signi…cance even at the 10% level
with risk controls. The results for being married and for working are similar
using the two estimators.
    For completeness, the fourth column of each panel in Table V presents
bootstrapped estimates of the probability that the two estimates are the
same.12 Most of the estimates are statistically signi…cantly di¤erent which is
consistent with our expectation that both are biased.
    There are two important points to take away from Table V. The …rst is
that even the lower bound estimates in the second column are modest in size.
These estimates suggest an e¤ect of a few percent on family income, an eight
percentage point drop in the probability of obtaining a high school diploma
or GED and about a third year less in educational attainment. These e¤ects
are not trivial but they also con…rm the view that much of the perceived e¤ect
of teenage motherhood on adult outcomes actually captures other factors.
    The second point is that there is still a notable di¤erence between the
upper- and lower-bound estimate. The upper-bound estimates are consistent
with the view of teen motherhood as a benign decision to time birth early.
The lower-bound estimates are not. It is therefore important to move beyond
the bounds presented in Table V.
  12
     In each repetition we chose a sample equal in size to the sample for the IV estimates.
We did not impose that the proportion of pregnancies ending in abortion, live birth and
miscarriage equal the proportions in the sample. Therefore the sample size for the OLS
estimates was random.




                                            22
Figure 2: Timing of Latent Miscarriages and Abortions: Miscarriages First




6    Consistent Estimates
Figures 2 and 3 give the estimated distribution of latent miscarriages and
latent abortions using the competing hazard model described in the methods
section. As can be seen from the similarity of the two …gures, it makes very
little di¤erence whether we assume that when an abortion and a miscarriage
are “scheduled” for the same week we observe an abortion or whether we
assume the opposite. In the latter case we estimate that 26.4% of teens are
abortion types and 11.9% are miscarriage types (see Table VI). With the
former assumption, the …gures are 26.2% and 12.2%. Again, with the latter
assumption, 46.8% of women who are both abortion types and miscarriage
types have miscarriages while with the former, the estimate is 38.5%.
     Given the similarity of the estimated densities, it is not surprising that
the results presented in Table VII are similar regardless of the assumption
we choose. The …rst two columns of Table VII replicate the IV and OLS
results with risk controls. The third and fourth columns are the estimates

                                      23
 Figure 3: Timing of Latent Miscarriages and Abortions: Abortions First




under the assumption that in any week a scheduled miscarriage occurs before
a scheduled abortion.13 The third column is in a sense the bias term. It is
the expected di¤erence in the outcome between women who have abortions
and those who give birth if they had not given birth.
    We can see that these di¤erences are often large. Even in the absence of
a birth, teens who would abort would be 33 percentage points more likely
to graduate high school and would have close to two years more education.
They would have substantially higher personal, spousal and family incomes
and would have about one-half child less. They would also be somewhat less
likely to be married. Di¤erences in employment are small.
    In contrast the estimated causal e¤ects of giving birth are negligible.
  13
    The standard errors in columns three through six are derived by bootstrapping treating
the parameters estimated in the competing risks model as known. Since the results in
columns three and four are similar to those in …ve and six despite the di¤erences in the
results of the competing risks models, allowing for this additional source of uncertainty is
unlikely to noticeably a¤ect the standard errors.


                                            24
There is no di¤erence in the probability of having a high school diploma and
only about one-eighth year di¤erence in average education although there is a
…ve percentage point di¤erence in the probability of having a GED. Personal
incomes are trivially higher for those who give birth. Spousal incomes are
actually somewhat higher conditional on having a partner and family income
slightly higher despite the lower probability of marriage. Incomes relative to
the poverty line are somewhat lower re‡ecting the larger number of children
among those who give birth as teens. None of the estimated e¤ects except
for the increase in number of live births and the reduction in hours worked
is statistically signi…cant.
    The last two columns show the results for the case where in any week, if
scheduled, an abortion takes place before a miscarriage can occur. There are
no important di¤erences from the results based on the opposite assumption.
    Overall Table VII suggests that except for an increase in the number
of live births, teen births have little e¤ect, positive or negative, on adult
outcomes. Even the result for live births must be taken with a note of
caution since having a miscarriage is a predictor of future miscarriages. While
miscarriage is plausibly random with respect to the other outcomes, there is
reason to be concerned that we overestimate the e¤ect of miscarriage on the
number of live births.


7    Multiple Teen Pregnancies
The approach so far allows us to estimate the e¤ect of a birth from a …rst teen
pregnancy on women who would choose to carry their …rst teen pregnancy
to term. Thus the discussion so far ignores the possibility that teenagers
whose …rst pregnancy does not end in birth may nevertheless give birth in
their teens. In particular, if most teenagers who would choose to give birth
but have a miscarriage later give birth as teens, miscarrying may have little
impact on teens who would otherwise have given birth.
    In fact, some teens who miscarry and some teens who have abortions on
their …rst pregnancy subsequently give birth as teens. As shown in Table
III, almost 30% of teens whose …rst teen pregnancy ends in miscarriage and
13% of those for whom it ends in abortion subsequently give birth as teens.
Teens who miscarry have about one half the probability of giving birth as
teens compared with those who do not miscarry on …rst teen pregnancy.
    We extend the previous analysis in a straightforward manner. In this


                                      25
case, we again have two inconsistent estimators. For both estimators, not
having a miscarriage on …rst teen pregnancy is an instrument for a teen
birth. However, in one case, analogous to the IV estimator when we ignore
births subsequent to miscarriage or abortion, the estimation is performed on
the entire sample. We call this estimate HM S although it is, in fact, only
analogous to the HMS estimator. In the second case, analogous to the OLS
estimate, girls whose …rst teen pregnancy was terminated by an abortion are
removed from the sample. We call this estimate M B to indicate that the
sample is limited to those whose …rst teen pregnancy ended in miscarriage
or birth.
     We will use the following notation: b is the probability of being a true
birth type whether presenting as a birth type or abortion type on …rst preg-
nancy. bA is the probability of being a true birth type but presenting as
an abortion type on …rst pregnancy. This does not necessarily mean that
the teen has an abortion. Just as a true abortion may have a miscarriage,
a “false abortion” type may miscarry before she would otherwise have had
an abortion. We write b bA = bf as the probability of being a true birth
type and presenting as such on …rst pregnancy. Again, such women do not
necessarily give birth since they may miscarry. As before, m is the probabil-
ity of miscarriage on …rst pregnancy and is independent of type. Similarly,
   is the probability of abortion if both a latent-miscarriage type and either
a latent-true-abortion type or latent-false-abortion type on …rst pregnancy.
Finally, we add b1 the probability of having a subsequent pregnancy that
ends in a teen birth for a true birth type who did not give birth on …rst
pregnancy (whether or not presenting as a birth type or false abortion type
on …rst pregnancy). Note that this probability is independent of whether the
teen aborts or miscarries provided that she is a true birth type.
     YA continues to be the expected outcome for a true abortion type in the
absence of a birth. Y0 is the expected outcome for a true birth type in the
absence of a birth regardless of whether this is due to miscarriage or abortion,
and YB is the expected outcome after birth regardless of whether the birth
occurs on a …rst or subsequent pregnancy.
     Put di¤erently, we assume that there were some teens, randomly drawn
from latent-birth types, who nevertheless had abortions. We think of these as
teens who would choose to give birth but due to the particular circumstances
surrounding their …rst pregnancy, they have an abortion. Subsequent to hav-
ing an abortion, they are indistinguishable from latent-birth types who mis-
carry. If they do not have a subsequent birth, they have the same outcomes

                                      26
as birth-types who miscarry and do not have a subsequent birth. Similarly,
their probability of having a subsequent birth is the same as for those who
miscarry and the resulting outcome is the same. We recognize that these
are strong assumptions, but we have not found a way to get a consistent
estimator in their absence.
    Finally, we have assumed that ; the probability that an abortion/miscarriage
type has an abortion is independent of whether the teen is a true or false
abortion type. To test this assumption we compared the timing of abor-
tions followed by teen births with those not followed by teen births. In our
data, among those who ended their …rst pregnancy through an abortion, the
di¤erence in duration of that pregnancy, between those who subsequently
gave birth as teens and those who did not, is less than one half week. A
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the equality of the distributions falls well short
of signi…cance at conventional levels.
    Under these assumption, then the probability that someone is a true-
abortion type and has an abortion is (1 b)((1 m) + m ), and this is
associated with outcome YA: The probability that a woman is a false abortion
(or birth after abortion type) and has an abortion on …rst pregnancy is
bA (1 m + m ): Such women have outcome YB with probability b1 and Y0
with probability (1 b1 ) Finally the probability that a woman is a birth-type
who presents as such on …rst pregnancy and gives birth is (b bA )(1 m)
with associated outcome YB :This gives

                               E(Y jM = 0) =                                 (14)

(1   b)(1   m + m )YA + bA (1 m + m )(b1 YB + (1 b1 )Y0 ) + (b           bA )(1     m)YB
                         1 m+m       bm + bA m
   Similarly, the probability that a woman is a true abortion type and mis-
carries is m(1 b)(1      ) with associated outcome YA : The probability that
she presents as a birth type on …rst pregnancy and miscarries is m(b bA )
while the probability that she is a true birth type but presents as an abortion
type and miscarries is mbA (1     ): All birth types who miscarry, regardless of
how they present on …rst pregnancy have expected outcomes (1 b1 )Y0 +b1 YB :
After some manipulation, this gives

                      (1   b) (1    ) YA + (b     bA )((1 b1 )Y0 + b1 YB )
     E(Y jM = 1) =
                                   (1 b) (1      )+b      bA



                                      27
   The di¤erence in probability of any teen birth between those who do not
miscarry on …rst pregnancy and those who do is

                           E(BjM = 0)              E(BjM = 1) =                                    (15)

     bA (1     m + m )b1 + (b bA )(1                   m)           (b    bA )b1
                                                                                               :
             1 m+m       bm + bA m                           (1   b) (1    )+b            bA
   The Wald estimate of the HMS-style IV estimator is
                                     E(Y jM = 0)            E(Y jM = 1)
                          HM S   =                                                                 (16)
                                     E(BjM = 0)             E(BjM = 1)
which after substitution and simpli…cation gives
                                                    (1 b)(YA Y0 )
 HM S   = YB Y0 +
                     (1     m) (1      b1 )       (1 b + (1 b1 ) (bA (1
                                                                   m(1 b)))          m)
                                                                      (17)
which is, as before, biased towards a benign view of teen motherhood.
   For the restricted sample we have

                                      E(Y jM = 0) = YB                                             (18)

while E(Y jM = 1) is unchanged from above. The Wald estimator is given
by
                         E(Y jM = 0) E(Y jM = 1)
                   MB =                                           (19)
                         E(BjM = 0) E(BjM = 1)
where

                  E(BjM = 0) = 1                                                                   (20)
                                                        (b    bA )b1
                  E(BjM = 1) =                                                                     (21)
                                              b        bA + (1 b)(1       )
which, in turn, after substitution and simpli…cation gives
                                          (YA Y0 ) (1 b) (1               )
                MB   = YB        Y0                                                  :             (22)
                                        1 (1 b + bA (1 b1 ))                  b1 b

    We now have seven unknowns: the e¤ect of giving birth as a teen (YB Y0 ),
the di¤erence in outcomes between abortion and birth types in the absence
of a birth (YA Y0 ), the fraction of pregnant teens who are “true latent-birth

                                                  28
types” (b), the fraction who are latent-miscarriage types (m), the fraction
who are latent-false abortion (or latent birth-after-abortion) types (bA ), the
fraction who are both abortion types and miscarriage types who have abor-
tions ( ) and the fraction of true birth types (whether or not they are birth
after abortion types) who do not give birth on …rst pregnancy and subse-
quently give birth as a teen (b1 ).
    The extension of our earlier procedure for calculating m, b and would
be straightforward if there were no “false-abortion” types. In that case, we
would calculate these parameters as before and then divide the fraction of
teens who give birth following a miscarriage by the fraction of teens who are
both miscarriage and birth types to get b1 .
    The existence of false-abortion types only slightly complicates estimation.
As noted above, we assume that the probability of being a miscarriage type
and the probability of having an abortion given being both a miscarriage
type and a (true or false) abortion type are independent of whether the teen
is a true or false-abortion type. Under this assumption our earlier procedure
gives us consistent estimates of m and : However, instead of an estimate of
b, we get an estimate of the proportion of pregnant teens who are birth types
and who do not present as abortion types. We call this birth types on …rst
pregnancy
                                  bf = b bA :                              (23)
The proportion of teens who have abortions followed by births (pA ) is
                          pA = b1 bA (1    m + m ):                       (24)
The proportion of all pregnant teens who miscarry and subsequently give
birth (pM ) is
                        pM = b1 m(bf + (1  )bA ):                  (25)
    Together with the values of ; bf and m derived from the competing
risks model and the data on the fraction of births following miscarriages and
abortions, equations (23)-(25) allow us to estimate b; bA and b1 . This, in
turn, allows us to use (17) and (22) to get consistent estimates of YB Y0
and YA Y0 :


8    Multiple Pregnancies: Results
The …rst column of Table VIII reports OLS results when the explanatory
variable is any teen birth, not just a birth resulting from the initial teen

                                      29
pregnancy. As expected, using this approach we continue to …nd large adverse
e¤ects of teen motherhood.
    Using the HMS instrumental variables approach (column two), we con-
tinue to estimate generally favorable e¤ects of teen births although these
estimates are generally not statistically distinguishable from zero. Women
who give birth as teens are estimated to have a nine percentage point higher
probability of having a high school diploma, about a thirteen percentage
point lower probability of having a GED and to have about three-tenths of a
year additional education on average. They have somewhat higher personal
and family incomes. Their spouses’incomes are noticeably higher, an e¤ect
which is signi…cant at the 10% level. There are small negative e¤ects on
employment. However, teenagers who give birth have total fertility that is
one child greater than those who do not.
    On the other hand, when the sample is limited to those whose …rst teen
pregnancy ended in birth or miscarriage (column three), we again generally
observe adverse e¤ects of giving birth and the magnitude of these e¤ects is
larger than when we ignore second pregnancies. We estimate that women
who gave birth as teens are about eleven percentage points less likely to have
a high school diploma or GED and have about one half year less education.
They have lower personal and family incomes although somewhat higher
spousal incomes conditional on being married. They are somewhat less likely
to be working although these last few e¤ects are not statistically signi…cant.
    The rest of Table VIII provides consistent estimates of 1 (the bias term)
and 0 ; the e¤ect of birth on adult outcomes. As in Table VII, the results are
largely una¤ected by whether we assume that in a given week a “scheduled”
miscarriage preempts a “scheduled” abortion or vice versa. The magnitude
of the estimated e¤ects remains small although general negative.
    Overall, the results are similar to those obtained when we focused on the
outcome of the …rst pregnancy. There are adverse e¤ects on education, but
these are small (roughly one-quarter year and a nine percentage point drop in
having a high school diploma or GED, mostly because of a decline in GED’s)
and similarly small e¤ects on the probability of working and being married.
The net result is essentially no e¤ect on personal or family income although
given the larger family size of those given birth and modest negative e¤ect
on family income relative to the poverty line.




                                     30
9     Extensions:
9.1    Late Miscarriages
We have provided evidence that, conditional on smoking behavior during
pregnancy and age at conception being greater or less than …fteen, late mis-
carriages are random, and, since abortions after the sixteenth week are rela-
tively rare, not likely to include latent-abortion types. Therefore, in princi-
ple, we can get unbiased estimates of the e¤ect of birth by using women with
late miscarriages as the comparison group for those who gave birth as teens.
    The …rst part of Table IX shows the results of restricting the sample to
those whose …rst pregnancy lasted at least sixteen weeks and who did not
have an abortion. The …rst column provides OLS estimates based on the
outcome of the …rst pregnancy. The second column uses the …rst pregnancy
outcome for this restricted sample as an instrument for whether the woman
had any teen birth.
    Unfortunately the results are considerably less precise than we would
hope. None of the e¤ects in the …rst column is statistically signi…cantly
di¤erent from the comparable estimate in Table V. Moreover, consistent with
those estimates, none of the e¤ects of teen motherhood on adult outcomes is
statistically distinguishable from zero except the e¤ect on total live births.
On the other, because the standard errors are large, we also cannot rule out
large adverse e¤ects of teen pregnancy.
    The situation is similar with respect to the second column where we
look at the e¤ect of any teen birth on the outcomes. Again the results are
statistically indistinguishable from those in the second column of Table VIII,
but we are also unable to rule out large adverse e¤ects of teen births.
    We are more inclined to view the results as weak evidence in favor of the
absence of a large bias and in favor of modest adverse e¤ects of teen births.
It is implausible that having a child as a teen causes an increase of more
than one live birth over the woman’s lifetime. Yet, the point estimate in
the second column is well above one, and the upper end of the con…dence
interval is implausibly large. We conclude that the di¤erences between the
estimates based on only the long pregnancy sample and those based on the
full sample are most likely due simply to the imprecision of the estimates
using the former.




                                      31
9.2    Changing E¤ects with Age
One of the messages of the HMS paper is that teen births are largely a matter
of timing. Teens who give birth have only slightly more live births over their
lifetimes. They su¤er the disadvantages of having children when they are
young but fare better than their counterparts when they are older because
they no longer have children. Depending on the model of wage determination
and the relation between the discount rate and the rate of growth of wages,
either delaying childbirth or advancing it could be the optimal strategy for
maximizing lifetime income (see Buckles, 2005). Of course, there are other
reasons for choosing the timing of births, but based on the results in HMS,
one could reasonably argue that for the women who give birth as teens, early
child-bearing is an optimal strategy.
     To address this issue, we interact the e¤ect of a teen birth with the current
age of the mother. To parallel HMS, we looked at the e¤ect of a birth from
the initial teen pregnancy. In general the interaction e¤ects did not approach
statistical signi…cance and are therefore not shown. Either such age e¤ects
do not exist in our data, they are too small to be estimated with any precision
or cohort e¤ects (absent from the HMS data set) counteract age e¤ects.
     There are two noteworthy exceptions. The …rst is total number of live
births. When we use IV estimation, the interaction falls only somewhat
short of statistical signi…cance at conventional levels. The point estimates
imply that women who give birth on their …rst teen pregnancy have about
nine-tenths more children at age eighteen than those who do not, a plausible
number but that by age forty-two this di¤erence has fallen to three-tenths,
a number consistent with the estimates in HMS. When we do OLS on the
miscarriage/birth sample, the interaction term is signi…cant at the .05 level,
and the point estimates imply that at age eighteen those who give birth on
…rst pregnancy have 1.1 more children at age 18 but only .4 more children
by age 42.
     The second exception is total family income relative to the poverty using
the miscarriage/birth sample. In this case, the interaction is highly signi…-
cant. The point estimates imply that there is a very large adverse e¤ect on
the family incomes of eighteen year olds (equal to the level of poverty income
for the family using the HMS instrumental variables) but that this adverse
e¤ect disappears sometime during the woman’s thirties and turns positive by
age forty using even the OLS birth/miscarriage estimates. This is consistent
with the teen mothers having somewhat smaller families by age forty.


                                       32
   With this one important exception, our results point towards modest but
constant adverse impacts of giving birth as a teen. The fact that we are able
to detect an e¤ect that diminishes with age when we would most expect it,
total number of live births, reinforces our con…dence that we are not missing
important age interactions.

9.3    Underreporting of Abortions
We noted in the discussion of the data that it is likely that a signi…cant
fraction of abortions are not reported in the data set. We might be concerned
that this explains our inability to detect signi…cant adverse impacts from
teen births. In fact, underreporting probably leads us to overestimate the
magnitude of any negative e¤ects.
    If nonreporting of abortions is random, then it is straightforward to show
that as the proportion of abortions that are not reported goes up, the fa-
vorable bias of the IV estimator diminishes and may even be reversed. The
intuition is as follows. The IV estimator is biased towards …nding benign ef-
fects of births because the proportion of abortion-types is higher among the
abortion/birth group than is the proportion of latent-abortion types among
the miscarriage group. But if abortions are underreported this discrepancy
is diminished and possibly reversed. In the extreme case where no abortions
were reported, the restricted sample and the IV sample would be identical
and both would be biased towards overestimating the adverse e¤ect of teen
births.
    This argument is exacerbated if some women report abortions as miscar-
riages since this will simultaneously reduce the proportion of abortion-types
in the birth/abortion group and increase the proportion in the miscarriage
group, thereby reducing the favorable bias of the IV estimator and increasing
the unfavorable bias of the OLS estimator.
    It is, of course, possible that nonreporting is nonrandom in a way that
creates a di¤erent bias. We know of no obvious way to address this concern.

9.4    Adoptions
One potential explanation for the small impact of teen births on mothers is
that many teen mothers give their babies up for adoption. In fact, relatively
few teen mothers in our sample do so (although the children may be brought


                                     33
up by grandparents). We experimented with making the explanatory variable
"giving birth and keeping the child." The results were una¤ected.

9.5    Timing of Births
It has been suggested to us that women who give birth may be more likely
to have a second pregnancy because it is optimal to space births relatively
close together. Of course, the physical limitations on second pregnancy and
the contraceptive e¤ect of breastfeeding work in the opposite direction. We
examined the relation between the pregnancy outcome and the probability
of a second conception before age twenty. Women who miscarried were most
likely (68%) and those who had an abortion were least likely (51%) to have a
second pregnancy before age twenty. Those who gave birth were signi…cantly
less likely (55%) than those who miscarried to have a second pregnancy by
age twenty. The di¤erence between those aborting and those giving birth is
not statistically signi…cant at conventional levels.


10     Conclusions
Our results reinforce recent research that …nds at most modest adverse causal
e¤ects of teen births on the mothers. However, they do not support an even
more benign view that teenage motherhood generates bene…cial outcomes for
the women who choose to become teen mothers. Instead, our results strongly
suggest that this conclusion rests on the use of a positively biased estimator.
    Our conclusions rest on a set of key assumptions. The …rst is that, in the
absence of abortion, women who miscarry and women who do not miscarry
would have similar outcomes in the absence of a birth. In other words, in the
absence of abortion, miscarriage would be random, at least conditional on
a small number of measured factors. We provide direct evidence to support
this assumption and indirect evidence in the form of similar outcomes for
teens having early and late abortions.
    Our second key assumption is that the timing of abortions is random
conditional on choosing an abortion. Again we provide some direct evidence
that outcomes are similar for early and late abortions.
    Our third key assumption, that we observe all abortions, is obviously
false. Unreported abortions will tend to reduce the upward bias of the HMS
estimator. Since our consistent estimator is implicitly a weighted average of


                                      34
the HMS and restricted-OLS estimators, we expect that nonreporting biases
us towards …nding more adverse e¤ects of births.
    Given this evidence, we conclude that the adverse e¤ects of birth on the
mothers who would choose to give birth are modest. This, of course, does
not preclude the existence of potentially large adverse e¤ects on those who
choose abortion or who avoid pregnancy altogether.




                                    35
REFERENCES
    Angrist, Joshua D. and Williams N. Evans, “Children and Their Par-
ents’ Labor Supply: Evidence from Exogenous Variation in Family Size,”
American Economic Review, 88 (June 1998): 450-477.
    Bronars, Stephen G. and Je¤rey Grogger, “The Economic Consequences
of Unwed Motherhood: Using Twin Births as a Natural Experiment,”Amer-
ican Economic Review, 84 (December 1994): 1141-56.
    Buckles, Kasey, “Stopping the Biological Clock: Fertility Therapies and
the Career/Family Tradeo¤,”unpublished, University of Notre Dame, 2005.
    Cox, David R., “Regression Models and Life Tables (with discussion),”
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 34 (2, 1972): 187-220.
    Garcua-Enguidanos, A., M. E. Calle, J. Valero, S. Luna and V. Dominguez-
Rojas, “Risk Factors in Miscarriage: A Review,” European Journal of Ob-
stetrics and Gynecology and Reproduction Biology, 102 (2002): 111-119.
    Geronimus, Arline, and Sanders Korenman, “The Socioeconomic Con-
sequences of Teen Childbearing Reconsidered,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 107 (November 1992): 1187-214.
    Ho¤man, Saul D., “The Socio-Economic E¤ects of Tenn Childbearing Re-
Considered: A Reanalysis of the Teen Miscarriage Experiment,” University
of Delaware Economics Department Working Paper No. 2003-08, 2003.
    Hotz, V. Joseph, Susan Williams McElroy, and Seth G. Sanders, “The
Impacts of Teenage Childbearing on the Mothers and the Consequences of
Those Impacts for Government,” in Rebecca Maynard, ed., Kids Having
Kids: Economic Costs and Social Consequences of Teen Pregnancy, Wash-
ington, DC: Urban Institute, 1998.
    Hotz, V. Joseph, Susan Williams McElroy, and Seth G. Sanders, “Teenage
Childbearing and Its Life Cycle Consequences,”Journal of Human Resources,
40 (Summer 2005): 683-715.
    Hotz, V. Joseph, Charles H. Mullin, Seth G. Sanders, “Bounding Causal
E¤ects Using Data from a Contaminated Natural Experiment: Analyzing the
E¤ects of Teenage Childbearing,”Review of Economic Studies, 64 (October
1997): 575-603.
    Kline, Jennie, Zena Stein and Mervyn Susser, “Conception to Birth: Epi-
demiology of Prenatal Development,”(New York: Oxford University Press),
1989.
    Levitt, Steven and John J. Donohue III, “The Impact of Legalized Abor-
tion on Crime,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (May 2001): 379-420.


                                    36
   Porter, Ian H. and Hook, Ernest B. (eds.) Human Embryonic and Fetal
Death, New York: Academic Press, 1980.
   Regan, Lesley, “Epidemiology and the Medical Causes of Miscarriage,”
Balliere’s Best Practice and Research: Clinical Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
14 (October 2000): 839-54.
   Ribar, David C., “Teenage Fertility and High School Completion,”Review
of Economics and Statistics, 76 (August 1994): 413-24.




                                    37
                                                     Table I
                                               Descriptive Statistics
                                                                    Full Sample          Teen Pregnancy
             Teen Pregnancy                                              0.18                  1.00
                                                                       (0.38)                 (0.00)
             Teen Birth                                                  0.12                  0.65
                                                                       (0.32)                 (0.47)
             High School Diploma                                         0.82                  0.50
                                                                       (0.38)                 (0.50)
             GED                                                         0.06                  0.19
                                                                       (0.24)                 (0.39)
             Education                                                   13.3                  11.3
                                                                       (2.73)                 (2.58)
             Currently Married                                           0.57                  0.53
                                                                       (0.50)                 (0.50)
             Currently Divorced or Separated                             0.14                  0.24
                                                                       (0.35)                 (0.43)
             Currently Working                                           0.73                  0.63
                                                                       (0.45)                 (0.48)
             Current Hours                                               27.6                  24.0
                                                                       (19.7)                 (20.7)
             Current Income if Working                                 21,986                18,107
                                                                      (16,985)              (12,152)
             Current Spouse Income if with Partner                     36,243                29,585
                                                                      (24,466)              (20,112)
             Current Family Income                                     43,595                33,692
                                                                      (30,779)              (26,212)
             Percent Poverty Level Income                                339                    250
                                                                        (225)                 (195)
             Number of Children                                          1.45                  2.31
                                                                       (1.35)                 (1.41)
             Age at Interview                                            32.4                  32.3
                                                                       (7.00)                 (6.92)
             White                                                       0.71                  0.59
                                                                       (0.45)                 (0.49)
             Hispanic                                                    0.11                  0.14
                                                                       (0.31)                 (0.34)
             Black                                                       0.13                  0.24
                                                                       (0.34)                 (0.43)
             Protestant                                                  0.54                  0.59
                                                                       (0.50)                 (0.49)
             Roman Catholic                                              0.35                  0.30
                                                                       (0.48)                 (0.46)
             No Mother                                                   0.01                  0.01
                                                                       (0.08)                 (0.12)
             No Father                                                   0.05                  0.10
                                                                       (0.21)                 (0.29)
             Mother’s Education                                          11.4                  10.4
                                                                       (3.55)                  (3.7)
             Father’s Education                                          11.7                  10.3
                                                                       (4.02)                  (4.2)
             Working Mother                                              0.43                  0.50
                                                                       (0.50)                 (0.50)
             Age at First Birth                                          22.6                  18.0
                                                                        (4.9)                 (2.95)
             Observations                                               9,431                   1,913
Notes: Sample means and standard deviation using sample weights. The Full Sample corresponds to all of the women
surveyed in the National Survey of Family Growth while the Teen Pregnancy Sample represents women having a pregnancy before
their 18th birthday. In both samples only women at least 20 years old when surveyed in 1995 were included.
                                                 Table II
                                         Teen Pregnancy Outcomes
                                                                                 0.003
                          Conception at Age 11
                                                                                 (0.06)
                                                                                  0.01
                          Conception at Age 12
                                                                                 (0.09)
                                                                                  0.04
                          Conception at Age 13
                                                                                 (0.20)
                                                                                  0.09
                          Conception at Age 14
                                                                                 (0.29)
                                                                                  0.18
                          Conception at Age 15
                                                                                 (0.38)
                                                                                  0.31
                          Conception at Age 16
                                                                                 (0.46)
                                                                                  0.38
                          Conception at Age 17
                                                                                 (0.49)
                                                                                  0.62
                          Have smoked 100 cigarettes in lifetime?
                                                                                 (0.49)
                                                                                  0.46
                          Do you smoke now?
                                                                                 (0.50)
                                                                                  0.27
                          Started smoking before pregnancy?
                                                                                 (0.44)
                                                                                  0.12
                          Married at conception?
                                                                                 (0.33)
                                                                                  0.65
                          Birth
                                                                                 (0.48)
                                                                                  0.25
                          Abortion
                                                                                 (0.43)
                                                                                  0.10
                          Miscarriage
                                                                                 (0.30)
                                                                                  0.89
                          Had another pregnancy?
                                                                                 (0.32)
                                                                                  19.6
                          Age at next pregnancy
                                                                                 (3.45)
                          Observations                                           1,913
Notes: Sample means and standard deviation using sample weights. The sample corresponds to the Teen Pregnancy Sample.
Miscarriage includes stillbirths and ectopic pregnancies.
                                                   Table III
                                Descriptive Statistics by Pregnancy Outcome
                                                                                                  Early          Late
                                                     Birth      Miscarriage       Abortion
                                                                                                 Abortion      Abortion
  High School Diploma                                  0.41           0.45            0.73          0.75         0.65*
                                                     (0.49)          (0.5)          (0.45)        (0.44)        (0.48)
  GED                                                  0.21           0.25            0.12          0.10         0.17*
                                                     (0.41)         (0.43)          (0.32)        (0.30)        (0.38)
  Education                                            10.8           11.1            12.6          12.5          12.7
                                                     (2.53)         (2.51)          (2.28)        (2.28)        (2.29)
  Currently Married                                    0.53           0.55            0.51          0.50          0.54
                                                     (0.50)         (0.50)          (0.50)        (0.50)        (0.50)
  Divorced or Separated                                0.25           0.22            0.22          0.24        0.15**
                                                     (0.43)         (0.42)          (0.42)        (0.43)        (0.36)
  Currently Working                                    0.60           0.65            0.69          0.69          0.66
                                                     (0.49)         (0.48)          (0.47)        (0.46)        (0.48)
  Current hours                                        22.8           26.4            26.1          26.1          26.0
                                                     (20.6)         (21.8)          (20.2)        (20.0)        (21.0)
  Annual Income if Working                           16,881         17,370          21,212        21,317        20,814
                                                    (11,128)       (13,418)        (13,313)      (13,535)      (12,532)
  Spouse Annual income if with Partner               27,344         26,353          36,612        37,119        34,758
                                                    (18,140)       (15,574)        (24,510)      (25,114)      (22,302)
  Family Annual Income                               30,928         31,749          41,692        42,528        38,726
                                                    (24,710)       (24,435)        (29,005)      (29,211)      (28,219)
  Poverty                                              221            242             329           335           307
                                                      (177)          (186)           (219)         (217)         (227)
  Number of Children                                   2.71           1.85            1.44          1.41          1.58
                                                     (1.31)          (1.40          (1.22)         (1.21        (1.27)
  Age at first birth                                   16.7           19.7            21.6          21.6          21.8
                                                     (1.17)         (3.08)          (3.86)         (3.8)        (4.17)
  Age at next pregnancy                                19.7           18.4            20.0          20.0          20.2
                                                     (3.35)         (2.75)          (3.83)        (3.71)        (4.28)
  Teen birth ever                                      1.00           0.29            0.13          0.13          0.13
                                                     (0.00)         (0.46)          (0.33)        (0.33)        (0.34)
  White                                               0.521           0.68            0.74          0.76          0.69
                                                     (0.50)         (0.47)          (0.44)        (0.43)        (0.46)
  Hispanic                                             0.17           0.11            0.06          0.06          0.06
                                                     (0.38)         (0.31)          (0.24)        (0.25)        (0.24)
  Black                                                0.28           0.19            0.17          0.15         0.24*
                                                     (0.45)         (0.39)          (0.38)        (0.36)        (0.43)
  Protestant                                           0.64           0.58            0.48          0.47          0.51
                                                     (0.48)         (0.49)          (0.50)        (0.50)        (0.50)
  Roman Catholic                                       0.28           0.31            0.36          0.39        0.23***
                                                     (0.45)         (0.47)          (0.48)        (0.49)        (0.42)
  No Mother                                           0.007           0.05           0.006          0.01          0.00
                                                     (0.08)         (0.22)          (0.08)        (0.09)        (0.00)
  No Father                                            0.11           0.10            0.07          0.06          0.08
                                                     (0.31)         (0.31)          (0.25)        (0.24)        (0.28)
  Mother’s Education                                   9.69           10.7            12.0          12.0         11.96
                                                     (3.82)         (3.42)          (2.65)        (2.72)        (2.42)
  Father’s Education                                   9.51           11.0            12.0          12.1          11.6
                                                     (4.31)         (3.90)          (3.35)        (3.31)        (3.50)
  Working Mother                                       0.49           0.54            0.53          0.49        0.68***
                                                     (0.50)         (0.50)          (0.50)        (0.50)        (0.47)
                                                       19.8           19.9            18.7          18.7          18.8
  Father of pregnancy’ age                           (3.96)         (3.50)          (3.38)        (3.38)        (3.38)
  Observations                                        1,313           186             414           311           103
Notes: Sample means and standard deviations for Teen Pregnancy Sample. All statistics employ sample weights. Miscarriage
includes stillbirths and ectopic pregnancies. Asterisks represent a test of whether outcomes for early and late abortions are
the same at 10%(*), 5%(**) or 1%(***).
                                               Table IV
              Estimates of the Relation between Individual Characteristics and Miscarriage
                                               Probit Estimates                               Competing Risks
                                                     FS-NA           FS-NA      Teens-NA
                      Full         FS - No
                                                     Weeks           Weeks        Weeks
                     Sample        Abortions                                                 Abortion    Miscarriage
                                                   Pregnant >      Pregnant >   Pregnant >
                      (FS)           (NA)
                                                        24              16           16
                       -0.07          -0.04           -0.21            0.05        -0.15       0.56             0.13
White                                                                                         (0.27)           (0.41)
                       (0.10)         (0.10)          (0.26)          (0.22)       (0.39)
                       -0.17          -0.13           -0.21            -0.03      -0.41       -0.15            -0.28
Hispanic                                                                                      (0.31)           (0.47)
                       (0.11)         (0.12)          (0.31)           (0.25)     (0.47)
                       -0.14          -0.11            0.08             0.28      -0.05        0.16            -0.34
Black                                                                                         (0.28)           (0.44)
                       (0.11)         (0.11)          (0.28)           (0.23)     (0.40)
                        0.12          -0.03            0.26             0.23       0.06       -0.65            -0.04
Protestant                                                                                    (0.10)           (0.23)
                       (0.07)         (0.07)          (0.23)           (0.16)     (0.29)
Roman                   0.12           0.05            0.04             0.12       0.18       -0.26             0.12
Catholic               (0.07)         (0.08)          (0.25)           (0.17)     (0.32)      (0.10)           (0.25)
                        0.60           0.66            0.35            -0.11       0.76        0.87             1.57
No Mother                                                                                     (0.55)           (0.37)
                       (0.21)         (0.22)          (0.49)           (0.47)     (0.60)
                        0.11           0.19           -0.05             0.21       0.06        0.09             0.48
No Father                                                                                     (0.21)           (0.31)
                       (0.11)         (0.11)          (0.27)           (0.18)     (0.36)
Mother’s                0.01           0.02           -0.005           -0.003      0.01        0.09             0.01
Education              (0.01)         (0.07)          (0.02)           (0.01)     (0.03)      (0.01)           (0.02)
Father’s                0.01           0.02           -0.003           0.002       0.02        0.04             0.04
Education              (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.02)           (0.01)     (0.02)      (0.01)           (0.02)
Working                 0.04           0.07           -0.09            -0.06       0.02        0.13             0.16
Mother                 (0.04)         (0.04)          (0.11)           (0.08)     (0.15)      (0.07)           (0.14)
                        0.16           0.18            0.06             0.20       0.19       -0.07             0.07
Smoking                                                                                       (0.08)           (0.15)
                       (0.04)         (0.04)          (0.11)           (0.08)     (0.17)
Conception             -0.03           0.12           -0.15             0.33       0.42        0.26             0.19
before 15              (0.11)         (0.12)          (0.34)           (0.18)     (0.19)      (0.08)           (0.19)
IUD before              0.25           0.23            0.51             0.50
                                                                                    -           -                -
1st pregnancy          (0.17)         (0.17)          (0.34)           (0.26)
LR chi2                44.70          73.15           14.48            28.18      13.27                        42.3
Observations           7,429          6,236           5,381            5,481      1,346                 1913
Notes: Only women at least 20 years old when surveyed in 1995 were included.
                                                Table V
                        Effect of Teen Motherhood: Teens Experiencing Pregnancy

                                     No controls                                        Risk Controls
                                                         Bootstrap                                          Bootstrap
Outcomes            B/no B       BA/M         B/M                       B/no B       BA/M         B/M
                                                          s.e. diff                                          s.e. diff
High School          -0.23         0.07       -0.04                      -0.25        0.06        -0.05
                                                            0.02                                                0.02
Diploma              (0.02)       (0.05)      (0.04)                     (0.02)      (0.05)       (0.04)

                      0.06        -0.09       -0.04                       0.06       -0.08        -0.03
GED                                                         0.02                                                0.02
                     (0.02)       (0.04)      (0.03)                     (0.02)      (0.04)       (0.03)

                     -1.33         0.22       -0.33                      -1.39        0.19        -0.37
Education                                                   0.10                                                0.10
                     (0.12)       (0.27)      (0.19)                     (0.12)      (0.27)       (0.19)

                      0.01        -0.03       -0.02                      -0.02       -0.04        -0.03
Married                                                     0.02                                                0.02
                     (0.02)       (0.05)      (0.04)                     (0.02)      (0.05)       (0.04)

Divorced or           0.03         0.03        0.03                       0.03        0.04         0.04
                                                            0.02                                                0.02
Separated            (0.02)       (0.05)      (0.03)                     (0.02)      (0.05)       (0.03)

                     -0.08        -0.03       -0.05                      -0.08       -0.04        -0.05
Working                                                     0.02                                                0.02
                     (0.02)       (0.05)      (0.04)                     (0.02)      (0.05)       (0.04)

                     -3.43        -3.80       -3.67                      -3.70       -4.02        -3.84
Hours worked                                                0.85                                                0.87
                     (0.99)       (2.16)      (1.57)                     (0.99)      (2.17)       (1.57)

Income if            -3,234       1,188       -489                       -3,352        961        -658
                                                            713                                                 712
Working               (744)      (1,694)     (1,112)                      (743)      (1,697)     (1,112)

                    -6,168        5,077        991                      -6,344        5,045        889
Spouse Income                                              1,056                                               1,070
                    (1,304)      (2,907)     (1,793)                    (1,312)      (2,911)     (1,794)

Total family        -7,860        2,997       -821                      -8,259        2,782      -1,096
                                                           1,069                                               1,079
income              (1,293)      (2,868)     (1,928)                    (1,290)      (2,869)     (1,921)

Percent Poverty      -82.26       12.50      -20.82                      -85.15       11.25      -22.67
                                                            7.83                                                8.00
Level Income         (9.13)      (20.50)     (13.43)                     (9.12)      (20.55)     (13.39)

Number of live        1.15         0.70        0.86                       1.15        0.69         0.85
                                                            0.05                                                0.05
births               (0.06)       (0.14)      (0.10)                     (0.06)      (0.14)       (0.10)
 Note: Controls: Smoker, age at conception before 15. Income is conditional on working and spouse income is
 conditional on being married or having a male partner. The first column of each panel compares outcomes for the teen
 pregnancy sample between those giving birth and those not giving birth. The second column uses miscarriage as an
 instrument for birth. The third column compares outcomes for those giving birth with those having miscarriages while
 the fourth column shows the bootstrapped standard errors of the differences between the coefficients in the second and
 third columns.
                    Table VI
     Estimates from Competing Risks Model
                    Misc First   Abort First

    1-b*=Pr(A*=1)      0.26         0.26

    m*= Pr(M*=1)       0.12         0.12

    b*=Pr(B*=1)        0.74         0.74

    1-γ                0.47         0.38

    m= Pr(M=1)         0.10         0.10

    Pr(A=1)            0.25         0.25

    Pr(B=1)            0.65         0.65
Weights are used
                                                 Table VII
                                        Effect of Teen Motherhood
                                                       Solving Equations                 Solving Equations
                                   From Data
                                                        Miscarriage First                  Abortion First
     Outcomes                   B/A vs M    BvM          β1          β0                    β1          β0
     High School                    0.06        -0.05          0.33        -0.003          0.32        -0.01
     Diploma                       (0.05)       (0.04)        (0.06)       (0.05)         (0.06)       (0.05)

                                   -0.08        -0.03         -0.16         -0.05         -0.15        -0.05
     GED
                                   (0.04)       (0.03)        (0.05)        (0.04)        (0.05)       (0.04)

                                    0.19        -0.37          1.69         -0.13          1.65        -0.17
     Education
                                   (0.27)       (0.19)        (0.30)        (0.25)        (0.29)       (0.24)

                                   -0.04        -0.03         -0.04         -0.03         -0.04        -0.03
     Married
                                   (0.05)       (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.05)        (0.06)       (0.05)

     Divorced or                    0.04         0.04        -0.003          0.04        -0.003         0.04
     Separated                     (0.05)       (0.03)       (0.05)         (0.04)       (0.05)        (0.04)

                                   -0.04        -0.05          0.04         -0.05          0.04        -0.05
     Working
                                   (0.05)       (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.05)        (0.06)       (0.05)

                                   -4.02        -3.84         -0.52         -3.92         -0.51        -3.90
     Hours Worked
                                   (2.17)       (1.57)        (2.61)        (2.24)        (2.54)       (2.18)

                                    961          -658         4,910         48.3          4,778         -84.0
     Income if Working
                                  (1,697)       (1,112)      (2,149)       (1,667)       (2,091)       (1,619)

     Spouse Earnings if            5,045          889        12,604         2,702        12,264         2,363
     with Partner                 (2,911)       (1,793)      (3,291)       (2,065)       (3,172)       (2,001)

                                   2,782        -1,096       11,759          597         11,443          278
     Total Family Income
                                  (2,868)       (1,921)      (3,293)       (2,604)       (3,205)       (2,534)

     Percent Poverty               11.25        -22.67         103          -7.87          100         -10.6
     Level Income                 (20.55)       (13.39)       (24.4)        (19.3)        (23.7)       (18.8)

     Number of Live                 0.69         0.85         -0.50          0.78         -0.48         0.79
     Births                        (0.14)       (0.10)        (0.16)        (0.14)        (0.15)       (0.13)
Weights were used to calculate βs. Controls: Smoker, age at conception before 15. Income is conditional on working and
spouse income is conditional on being married or having a male partner. For the βs, bootstrapped standard errors are
shown in parenthesis (taken the parameters in table VI as given)
                                               Table VIII
                            Effect of Teen Motherhood. Multiple Pregnancies.
                                                            Solving equations                Solving equations
                                    From Data
                                                             Miscarriage first                 Abortion first
     Outcomes            B v no B      B/A v M    BvM          β1        β0                    β1         β0
 High School               -0.32            0.09         -0.07        0.55        -0.004        0.53       -0.02
 Diploma                   (0.02)          (0.08)        (0.05)      (0.14)       (0.07)       (0.13)      (0.07)

                            0.10           -0.13         -0.04       -0.29        -0.08        -0.29       -0.07
 GED
                           (0.02)          (0.07)        (0.04)      (0.13)       (0.07)       (0.11)      (0.06)

                           -1.64            0.29         -0.52        2.78        -0.19         2.72       -0.25
 Education
                           (0.12)          (0.42)        (0.27)      (0.67)       (0.37)       (0.65)      (0.36)

                           -0.02           -0.06         -0.04       -0.08        -0.05        -0.08       -0.05
 Married
                           (0.03)          (0.08)        (0.05)      (0.12)       (0.07)       (0.12)      (0.07)

 Divorced or                0.05            0.05          0.05        0.01         0.05         0.01        0.05
 Separated                 (0.02)          (0.07)        (0.05)      (0.10)       (0.06)       (0.10)      (0.06)

                           -0.10           -0.06         -0.07        0.05        -0.07         0.05       -0.07
 Working
                           (0.02)          (0.08)        (0.05)      (0.12)       (0.07)       (0.12)      (0.07)

                           -4.19           -6.20         -5.40       -2.74        -5.73        -2.68       -5.67
 Hours Worked
                           (1.04)          (3.35)        (2.21)      (5.56)       (3.41)       (5.44)      (3.25)

                           -4,018           1,534         -926        8,450       92.6         8,254       -104
 Income
                            (770)          (2,723)       (1,564)     (5,012)     (2,545)      (4,915)     (2,445)

 Spouse Earnings           -8,191           8,627         1,315      25,116       4,342       24,533       3,757
 if with Partner           (1,361)         (5,122)       (2,652)     (8,054)     (3,225)      (7,921)     (3,161)

 Total Family              -9,661           4,286        -1,543      20,021        870        19,556        404
 Income                    (1,355)         (4,447)       (2,706)     (6,562)     (3,794)      (6,357)     (3,660)

 Percent Poverty           -99.22           17.37        -31.87       169         -11.5         165        -15.4
 Level Income              (9.53)          (31.86)       (18.84)     (49.7)       (28.5)       (48.6)      (27.6)

 Number of Live             1.31            1.06          1.19       -0.46         1.14        -0.45        1.15
 Births                    (0.07)          (0.21)        (0.19)      (0.31)       (0.19)       (0.30)      (0.18)
Weights were used to calculate βs. Controls: Smoking and age at conception before 15. Income is conditional on
working and spouse income is conditional on being married or having a male partner. For the βs, bootstrapped standard
errors are shown in parenthesis (taken the parameters in table VI as given).
                                      Table IX
         Birth vs Miscarriage: First Pregnancy Lasted More than 16 Weeks
     Outcomes                          1st Pregnancy    Multiple Pregnancies
                                                  -0.05                      -0.07
     High School Diploma
                                                  (0.08)                     (0.11)

                                                   0.02                       0.03
     GED
                                                  (0.07)                     (0.09)

                                                  -0.27                      -0.36
     Education
                                                  (0.43)                     (0.58)

                                                  -0.04                      -0.06
     Married
                                                  (0.09)                     (0.12)

                                                   0.10                       0.14
     Divorced or Separated
                                                  (0.07)                     (0.10)

                                                  -0.10                      -0.14
     Working
                                                  (0.08)                     (0.11)

                                                  -6.28                      -8.46
     Hours Worked
                                                  (3.57)                     (4.81)

                                                 -1,973                      -2,357
     Income if Working
                                                 (2,388)                     (2,852)

                                                 -6,414                     -10,302
     Spouse Income if with Partner
                                                 (4,426)                    (7,104)

                                                 -5,112                      -7,019
     Total Family Income
                                                 (4,379)                     (6,011)

                                                  -33.3                      -44.9
     Percent Poverty Level Income
                                                  (30.4)                     (40.9)

                                                   0.33                       0.46
     Age at second conception
                                                  (0.58)                     (0.81)

                                                   0.93                       1.25
     Number of Live Births
                                                  (0.23)                     (0.30)
Weights were used to calculate βs. Controls: Smoking and age at conception before 15. Income
is conditional on working and spouse income is conditional on being married or having a male partner
