                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION: A REAPPRAISAL

                                             M. Ayhan Kose
                                              Eswar Prasad
                                             Kenneth Rogoff
                                             Shang-Jin Wei

                                         Working Paper 12484
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12484


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




We are grateful for helpful comments from Roger Gordon, referees, seminar participants at the BIS, ECB,
HKMA, CEPR, Cornell University, and University of Houston, where earlier versions of this paper were
presented. Lore Aguilar, Cigdem Akin, Dionysios Kaltis and Ashley Taylor provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
those of the IMF or IMF policy. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by M. Ayhan Kose, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal
M. Ayhan Kose, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 12484
August 2006
JEL No. F02, F21, F36, F4

                                             ABSTRACT


The literature on the benefits and costs of financial globalization for developing countries has
exploded in recent years, but along many disparate channels with a variety of apparently conflicting
results. We attempt to provide a unified conceptual framework for organizing this vast and growing
literature. This framework allows us to provide a fresh synthetic perspective on the macroeconomic
effects of financial globalization, both in terms of growth and volatility. Overall, our critical reading
of the recent empirical literature is that it lends some qualified support to the view that developing
countries can benefit from financial globalization, but with many nuances. On the other hand, there
is little systematic evidence to support widely-cited claims that financial globalization by itself leads
to deeper and more costly developing country growth crises.


M. Ayhan Kose                                           Kenneth S. Rogoff
International Monetary Fund                             Economics Department
700 19th Street, NW                                     Harvard University
Washington, DC 20431                                    Littauer Center 232
akose@imf.org                                           Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
                                                        and NBER
                                                        krogoff@harvard.edu

Eswar Prasad                                            Shang-Jin Wei
International Monetary Fund                             International Monetary Fund
Research Department, Room 9-700                         Room 10-700
International Monetary Fund                             19th Street, NW
700 19th Street, NW                                     Washington, DC 20433
Washington, DC 20431                                    and NBER
eprasad@imf.org                                         swei@imf.org
                                             -2-




                                         I. Introduction

The recent wave of financial globalization got started in earnest in the mid-1980s, with rising
cross-border financial flows among industrial economies and between industrial and
developing economies. This was spurred by liberalization of capital controls in many of these
countries, in anticipation of the benefits that cross-border flows would bring in terms of
better global allocation of capital and improved international risk-sharing possibilities. The
strong presumption was that these benefits ought to be large, especially for developing
countries that tend to be relatively capital-poor and have more volatile income growth.

With the surge in financial flows, however, came a spate of currency and financial crises in
the late 1980s and 1990s. There is a widely-held perception that developing countries that
opened up to capital flows have been more vulnerable to these crises than industrial
economies, and have been much more adversely affected. These developments have sparked
a fierce debate among both academics and practitioners on the costs and benefits of financial
globalization. This debate has intensified and become more polarized over time, in contrast
to the debate on trade liberalization that has more or less moved towards a consensus.1

Some academic economists view increasing capital account liberalization and unfettered
capital flows as a serious impediment to global financial stability (e.g., Rodrik, 1998;
Bhagwati, 1998; Stiglitz, 2002), leading to calls for capital controls and the imposition of
frictions such as “Tobin taxes” on international asset trade. Others argue that increased
openness to capital flows has, by and large, proven essential for countries aiming to upgrade
from lower to middle income status, while significantly enhancing stability among
industrialized countries (e.g., Fischer, 1998; Summers, 2000). This is clearly a matter of
considerable policy relevance, especially with major economies like China and India recently
taking steps to open up their capital accounts. While consensus may be too much to hope for,
some clarity on what theory and data do tell us—and what they do not tell us—is important
for informing the ongoing debate.

A central conclusion of this paper is that while the rapidly-growing empirical literature is
gradually tilting towards supporting a significant positive role for financial globalization,
there are many unanswered questions about how a country should organize and pace its
move. At the same time, we find there is very little meaningful empirical support to underpin
the more polemic claims of those who argue that capital account liberalizations (as opposed
to, say, inappropriately rigid exchange rate regimes) are the root problem behind most
developing country financial crises of the past fifteen years. We hope in this paper to provide
a synthetic perspective on this literature so the reader may judge for herself. At the same
1
 For empirical evidence showing that trade openness has a direct and positive effect on economic
growth, see, e.g., Frankel and Romer (1999) and Dollar and Kraay (2003). Rodriguez and Rodrik
(2002) present a contrarian view but, as summarized in recent surveys by Berg and Krueger (2002),
Baldwin (2004), and Winters (2004), the weight of the evidence supports the by-now conventional
wisdom that trade is good for growth.
                                               -3-




time, we try to develop a few organizing principles that will perhaps point the way to where
future research is most needed.

The fundamental point we make in this paper is that the main benefits to successful financial
globalization are probably catalytic and indirect, rather than simply enhanced access to
financing for domestic investment. Of course, this perspective differs from the standard
neoclassical framework, which views the key benefit of financial globalization as arising
from long-term net flows of capital from industrial to developing economies. Since the
former group of countries is capital rich while the latter is relatively capital poor, this would
generate welfare gains for both groups of countries. Yet, a survey of the literature on capital
account liberalization by Eichengreen (2001) concludes that there is no empirical
substantiation of the conventional theoretical tenets about the growth benefits of capital
account liberalization.

A subsequent survey by us (Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose, 2003) on the broader dimensions
of financial globalization deepens the puzzle. Even after taking into account the fundamental
distinction between de jure and de facto financial globalization (which we shall discuss
below), we still conclude that, taken as a whole, the vast empirical literature provides little
robust evidence of a causal relationship between financial integration and growth. Moreover,
we find that, among developing countries, the volatility of consumption growth relative to
income growth appears to be positively associated with financial integration, the opposite of
what canonical theoretical models would predict. In theory, access to international markets
should allow all countries to smooth consumption by insuring against country-specific
income risk. What accounts for these discrepancies between the advertised benefits of
financial globalization and the mixed empirical evidence?2

We argue here that far more important than the direct growth effects of access to more capital
is how capital flows generate a number of what we label the “potential collateral benefits” of
financial integration. There is now a rapidly growing literature showing that financial
openness can, in many but not all circumstances, promote development of the domestic
financial sector, impose discipline on macroeconomic policies, generate efficiency gains
among domestic firms by exposing them to competition from foreign entrants, and unleash
forces that result in better government and corporate governance.

The notion that financial globalization mainly influences growth through indirect channels
has important implications for empirical analysis of its benefits. For one thing, building
institutions, enhancing market discipline and deepening the financial sector takes time, and
so does the realization of growth benefits from such channels. This may explain why, over
relatively short periods, it seems much easier to detect the costs but not the benefits of

2
 We emphasize up front that our analysis focuses largely on private capital flows and does not
encompass the effects of official flows, including foreign aid, and other flows such as remittances
(which should, strictly speaking, appear in the current account of the balance of payments).
                                             -4-




financial globalization. More fundamentally, even at long horizons, it may be difficult to
detect the productivity-enhancing benefits of financial globalization in empirical work if one
includes structural, institutional and macroeconomic policy variables in cross-country
regressions that attempt to explain growth of GDP or productivity. For then, by construction,
there can be little added explanatory power left for the financial openness measure. Indeed,
this could explain why simple correlations tend to show that financially integrated economies
have higher growth rates on average than less integrated economies, yet it has proven
difficult to find a causal effect of financial integration on growth once the other factors
mentioned above are controlled for.

The approach we have outlined above helps to link together a number of other pieces of the
literature. For instance, a majority of the papers looking at the effects of overall capital
account liberalization have relied on de jure measures of capital account openness, which
reflect legal restrictions on capital movements (or lack thereof). But the collateral benefits are
likely to be realized at least as much through de facto integration, which, as we show, can be
quite different. In practice, the distinction between de jure and de facto openness can be very
important. Many countries have capital controls that are quite strict on paper but toothless in
practice so their de facto level of integration—as measured by capital flows or stocks of
foreign assets and liabilities--is quite high; this in itself could act as a disciplining device on
the government and firms. In contrast, many other countries are quite open to global capital
markets on a de jure basis, but in practice capital flows are minimal. In our survey, we
consider results based on both kinds of measures and argue that the choice of measure has
important consequences for empirical analysis.

Our approach could help understand why recent research that focuses on the growth effects
of equity market liberalizations seems to find such strong positive effects despite the fact that
portfolio equity inflows are typically small relative to other types of flows. For instance, one
possibility is that equity market liberalizations typically take place in tandem with various
other domestic reforms, and when national governments have confidence in their own ability
to adequately supervise domestic financial markets. Besides, equity inflows are precisely the
ones that, along with FDI, are most likely to confer the sort of collateral benefits discussed
above. Our analysis may help explain why there is much stronger evidence based on
microeconomic (firm- or industry-level) data on the distortionary effects of capital controls
and the benefits of capital account liberalization.

The collateral benefits perspective also ties in to the literature on thresholds in the effects of
financial globalization. It has become a mantra in academic and policy circles that financial
globalization can in principle be good for any country—in terms of delivering the benefits
and minimizing risks—but that the benefits to cost calculus is much more compelling for
countries with robust institutions and good macroeconomic policies. The set of prescribed
requirements tends to be vast—encompassing sound monetary and fiscal policies, depth and
sophistication of financial markets, the quality of financial sector regulation and supervision,
transparency and good governance, and the list goes on.
                                               -5-




It is clearly the case that most developing countries do not measure up to all of these
desiderata and, for many of them, the length of this list makes things look hopeless at the
outset. Does this imply that developing countries would do best to shield themselves from
external influences while trying to improve the quality of their domestic policies and
institutions to some acceptable level? The academic literature we survey does not seem to
offer a simple answer, in part because the links are bi-directional. In theory (and with some
supporting evidence, as we shall see), financial opening may in fact play an important
catalytic role in improving institutions, allowing for transfer of good governance practices,
strengthening macroeconomic discipline and so on. But there remain a number of unresolved
questions in the literature that make it difficult to draw firm policy conclusions. We list some
of these questions that require further research in the final section of the paper.

                                 II. A Brief Overview of Theory

We begin with a very brief review of the basic implications from theoretical models about
how financial globalization should affect growth, volatility, and comovement of output and
consumption.

Growth

As we have already noted, the simplest benchmark one-sector neoclassical framework
suggests that financial globalization should lead to flows of capital from capital-rich
economies to capital-poor economies since, in the latter, the returns to capital should be
higher.3 These flows should complement limited domestic saving in capital-poor economies
and, by reducing the cost of capital, allow for increased investment. Certain types of financial
flows could also generate technology spillovers and serve as a conduit for imbibing
managerial and other forms of organizational expertise from more advanced economies.

There are also a number of indirect channels through which financial globalization could
enhance growth. It could help promote specialization by allowing for sharing of income risk,
which could in turn increase productivity and growth as well.4 Financial flows could foster
development of the domestic financial sector and, by imposing discipline on macroeconomic
policies, lead to more stable policies. We discuss the mechanisms and evidence for some of
these channels later in the paper.
3
 Indeed, the fact that the actual volumes of such flows don’t come anywhere near what might be
predicted by neoclassical growth models has been characterized as a puzzle by Lucas (1990), with
many subsequent papers trying to resolve this puzzle.
4
 Concerns about increases in volatility that may result from a specialized production structure could
discourage countries from taking up growth-enhancing specialization activities; higher volatility
might also reduce investment rates. Financial globalization could facilitate international risk sharing
and thereby reduce countries’ consumption volatility. Among developed countries and across regions
within developed countries, better risk sharing appears to be associated with greater specialization
(Acemoglu and Zilibotti, 1997; Obstfeld, 1994; and Kalemi-Ozcan, Sorensen, and Yosha, 2001).
                                              -6-




Volatility

The effects of financial integration on output volatility are not obvious in theory. In principle,
financial integration allows capital-poor countries to diversify away from their narrow
production bases that are often agricultural or natural resource-dependent. This should reduce
macroeconomic volatility. At a more advanced stage of development, however, trade and
financial integration could simultaneously allow for enhanced specialization based on
comparative advantage considerations. This could make countries more vulnerable to
industry-specific shocks.5

Theory does have a strong prediction, however, about the relationship between financial
integration and consumption volatility. Since consumers and, by extension, economies are
risk-averse, consumption theory tells us that they should desire to use financial markets to
insure against income risk, thereby smoothing the effects of temporary idiosyncratic
fluctuations in income growth on consumption growth. In theory, the benefits of international
risk-sharing could be quite large (Lewis, 1999; van Wincoop, 1999). But this issue is far
from settled (see the discussion in Obstfeld and Rogoff, 2004, Chapter 5). Lucas’s (1987)
claim that macroeconomic stabilization policies that reduce consumption volatility can have
only minimal welfare benefits continues to be influential (see Barlevy, 2004). Some authors
have shown that, even within Lucas’s framework, the higher volatility that developing
countries experience implies that they can potentially reap large benefits from international
risk-sharing arrangements (Pallage and Robe, 2003)

Comovement

Another prediction of theory, related to the consumption smoothing issue, concerns the cross-
country comovement of major macroeconomic aggregates. In theory, the effect of increased
financial integration on cross-country correlations of output growth is uncertain, since it
depends on the nature of shocks and specialization patterns. In any case, financial integration
should in theory help countries diversify away country-specific risk and should, therefore,
result in stronger comovement of consumption growth across countries. Thus, in parallel to
the discussion of volatility, economic theory has clear implications for how financial
integration should affect cross-country consumption correlations but not for correlations of
output or income.

5
  See Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2004) for a more detailed exposition. Imbs and Wacziarg (2003)
show that the degree of diversification has an inverted U-shaped relationship with per capita income
level. The relationship between financial openness and macroeconomic volatility could also be
affected by certain features of developing countries that may make them more vulnerable to external
shocks. First, the limited diversification of their exports and imports could make them susceptible to
terms of trade and foreign demand shocks (Kose, 2002). Second, sharp changes in world interest rates
might induce large fluctuations in highly indebted countries (Blankenau, Kose, and Yi, 2001;
Neumeyer and Perri, 2005). Third, country size is an important factor as external shocks have a larger
impact on volatility in small open developing countries (Crucini, 1997).
                                            -7-




In summary, there is a strong presumption in theory that financial integration is good for
growth and, although its effects on output volatility are unclear, it should unambiguously
lead to reductions in the relative volatility of consumption (and increase the cross-country
comovement of fluctuations in consumption).

                             III. Measuring Financial Openness

The traditional approach to measuring financial openness is to use measures of legal
restrictions on cross-border capital flows. Such capital controls come in many varieties
(controls on inflows versus controls on outflows, quantity controls versus price controls,
restrictions on foreign equity holdings, etc.). Indeed, the IMF’s widely-used Annual Report
on Exchange Rate Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER) measures over 60
different types of controls. Appendix I summarizes the different categories of restrictions in
the AREAER and shows how wide-ranging these controls can be.

One issue in the literature is whether to use a 0/1 measure of capital account openness (as in,
say, the well-known work of Rodrik, 1998) or a finer measure (as pioneered by Quinn,
1997). Another question is whether to stick with using one of these types of de jure measures
(as most of the literature does) or look for alternatives. It is worth noting that the range of
available de jure measures is not as broad as it may seem since most of them, in one way or
another, essentially just summarize the information in the IMF’s AREAER reports.

An alternative approach (advocated, for example, in Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose, 2003) is
to use a de facto measure that tries to take into account how much a country is integrated into
international capital markets in practice. We will argue in this section that there is important
information in both the de jure and de facto measures, but that for many applications the de
facto measure is more suitable. The availability of a de facto integration measure that is
consistently defined across countries owes a great deal to the pioneering work of Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti, which we discuss in greater detail below.

De jure measures based on IMF indicators

Measuring capital account openness has long been a challenge (see Edison et. al., 2004).
Some researchers utilize the summary information provided by the AREAER to construct a
“share” measure, reflecting the fraction of years in the sample in which a country’s capital
account was open (see Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti, 1995; Rodrik, 1998; and Klein and Olivei,
2006). Quinn (1997, 2003) use the narrative descriptions in the AREAER to develop a
quantitative measure of capital account openness. Raising the level of technical
sophistication a notch, Chinn and Ito (2005) develop an index of financial openness based on
principal components extracted from disaggregated capital and current account restriction
measures in the AREAER. Mody and Murshid (2005) also utilize the measures involving
restrictions on capital and current account transactions and construct a different measure.
Edwards (2005) combines the measures in Mody and Murshid (2005) and Chinn and Ito
                                               -8-




(2005) with information from country-specific data sources and proposes a new index.6 After
the expansion of the set of categories reflecting the existence of capital controls in the 1997
issue of the AREAER, there have been some refinements of the earlier measures (see
Johnston and Tamirisa, 1998, and Miniane, 2004).

Shortcomings of de jure measures

All of these measures, despite their increasing sophistication and fineness, suffer from a
variety of similar shortcomings. First, they do not accurately reflect the degree of openness of
the capital account because they are partially based on various restrictions associated with
foreign exchange transactions that may not necessarily impede capital flows. Second, they do
not capture the degree of enforcement of capital controls (or the effectiveness of that
enforcement), which can change over time even if the legal restrictions themselves remain
unchanged.7 Third, and most importantly, these measures do not always reflect the actual
degree of integration of an economy into international capital markets, as we have already
noted. As another example, China, despite its extensive regime of capital controls, has not
been able to stop inflows of speculative capital in recent years (see Prasad and Wei, 2007).

A further complication is that, despite the extensive coverage of the IMF’s annual AREAER
publication, there could be other regulations that effectively act as capital controls but are not
counted as controls. For instance, prudential regulations that limit the foreign exchange
exposure of domestic banks could, under certain circumstances, have the same effect as
capital controls.

This discussion suggests that the distinction between de jure and de facto financial
integration is a crucial one. After all, what matters in analyzing the effects of financial
globalization, is not how integrated economies seem on paper but how integrated they are in
practice.8 But how does one go about measuring de facto integration?

6
  Edison and Warnock (2003) construct measures of capital account restrictions related to just equity
flows. Bekaert and Harvey (2000) and Henry (2000a) compile dates of equity market liberalizations
for developing countries. We discuss some of these narrower measures in more detail later.
7
  Edwards (2005) notes that binary measures suggest similar levels of capital account restrictiveness
in Chile, Mexico and Brazil during the period 1992-1994. In fact, Mexico had a rather open capital
account, Brazil employed a complex set of controls on capital flows, and there were some controls on
short-term flows in Chile.
8
  Collins (2005) argues that de facto and de jure measures are both relevant in measuring the effects
of financial integration. She also notes that de facto indicators are likely to be endogenous in growth
regressions, making it difficult to pin down causal effects. As we discuss below, de jure measures also
have a strong element of endogeneity to them, in addition to their various other deficiencies.
Aizenman and Noy (2006) report that de jure measures of capital account liberalization have
differential effects on de facto measures of trade and financial integration. They find that de jure
restrictions on current account transactions adversely affect the extent of de facto trade openness
while de jure restrictions on capital account transactions have no impact on de facto financial
                                                                                          (continued)
                                               -9-




De facto measures based on price differentials

One approach has been to look at price-based measures of asset market integration. The logic
is that, irrespective of the volume and direction of flows, true integration of capital markets
should be reflected in common prices of similar financial instruments across national
borders.9 While the logic is sound, there are serious practical problems in using such
measures for emerging markets and even more so for low-income developing economies.
Returns on financial instruments in these economies may incorporate a multitude of risk and
liquidity premia that are difficult to quantify. For example, stocks of firms in many emerging
market economies trade at low price earnings ratios due to investor concerns about corporate
governance and contract problems. Yet, it is not easy to separate this form of segmentation
from differential pricing due to high project risk. In general, domestic financial markets may
simply not be deep or liquid enough to allow for efficient arbitrage of price differentials.

Other measures of capital market integration include saving-investment correlations and,
related to the price-based approach discussed above, various interest parity conditions (see
Frankel, 1992; and Edison, Klein, Ricci, and Slok, 2002). However, these measures are also
difficult to interpret and to operationalize for an extended period of time and for a large
group of countries.

De facto measures based on quantities

This leaves quantity-based measures of integration based on actual flows which, in our view,
provide the best available measure of a country’s integration with international financial
markets. One issue is whether to measure integration using net or gross capital flows. Gross
flows provide a relatively less volatile and more sensible picture of integration. Indeed, this
measure has the advantage of capturing two-way flows which one would expect to see if
economies were in fact sharing risk efficiently in a world with multiple financial instruments
and agents with different risk profiles. Using the sum of gross inflows and outflows as a ratio
to national GDP also yields a nice symmetry with the widely-used measure of trade
openness, which is the sum of imports and exports as a ratio to GDP.

However, such annual flows tend to be quite volatile and are prone to measurement error. To
mitigate these problems, it may be preferable to use a measure of the sum of gross stocks of
foreign assets and liabilities as a ratio to GDP. These stocks are essentially just a refined
cumulated version of the underlying flows corrected for valuation effects. This preserves the
spirit of measuring de facto integration and obviates many of the problems associated with
flow data. Moreover, for some purposes--particularly risk sharing--the stock measures are

integration. Similarly, Magud and Reinhart (2006) survey a number of studies on the effectiveness of
capital controls and conclude that controls on inflows do not reduce the volume of net flows.
9
 This is of course a simplistic description of a sophisticated approach (see Karolyi and Stulz, 2003,
for a survey).
                                                 - 10 -




clearly more appropriate. For instance, if countries have large gross stocks of assets and
liabilities, small exchange rate changes can have large valuation effects and serve as a
mechanism for risk-sharing even if net asset positions are small.

The measures of financial integration that we use in the next section draw upon the work of
Milesi-Ferretti and Lane (2006). These authors have carefully constructed an extensive
dataset of stocks of gross liabilities and assets for 145 countries covering the period 1970-
2004.10 Their dataset contains information about the composition of international financial
positions, including foreign direct investment, portfolio equity investment, external debt, and
official reserves. In addition, the dataset has the virtue of accounting for valuation effects and
other problems that typically plague raw country-level data, and also corrects for cross-
country differences in data definitions and variable construction.

                               IV. Patterns of Financial Globalization

Measures of de facto integration based on the Lane-Milesi-Ferretti data show a surge in
financial globalization over the last two decades. Emerging markets have accounted for the
lion’s share of inflows to developing economies. This is of course not a surprise since their
level of integration into financial markets is the main ex-post criterion used to define
emerging markets--the point to note here is that only a relatively small group of developing
economies has actively participated in the process of financial globalization. FDI and
portfolio equity flows have become the dominant form of new flows into developing
economies, with the relative importance of debt flows declining over time (although, as we
shall see, debt still accounts for more than half the stock of all external liabilities.)

Evolution of financial globalization across different country groups

Figure 1 shows the absolute level of integration of different country groups into global
financial markets, calculated as the sum of gross international financial assets and
liabilities.11 While the level of integration into global capital markets is clearly highest for
advanced economies, emerging market economies have accounted for the bulk of the
integration experienced by developing economies in terms of the accumulation of foreign
liabilities through capital inflows (Figure 2). Of the total stock of outstanding foreign
liabilities at the end of 2004, industrial countries accounted for 91 percent and emerging

10
   In this paper, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti substantially extend their widely-used External Wealth of
Nations database (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2001) by employing a revised methodology and utilizing
a larger set of sources. While their benchmark series are based on the official estimates from the
International Investment Position, they compute the stock positions for earlier years using data on
capital flows and account for capital gains and losses. In a series of papers, they analyze the various
features of the data and document the implications of changes in external asset positions for exchange
rates, financial integration, and global imbalances (see Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2002, 2003, 2005).
11
     The sample of countries used in our analysis is listed in the Data Appendix.
                                            - 11 -




markets for 8 percent. Both figures show that the recent wave of financial globalization really
got started in earnest only in the mid-1980s.12

Figure 3 compares the evolution of de jure integration based on the IMF’s binary capital
account restrictiveness measure, averaged across all countries in each group, and
corresponding group averages of the de facto financial openness measure (stock of
international financial assets and liabilities expressed as a ratio to GDP). By both measures,
advanced economies have become substantially integrated into global financial markets. For
emerging market economies, average de jure openness has not changed much based on the
IMF measure, but de facto integration has increased sharply over the last two decades. For
other developing economies, de jure openness on average rose sharply over the last decade,
to a level higher than that for emerging market economies, but the de facto measure has
stayed flat over this period. This figure highlights the different informational content in the
two types of integration measures and the importance of taking these differences into account
in analyses of the effects of financial globalization.

Composition of stocks and flows

Table 1 shows that the share of debt in gross stocks of foreign assets and liabilities has
declined from 75 percent in 1980-84 to 59 percent in 2000-04. Among advanced economies,
the biggest increase has been in the share of portfolio equity. For emerging markets, the share
of FDI and portfolio equity has risen from a total of 13 percent in 1980-84 to 37 percent in
2000-04. In recent years, accumulation of official international reserves has accounted for a
significant portion of the increase in gross foreign assets of emerging and other developing
economies; consequently, the share of the “other” category has jumped over the last decade.

Some of these patterns are even stronger when one looks at gross inflows (rather than total
stocks of assets and liabilities). Table 2 shows that, while debt financing remains the most
important source of inflows for advanced economies, FDI now accounts for almost half of
total inflows into developing economies. Equity flows have become quite important for
emerging markets, accounting for almost 12 percent of inflows, while this category still
remains virtually non-existent for other developing economies, reflecting their
underdeveloped stock markets.

In short, there are important differences across country groups in the relative importance of
different types of inflows, although there has been a broad shift away from debt financing
towards FDI and equity flows in all groups.




12
  A much earlier wave of financial globalization, which took place between 1880 and 1914, has been
analyzed by Bordo, Taylor and Williamson (2003), Obstfeld and Taylor (2004), and Mauro, Sussman
and Yafeh (2006).
                                             - 12 -




Volatility of inflows

Table 3 looks at the volatility of different types of inflows, calculated as the cross-country
averages of the standard deviations of different types of inflows (measured as ratios to GDP)
over the period 1985-2004. The top panel shows that, in all country groups, gross inflows of
debt financing are substantially more volatile than FDI or equity inflows, or the sum of FDI
and equity inflows.

However, the standard deviation is not a scale-free measure and could be affected by the
magnitude of different types of flows. In the lower panel of Table 3, we examine a different
measure of volatility—the coefficient of variation (the standard deviation divided by the
mean). The results using this measure are less clear-cut. For emerging markets, FDI and the
sum of FDI and equity are slightly less volatile than debt flows. Some of these results turn
out to be sensitive to the choice of sample as a few countries have very small shares of
certain types of flows, which distorts some of the results (by blowing up the coefficients of
variation).

          V. Macroeconomic Evidence on the Effects of Financial Globalization

In this section, we review macroeconomic evidence on the effects of financial globalization
in the three dimensions discussed in the theoretical overview--growth, volatility and
comovement. The evidence based on cross-country regression frameworks has been
inconclusive in some respects and, as we discuss below, has a number of conceptual
limitations that can not easily be overcome just by using better cross-country datasets or
more sophisticated econometric techniques. Nevertheless, this is a useful starting point as the
aggregate evidence has been at the center of various debates on financial globalization.

                                      V.1 Effects on Growth

Perceptions about the growth benefits of financial integration owe much to the fact that
emerging market economies have, as a group, experienced far higher cumulative growth
since 1970 than other developing countries or even industrial countries, despite the crises that
some in the former group have experienced (Figure 4). Excluding China and India from the
list of emerging markets makes the cumulative growth performance of this group over this
period look less spectacular, although it is still much better than that of the group of other
developing countries.

Figure 5A shows that there is no systematic relationship between the average level of de
facto financial openness and growth during the period of globalization (defined here as 1985-
2004).13 Controlling for standard growth determinants makes little difference (right panel).

13
  We excluded from these plots a few countries that were outliers, mostly those with very high levels
of financial openness relative to GDP (see the Data Appendix). Including all of the countries in our
sample strengthened (or left essentially unchanged) all of the results reported here. We do not
                                                                                         (continued)
                                               - 13 -




When one compares average GDP growth with the change in the financial openness measure
from 1985 to 2004, however, there appears to be a weak positive association, consistent with
the general wisdom that economies that integrated into global financial markets grew faster
(Figure 5B). But once other growth determinants are controlled for, this relationship
vanishes. There is of course considerable endogeneity embedded in regressions of this sort,
but they do clarify the point taken from the literature based on cross-country growth
regressions that financial integration by itself may not be the key to high growth.14

In Table 4A, we provide an overview of the literature that aims to establish a causal
relationship between financial openness and growth. While some of these studies conclude
that there are growth benefits associated with international financial integration, the majority
of them tend to find no effect or a mixed effect (results that are not robust across alternative
specifications) for developing countries. This confirms our earlier claim that, if financial
integration has a positive effect on growth, it is apparently not robust, once the usual
determinants of growth are controlled for.

Growth effects of coarse versus finer de jure measures

Why do different studies reach such diverse conclusions about the importance of financial
integration in affecting long-run economic performance? A key issue that we noted earlier is
related to the measurement of financial integration. Some widely used de jure measures are
quite coarse and may not capture the true extent of international financial integration. As
discussed by Edison, Klein, Ricci, and Slok (2004), empirical studies using finer (more
informative) de jure measures of capital account openness appear to reach more positive
results about the impact of financial integration on economic growth than those that employ
binary measures. For example, Rodrik (1998) finds that capital account liberalization has no
significant effect on economic growth, but his analysis is based on a binary measure of
capital controls. Employing a finer, and presumably more informative, version of the same
openness measure, Quinn (1997) documents a positive association between capital account
liberalization and economic growth.


formally examine the effects of outliers as these plots are meant just to be descriptive and do not
constitute formal empirical evidence.
14
  An alternative approach is to look at specific country experiences. Prasad, Rogoff, Wei, and Kose
(2003) analyze the growth performance of the fastest and slowest growing (or fastest declining)
economies during 1980–2000 and the status of their financial openness. They conclude that a high
level of financial integration is not a necessary condition for attaining high growth. China and India
achieved high growth rates despite limited and selective capital account liberalization. Mauritius and
Botswana also had strong growth rates despite being relatively closed to financial flows. Financial
integration is apparently also not a sufficient condition for attaining high growth. For example, Jordan
and Peru became relatively open to foreign capital flows during this period; yet their economies
contracted. Bakker and Chapple (2002) and Ariyoshi et al. (2000) review the experiences of several
industrial and developing countries, respectively, with the process of capital account liberalization.
                                           - 14 -




De facto versus de jure measures

Among the studies that use both de jure and de facto measures, specifications where capital
account openness is measured using de facto measures tend to lend more support for the
potential growth enhancing effects of financial integration than those employing de jure
measures (see Kraay, 1998; O’ Donnell, 2001; and Edison, Levine, Ricci, and Slok, 2002).
The fact that studies using finer de jure measures and de facto measures find more evidence
of positive growth effects suggests that appropriate measurement of financial integration is
crucial for uncovering growth effects. It also suggests that the nature of financial
integration—what types of inflows and outflows are permitted—may have an important
bearing on the growth outcomes. We return to this later, but flag this as an area where more
systematic research would be useful.

Country coverage

There are also materially important differences in the coverage of countries across studies.
Some studies focus exclusively on advanced countries, a few consider developing and
emerging market countries, and others use a combination of all three groups. While Quinn
(1997) finds that capital account liberalization tends to have a positive impact in all
countries, Edwards (2001) and Edison, Klein, Ricci, and Slok (2004) argue that its effect is
very limited in less developed countries. Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (2003), on the
other hand, find no relationship between the level of development and the growth effects of
capital account liberalization. We return to this issue in Section IX, when we discuss in more
detail how the growth benefits of capital account liberalization may be influenced by specific
country characteristics, many of which are of course related to the level of development.

Time period

The time period covered by different empirical analyses is another source of variation in
results. Some studies use data going back to the early 1950s (Alesina, Grilli, and Milesi-
Ferretti, 1994), while others limit their examination to the post-1986 period (Klein and
Olivei, 2006). Longer time spans are presumably more appropriate for studying the impact of
international financial integration on economic growth. At the same time, one must keep in
mind that capital flows to developing countries have really taken off only in the last two
decades. The choice of sample period appears to make a big difference. For example,
comparing the studies by Rodrik (1998) and Quinn (1997) which arrive at diametrically
opposed conclusions, Eichengreen (2001) observes that Quinn’s sample coverage begins in
1960 and Rodrik’s in 1975. Even though both studies use a sample ending in 1989, the
impact of the debt crises of the 1980s receives a higher weight in Rodrik’s study since the
span of his dataset is much shorter.

Differences in methodologies

Differences in empirical methodologies could also account for some of the variations in
results across papers, especially given the large number of potential pitfalls in reduced-form
                                             - 15 -




cross-country regressions. While some studies point to the importance of capturing temporal
effects associated with financial integration using dynamic regression models (McKenzie,
2001), others emphasize the need to account for nonlinear interactions between financial
integration and various factors affecting economic growth (Klein, 2005). Edison, Levine,
Ricci, and Sløk (2002) employ a variety of statistical methodologies that allow them to deal
with several econometric problems, including possible reverse causality—i.e., the possibility
that any observed association between financial integration and growth could result from the
mechanism that faster growing economies are more likely to liberalize their capital
accounts.15 After a battery of statistical analyses, they conclude that there is no robustly
significant effect of financial integration on economic growth, although de facto measures of
integration do tend to generate some results showing positive growth effects.

Investment as an alternative dependent variable

Another important difference across empirical studies is related to the choice of dependent
variable. The studies we have summarized so far look at the relationship between financial
integration and GDP growth. Is there evidence that financial integration boosts investment
growth, as predicted by the neoclassical model? Bosworth and Collins (1999) and
Borenzstein, De Gregorio, and Lee (1998) find that there is a strong positive association
between certain types of financial integration and investment growth. In particular, their
findings suggest that there exists an almost one-for-one relationship between FDI flows and
domestic investment. The relationship between aggregate financial flows (as opposed to just
FDI) and investment growth appears to be smaller and less robust. Mody and Murshid (2005)
confirm the positive relationship reported in earlier results, but their results suggest that the
impact of capital inflows on growth has been declining over time.

Summary of the evidence on growth benefits

Our reading of this large literature based on aggregate data is that it remains difficult to find
robust evidence that financial integration systematically increases growth, once other
determinants of growth are controlled for. Nevertheless, the weight of the evidence seems to
be gradually shifting towards finding positive marginal effects on growth, especially when
financial integration is measured using de facto or finer de jure measures, when data over
longer time periods are used, and when interaction terms accounting for supportive
conditions (such as good policies and institutions) are properly included in cross-country
regression frameworks. We will expand on these themes later in the paper.

We should note, however, that potential endogeneity between financial integration and
growth remains a problematic issue even in studies that do find a positive association

15
  They use a generalized method of moments estimation procedure in which, under certain
assumptions, lagged values of changes in the explanatory variables can be used as instruments to
control for potential endogeneity of all of the explanatory variables.
                                              - 16 -




between these variables. This problem may ultimately be intractable if one relies solely on
macroeconomic data; looking at more disaggregated data may be one way out. Another
possibility, as we will discuss later, is that it is very difficult, even at a conceptual level, to
make strong causal statements about the consequences of financial globalization,
independent of whether macro or micro data are used.

                                     V.2 Effects on Volatility

Capital account liberalization is believed to have played an important role in fomenting
financial crises and has been indicted by some observers as the proximate cause for the crises
experienced by various emerging markets over the last decades. Interestingly, there is little
empirical evidence to support the view that capital account liberalization by itself increases
vulnerability to crises. While crisis episodes receive most of the attention, however, they are
just particularly sharp manifestations of the more general phenomenon of macroeconomic
volatility. Here the results are less favorable--there is no evidence that financial globalization
has delivered on the promised benefit of improved international risk sharing and reduced
volatility of consumption.

Crises

Some papers that have analyzed the effects of capital controls on susceptibility to financial
crises have found that countries with capital controls are in fact more subject to crises. But
this could simply be because of a “selection effect”—often it is countries with poor
macroeconomic fundamentals that put controls in place to try and insulate themselves from
crises. Glick, Guo and Hutchison (2006) address this issue--they find that capital account
openness reduces the probability of currency crises, even after controlling for selection bias
in terms of how macroeconomic policies influence the existence of capital controls.16 The
relationship between capital controls and crises could also reflect the fact that some of the
countries are actually more integrated in terms of de facto measures of integration (capital
flight) and that capital controls therefore do not insulate them from crises.

Edwards (2005) examines this issue using a more sophisticated measure of de jure financial
openness that attempts to incorporate some notion of the intensity of capital controls. He
looks at two manifestations of external crises—sudden stops of capital inflows and current
account reversals. He finds no systematic evidence that countries with higher capital mobility
tend to have a higher incidence of crises, or tend to face a higher probability of having a
crisis, than countries with lower mobility. In subsequent work, Edwards (2006) concludes
that there is no evidence that the output costs of currency crises are smaller in countries that
restrict capital mobility.

16
  These authors use a binary capital account openness indicator based on the IMF’s AREAER.
Whether this relationship holds up with de facto measures, which we have argued are more
appropriate measures of integration, remains to be seen.
                                            - 17 -




While currency crises have been emphasized in the literature on the risks of capital account
liberalization, it is worth noting that banking crises account for about one-third of financial
crises over the last three decades and that their frequency increased in the 1980s and 1990s
(Kaminsky and Reinhart, 1999). Banking crises tend to be more disruptive--Hutchison and
Noy (2005), for instance, find that banking crises generally have larger adverse effects on
output growth than currency crises. Glick and Hutchison (2001) explore the relationships
between these two types of crises—one of their conclusions is that banking crises are a good
indicator of future currency crises, while the reverse is not necessarily true. Furthermore,
there appears to be little evidence that capital account liberalization by itself affects
vulnerability to banking crises; moreover, the adverse effects of banking crises seem to be
weaker for countries with open capital accounts (Bonfiglioli and Mendicino, 2004).

In sum, there is little formal empirical evidence to support the oft-cited claims that financial
globalization in and of itself is responsible for the spate of financial crises that the world has
seen over the last three decades. Of course, as we will discuss in more detail below, the
interaction between capital account liberalization and other policy choices (e.g., fixed
exchange rate regimes that are not well supported by other macroeconomic policies) could,
under certain circumstances, spell trouble for a developing economy.

Volatility

Turning to volatility more broadly, there has been a well-documented trend decline in
macroeconomic volatility in most of the major industrial economies since the mid-1980s
(Doyle and Faust, 2005), although the reasons for this decline are still a matter of debate.
Output volatility seems to have been on a declining trend in emerging market and developing
economies as well. However, the existing evidence based on papers using a variety of
regression models, different country samples and time periods leads to the conclusion that
there is no systematic empirical relationship between financial openness and output volatility,
which is, in a sense, consistent with the predictions of theory.17

Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2003b) confirm the major trends in the evolution of volatility
dynamics reported in earlier studies, but also find that, during the 1990s, average declines in
output growth volatility were smaller for emerging markets than for either industrial or low-
income developing economies. More importantly, they find that the ratio of consumption
growth volatility to income growth volatility increased during the recent period of
globalization for emerging market economies (and remained flat for the other two groups).
What is surprising is not just that the volatility of consumption rose (perhaps because of
crises experienced by some of these economies, and the associated rise in income volatility)
but that it increased by more than income volatility. This is a striking result in that it runs


17
  See Razin and Rose (1994), Easterly, Islam, and Stiglitz (2001), and Buch, Dopke, and Pierdzioch
(2005).
                                              - 18 -




exactly counter to one of the presumed theoretical benefits of financial integration—that it
allows countries to share income risk and smooth consumption.18

These authors also find that the relative volatility of consumption growth increases with the
degree of financial openness, but only up to a certain threshold level of integration. At higher
levels of financial integration, countries do seem to accrue the benefits of financial
integration in terms of improved risk sharing and better consumption smoothing relative to
autarky. Most emerging market economies are, however, below this threshold level of
financial integration while most industrial economies are above it.19

                                          V.3 Comovement

A number of papers show that the synchronicity of national business cycle fluctuations (in
both industrial countries and emerging market economies) and the relative importance of
global factors for these fluctuations have increased during the period of globalization.20 Imbs
(2006) documents that financial integration has led to higher cross-country consumption and
output correlations among industrialized economies. Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2003a)
document changes in output comovement across a broader group of industrial and developing
economies and link these changes to financial integration. Contrary to the predictions of
theory, however, Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2003a, 2004) document that, on average,
cross-country correlations of consumption growth did not increase in the 1990s, precisely
when financial integration would have been expected to result in better risk-sharing
opportunities for developing economies.

These findings on the cross-country comovement of output and consumption complement the
results on the effects of financial integration on consumption and output volatility and



18
   A number of recent theoretical papers have attempted to explain the positive association between
financial integration and the relative volatility of consumption growth documented by Kose, Prasad,
and Terrones (2003b). For instance, Levchenko (2004) and Leblebicioglu (2006) consider dynamic
general equilibrium models where only some agents have access to international financial markets. In
both models, capital account liberalization leads to an increase in the volatility of aggregate
consumption since agents with access to international financial markets stop participating in risk-
sharing arrangements with those who do not have such access.
19
  Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2006) find that, following equity market liberalizations, there is a
decline in consumption volatility. These results differ from those of Kose, Prasad and Terrones
(2003b) due to differences in the definitions of financial integration, the measures of consumption
volatility, data samples, and methodologies. The results in Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2006)
suffer from the same problems noted about their work on the impact of equity market liberalizations
on economic growth (see discussion in Section VI).
20
 See Stock and Watson (2003), Bordo and Helbling (2003), Kose, Otrok, and Whiteman (2005) and
Kose, Otrok, and Prasad (2006).
                                            - 19 -




suggest that, in order to utilize the risk-sharing benefits of financial integration, developing
economies may have to attain higher levels of financial integration.

To summarize, the macroeconomic evidence on the growth and volatility effects of financial
integration remains sobering although there are some grounds for optimism in more recent
work. But most of the evidence so far is based on cross-country regressions that lump
together different types of capital flows. Is there a different way to approach the issue?

                 VI. How Does the Composition of Capital Flows Matter?

An alternative line of inquiry into the effects of financial globalization is based on the notion
that not all types of capital flows are created equal. Flows that have equity-like features—i.e.,
FDI and portfolio equity flows—are not only presumed to be more stable and less prone to
reversals (Wei, 2005), but are also believed to bring with them many of the indirect benefits
of financial globalization such as transfers of managerial and technological expertise. As we
discussed in Section IV, the evidence for the former proposition—that FDI and equity flows
are more stable than debt financing—is far from conclusive.

In any case, portfolio debt flows have acquired black sheep status, especially since currency
and maturity mismatches related to external debt are seen as proximate determinants of many
emerging market crises. As we have documented earlier, there have been substantial changes
in the composition of financial flows over time. So what does the evidence show about the
macroeconomic effects of different types of flows? We now review the literature on this
question, studying the impact of each of these types of flows in turn.

                                  VI.1 Portfolio Equity Flows

The rising importance of portfolio equity flows to emerging markets has motivated a number
of researchers to examine the growth effects of equity market liberalizations. Most of the
papers in this rapidly-expanding literature suggest that portfolio equity flows have a
significant positive impact on output growth. Whether the estimated growth effects (in
macroeconomic data) of equity market liberalizations could be picking up the effects of other
factors—especially other reforms that tend to accompany these liberalizations—remains, in
our view, an open question. On the other hand, there is now a growing body of micro
evidence (using industry- and firm-level data) supporting the macro evidence on the benefits
of equity liberalizations. Some of these papers also document the empirical relevance of
various theoretical channels linking equity market liberalization to economic growth—
including through increases in investment growth and TFP growth. Table 4B provides a
summary of the key papers discussed in this section.
                                               - 20 -




Evidence from macro data

Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2005; henceforth BHL) document that equity market
liberalizations have a positive effect on growth.21 Using a sample that covers 95 countries
over the period 1980-1997, they conclude that equity market liberalizations increase GDP
growth by about 1 percentage point. Using a longer sample and a different methodology, Li
(2003) finds that such liberalizations lead to a 0.6 percentage point increase in GDP growth.

A potential concern related to this work based on cross-country regressions is that many
emerging markets undertook equity market liberalizations around the same time that they
instituted numerous other policy and structural reforms. Henry (2003a, 2003b) argues that it
is not possible to explain the strong result in BHL using standard growth accounting
techniques as this would require an elasticity of output with respect to capital of about 1. He
notes that equity market liberalizations are often part of a larger reform program and that
these reforms could have a positive impact on productivity, leading to an increase in output
growth that is compatible with the predictions of standard production theory.

To address these concerns, BHL control for other determinants of growth, including financial
development, quality of legal institutions, macroeconomic policies, and broader capital
account and trade liberalizations. They find that capital account liberalization has no
significant effect on growth. The inclusion of other factors dampens the magnitude of the
growth effects of equity market liberalizations but the effect is still statistically significant
and in the range of 0.7-0.9 percentage points.22 Henry (2003a), however, finds these
sensitivity experiments unconvincing since BHL do not use binary variables to capture the
effect of many other one-off reforms, especially trade reforms and inflation stabilizations (for
instance, they use a continuous measure of trade openness). Henry argues that, since BHL
undertake a before-and-after evaluation of the growth effects of equity market liberalizations,
they should conduct the same before-and-after event analysis for other reforms as well.

Other macroeconomic evidence on the growth effects of equity market liberalizations is more
mixed. Martell and Stulz (2003) note that equity market liberalizations can be seen as

21
  Equity market liberalizations are defined as events that make shares of common stock of local firms
available to foreign investors. Commonly-used dates, drawn from Henry (2000) and Bekaert and
Harvey (2000), include official liberalization dates and dates of “first sign” of liberalization based on
events such as the launching of a country fund or American Depository Receipt (ADR)
announcement. ADRs are securities that are traded in the United States but represent underlying
stocks listed in a foreign country.
22
  BHL also attempt to tackle potential endogeneity between the liberalization decision and growth
performance—an issue emphasized by Martell and Stulz (2003). They create a proxy for a country’s
exogenous growth opportunities, based on a country’s industry mix and global growth prospects for
each industry (inferred from the price to earnings ratios of global industry portfolios). They find that
inclusion of this variable in the regressions, which they argue is an indirect way of controlling for the
endogeneity of the liberalization decision, does not affect their main result.
                                              - 21 -




country initial public offerings (IPOs) since, like company IPOs, these events make shares in
existing firms available to a new class of investors—foreign investors. These authors
examine country excess returns, defined as excess returns on a dollar-denominated total
return index for each country, relative to excess returns of a global portfolio and an emerging
markets index. They report that, following equity market liberalizations, country excess
returns are high for the first 2-4 years but then turn marginally negative over longer horizons.
Edison, Klein, Ricci and Slok (2004) confirm the positive association between equity market
liberalization and output growth but find that this result disappears when they introduce a
measure of government reputation as a regressor. When they interact the liberalization
measure with income, they recover its positive impact on growth in middle income countries.

Recent research also provides some cross-country evidence about the empirical relevance of
various channels linking equity market liberalization to economic growth. There is evidence,
consistent with the predictions of international asset pricing models, that stock market
liberalizations reduce the cost of capital.23 Using a sample of 12 emerging market countries
and an event study approach, Henry (2000a) shows that, on average, equity price indexes
register a substantial increase in the months preceding equity market liberalizations, implying
that these liberalizations are associated with a fall in the cost of equity capital. Bekaert and
Harvey (2000) analyze changes in the dividend yield after liberalizations and report that the
cost of capital goes down by 5 to 75 basis points.

There is also some evidence that equity market liberalizations promote investment growth.
Henry (2000b), for instance, finds that, in 9 (10) out of 11 emerging market countries in his
sample, growth rates of private investment are larger in the first (second) year after an equity
market liberalization than they were before liberalization. Moreover, he finds that the mean
growth rate of real private investment in the three years immediately following equity market
liberalizations is 22 percentage points higher than the sample mean. Alfaro and Hammel
(2006) find that equity market liberalizations boost imports of machinery going into domestic
equipment investment.

Evidence from micro data

We view research using industry- and firm-level data as a more promising way of getting a
handle on the growth-enhancing effects of equity market liberalizations. This line of
empirical research has turned up encouraging results. For example, using industry-level panel
data from the manufacturing sectors of 31 emerging market economies over the period 1981-
98, Gupta and Yuan (2005) find that, following such liberalizations, industries that are
technologically more dependent on external finance (the difference between investments and
23
   First, such a liberalization could increase the volume of capital inflows, which, in turn, should
decrease the domestic risk-free rate. Second, increased risk sharing opportunities between foreign and
domestic investors might help to diversify risks, reducing the equity risk premium. Third, as capital
flows increase and liquidity in the domestic stock market increases, the equity risk premium could fall
further. See Stulz (1999a, 1999b) and Kim and Singal (2000) for additional empirical evidence.
                                               - 22 -




cash generated from operations) experience higher growth. They also find that liberalizations
have a larger impact on the growth of industries facing better growth opportunities (based on
industry-level global demand indicators). When the liberalization decision is assumed to be
endogenous, however, only the former result survives, suggesting that countries may time the
liberalization decision to coincide with high growth in certain industries.

Hammel (2006) provides additional evidence that, following equity market liberalizations,
industries that are more dependent on external finance grow faster in countries with relatively
higher stock market capitalization rates. She also examines the impact of other reforms,
including domestic financial reforms and capital account liberalization, on the robustness of
her main findings. She concludes that, while such reforms do have significantly positive
effects on industry growth, their interaction terms with dependence on external finance are
not significant, and they do not affect the growth impact of equity market liberalizations.24

Using firm-level data, Chari and Henry (2004, 2005) find that equity market liberalizations
reduce the cost of equity capital and increase investment in a sample of 11 emerging market
countries. They find that these events reduce the systematic risk associated with holding
stocks in emerging markets and leads to an average stock price increase of about 15 percent.
The latter paper documents that the growth rate of the capital stock of a typical firm exceeds
its pre-liberalization mean by an average of 5.4 percentage points in the three-year period
following liberalization.

Mitton (2006) argues that equity market liberalization gives firms in emerging markets
access to a new financing channel, increasing opportunities for investment and growth.
Moreover, foreign investors tend to demand higher governance standards, which could have
a positive impact on profitability, efficiency, and other measures of operating performance.
In his empirical work, Mitton finds that firms with stocks that are open to foreign investors
register higher levels of sales growth, investment, and efficiency, and lower leverage ratios.25

Summary, and a caveat

Our view is that research on the effects of equity market liberalizations is quite promising,
although even in this area disaggregated evidence may have a better chance of pinning down

24
  Gupta and Yuan (2005) and Hammel (2006) use the Rajan-Zingales (1998) criterion to determine
the level of dependence of different industries on external finance.
25
   Mitton employs firm-specific liberalization dates on which individual stocks become open to
foreign investors. These dates are based on data from the International Finance Corporation, which
specifies the extent of openness of each stock to foreign investors and determines dates on which a
firm’s stock can gain “investable” status, after analyzing country- and firm-level investment barriers.
The use of firm-specific liberalization dates allows Mitton to account for the gradual nature of
liberalization programs. It also mitigates potential contamination of the results by other liberalization
and reform programs, although the firm-specific dates may still create endogeneity problems.
                                               - 23 -




the channels through which such liberalizations generate positive effects. In addition to the
problem that much of this literature is still focused on macroeconomic evidence, virtually all
of it is based on de jure measures of equity market liberalization. We have already noted, in
the context of the measurement of broader capital account liberalization, why de facto
measures may be more meaningful in many circumstances.

Why is it that, using similar de jure measures, the growth effects of broader capital account
liberalization are found to be quite weak while those of equity market liberalization are
remarkably and uniformly strongly positive? As noted above, one possibility is that equity
market reforms may take place only when governments feel they have supportive conditions
in place. Analyses based on micro data indicate that the productivity-enhancing effects of
equity market liberalizations are greater than those of broader capital account liberalizations.
Nevertheless, while the evidence does suggest that equity market liberalizations may have an
independent impact on growth, we are skeptical that these liberalizations by themselves can
generate as large growth effects as has been reported by some authors such as BHL.

                                               VI.2 FDI

We turn next to the presumed poster child for the benefits of financial globalization—foreign
direct investment (FDI). As we discussed earlier, the relative importance of FDI flows has
risen significantly in recent years, making it the most important form of private international
financing for emerging market economies. There is a strong presumption in theory that FDI
should yield more benefits than other types of financial flows since, in addition to
augmenting domestic capital stock, it has a positive impact on productivity through transfers
of technology and managerial expertise. It has also been argued that FDI tends to be the least
volatile of the various types of capital flows, making countries less vulnerable to sudden
stops or reversals of flows.26

In parallel with the rapid growth of FDI flows, a large empirical literature has flourished
seeking to find evidence in support of the theoretical benefits of these flows. Although the
evidence has in general been mixed, recent studies, using more sophisticated methodologies
and micro-level datasets, find more favorable evidence of benefits from FDI. More
importantly, the literature has been reasonably successful in identifying the conditions
necessary to help developing countries fully utilize the potential benefits of these flows.27
Table 4C provides a summary of the key studies in this literature.



26
   Moreover, FDI could help ease firms’ financing constraints. Harrison, Love and McMillan (2004)
document that FDI is associated with a significant reduction in financing constraints, especially in
low income countries. Blalock and Gertler (2005) find that FDI could mitigate the adverse effects of
financial crises by helping firms maintain continuous access to credit through their parent companies.
27
     Recent surveys of this literature include Lipsey (2004) and Moran, Graham, and Blomstrom (2005).
                                               - 24 -




FDI and growth: Evidence from macro data

Studies using aggregate data have been unable to provide conclusive evidence about the
positive impact of FDI on economic growth. While some papers show that FDI enhances
GDP growth, others report that there is no direct evidence of such a relationship.28 How can
we reconcile these disparate findings?

Blonigen and Wang (2005) show that inappropriate pooling of data from developed and
developing countries could dampen the estimated growth effects of FDI. Since FDI is more
likely to crowd in domestic investment in developing countries than in developed ones, it
could have larger effects on growth in the former group. Some empirical studies note that
FDI seems to boost growth only in economies that have the right initial conditions, including
high levels of human capital, financial sector development and policies fostering free trade.29

The growth benefits of FDI also depend on its sectoral composition and its interactions with
domestic investment (see Aykut and Sayek, 2005). FDI flows into the primary sector may
have limited beneficial spillovers, since they often involve mega projects that scarcely
employ domestically-produced intermediate goods. FDI in the manufacturing sector, on the
other hand, tends to have a significant effect on GDP growth because of stronger linkages
between this sector and the rest of the economy.

Carkovic and Levine (2005) provide a comprehensive analysis of the growth effects of FDI.
Using panel GMM estimators and a dataset covering the period 1960-1997, they conclude
that, after controlling for the joint determination of FDI and growth, FDI has no robust causal
effect on economic growth. Melitz (2005) points out that the baseline results of Carkovic and
Levine in fact suggest a positive association between FDI and economic growth, but this
positive link disappears when they introduce controls for trade and domestic financial credit.
Melitz notes that there are strong linkages between FDI and trade flows; more importantly,
joint changes in FDI and trade flows are correlated with economic growth. He concludes that
Carkovic and Levine’s results imply that an expansion of FDI flows accompanied by an
increase in trade could indeed enhance growth.

FDI and productivity: Evidence from micro data

FDI can in principle generate productivity spillovers through several channels, including
imitation (adoption of new production methods), skill acquisition (education/training of


28
     On the former, see Haveman, Lei, and Netz (2001). On the latter, see Carkovic and Levine (2005).
29
  The importance of these three initial conditions is shown by Borensztein, De Gregorio and Lee
(1998); Hermes and Lensink (2003) and Alfaro, Chanda, Kalemli-Ozcan and Sayek (2006); and
Balasubramanyan, Salisu, and Sapsford (1996), respectively. The growth effects of FDI also depend
on the complementarity/substitutability between FDI and domestic investment (de Mello, 1999).
                                              - 25 -




workers), competition (efficient use of existing resources by domestic firms), and exports
(expansion of export potential of domestic firms).

The evidence on the role of horizontal spillovers--productivity spillovers from foreign firms
to domestic firms in the same sector--in transmitting the productivity benefits of FDI has
been inconclusive.30 Lipsey and Sjolhom (2005) conclude that the differences in results
across such studies are related to various country characteristics, including level of human
capital, degree of competition in the sector, ability of the sector to adopt new technologies,
institutional factors, and trade and investment policies. Lipsey (2004) emphasizes the
importance of the trade regime. He notes that Morocco and Venezuela were relatively closed
to trade during the periods covered by the panel datasets used in the widely-cited studies by
Haddad and Harrison (1993) and Aitken and Harrison (1999), respectively.31

The research program on horizontal spillovers has, however, stalled for a number of reasons.
Gorg and Greenaway (2004) note that studies employing cross-section data can not truly
establish causality since they are unable to account for differences in productivity across
sectors. If foreign firms tend to locate in high-productivity sectors, these studies might
conclude that there is a positive association between FDI and productivity even if there are
no productivity spillovers. More importantly, studies looking for horizontal spillovers do not
account for the possibility that foreign firms may try to minimize technological spillovers to
domestic firms in the same sector in order to protect their firm-specific advantages.

However, foreign firms might have incentives to transfer knowledge to their local suppliers
and customers, implying that productivity spillovers from FDI may occur through “vertical”
rather than horizontal linkages. This is a promising line of research that has picked up steam
in recent years. For instance, Javorcik (2004) uses enterprise-level data from Lithuania and
employs semiparametric estimation methods to account for simultaneity and sample selection
problems affecting OLS estimates. Her results suggest that, while there are positive spillovers
from FDI occurring through backward linkages, there are few spillovers through horizontal
channels. She reports that the magnitude of the spillover effect is economically meaningful--




30
  Papers by Haddad and Harrison (1993) on Morocco; Aitken and Harrison (1999) on Venezuela;
Djankov and Hoekman (2000) on the Czech Republic find that the net effect of FDI on sectoral
productivity appears to be small. However, other studies by Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter (2002) on
the United Kingdom; Keller and Yeaple (2003) on the United States; and Blalock and Gertler (2005)
on Indonesia document significant horizontal spillovers from FDI to sectoral productivity.
31
  Based on those two studies, Rodrik (1999) argues that FDI has no extra benefit to host country
development. Moran (2005) dismisses this argument, noting that both of these countries practiced
import-substitution based trade policies during the periods analyzed in these papers. He provides
several case studies showing that the full benefits of FDI are realized only in an environment with
minimal distortions from trade barriers and other protectionist policies.
                                            - 26 -




a ten percent increase in foreign presence in downstream sectors is associated with a 0.38
percent increase in the output of firms in the supplying industry.32

Summary of evidence on the benefits of FDI

Despite the theoretical presumption that, of the different types of inflows, FDI has the
strongest benefits, it has not proven easy to document these benefits. Recent empirical
research that takes a more nuanced approach, especially by accounting for the role of various
initial conditions (human capital, trade openness), has been more successful at showing the
potential links between FDI and growth. Similarly, at the micro level, a reassessment of the
channels through which technological spillovers from FDI inflows should take place has
begun to turn up more positive evidence of such spillovers.

                                        VI.3 Debt Flows

If there is anything close to a consensus in the literature on financial globalization, it is that
debt flows, which include portfolio bond flows and commercial bank loans, generate the
greatest risks from financial openness. Even at a conceptual level, it is easy to see why debt
flows do not have the positive attributes of equity-like flows. They do not solve certain
agency problems, can lead to inefficient capital allocation if domestic banks are poorly
supervised, and generate moral hazard as debt is implicitly guaranteed by the government (in
the case of corporate debt) and/or international financial institutions (both corporate and
sovereign debt).

Volatility of debt flows

Debt flows appear to be more volatile than other types of inflows and easily reversible in
times of crises. Wei (2006) argues that sudden reversals of international capital flows are
more likely to occur among countries that rely relatively more on portfolio debt flows,
including bank loans, and less on FDI. Moreover, short-term bank loans to developing
countries are procyclical, i.e., they tend to increase during booms and rapidly decrease during
economic slowdowns (World Bank, 2000). The procyclical and highly volatile nature of
these flows can magnify the adverse impact of negative shocks on economic growth.

Furthermore, opening up to debt flows can give profligate governments and weakly
supervised financial sectors a lot more room to increase their vulnerability to shocks. For
instance, McKinnon and Pill (1996) describe the problem of overborrowing by banks in the
event of financial liberalization without adequate supervision. They show in a theoretical
model that moral hazard in domestic financial markets and unrestricted capital flows can

32
  Other studies showing positive FDI spillovers through backward linkages include Lopez-Cordova
(2003) on Mexico; Alfaro and Rodriguez-Clare (2004) on Brazil, Chile, and Venezuela; and Blalock
and Gertler (2005) on Indonesia.
                                             - 27 -




together create a potential for disaster. McKinnon and Pill (1998) extend the model to show
that open capital accounts can exacerbate the adverse effects of poor financial sector
supervision by allowing banks to expose their balance sheets to currency risk and also by
permitting them to take speculative open positions in foreign exchange.

Interestingly, countries with unfavorable conditions tend to rely more on short-term external
debt denominated in foreign currencies as their main source of foreign capital.33 This creates
vulnerabilities, especially when the domestic financial system through which this capital is
intermediated is underdeveloped, poorly supervised and subject to governance problems.

Risks of short-term debt

There appears to be a systematic empirical link between exposure to short-term debt and the
likelihood of financial crises. For example, the literature on early warning systems generates
a clear result that high levels of short-term external debt denominated in foreign currencies
substantially increase vulnerability to financial crises (see Berg, Borenzstein, and Patillo,
2004 for a review of this literature). This finding is not unexpected since currency and
maturity mismatches of debt structures have been shown to frequently tip countries over into
crises. Rodrik and Velasco (2000) find that the ratio of short-term debt to reserves is a robust
predictor of financial crises among emerging market economies. They report that countries
with a larger short-term debt stock than reserves are three times more likely to experience a
sudden and massive reversal in financial flows. Their results also indicate that the severity of
crises becomes more acute as the exposure to short-term debt increases.

However, even if debt flows—especially of short maturity—are more likely to be associated
with less desirable outcomes, one cannot automatically infer that a ban on debt flows would
be beneficial in all cases. Diamond and Rajan (2001) posit that banks in developing countries
have little choice but to generate liquidity through short-term debt in order to finance illiquid
projects in a low-quality investment environment. The implication is that the greater
vulnerability of developing countries to financial crises is not the result of their large stock of
short-term debt, but a byproduct of the illiquidity and low creditworthiness of the investment
opportunities in these countries. A capital-poor country that has no access to equity or FDI
inflows might still be able to benefit from debt inflows to finance illiquid investments, even
though it could potentially face more risks. Similarly, Jeanne (2003) argues that short-term
debt could serve as a useful commitment device to foster good macroeconomic policies,
although debt would of course increase vulnerability to external shocks.




33
  Eichengreen, Hausmann, Panizza (2006) argue that this is the only form of international capital
inflows available to certain countries, so they may have little say in this outcome.
                                               - 28 -




                                            VI.4 Synthesis

The literature that we have summarized thus far suggests that, in the macroeconomic data, it
is difficult to find robust causal evidence that financial integration boosts growth. But there is
apparently strong indication that equity market liberalizations boost growth. The evidence
that FDI increases growth is less conclusive although more recent work has begun to come
up with more positive evidence. There are two related strands of literature that help round out
the picture. The first looks jointly at the effects of different flows in a common framework.
The second analyzes the costs of capital controls—this constitutes another approach to
examining the costs/benefits of financial integration.

Joint analyses of effects of different types of flows

A number of authors have attempted to disentangle the effects of different types of flows by
looking at them in a unified empirical framework. The results are largely consistent with
those from papers looking at each of these types of flows individually. For instance, Reisen
and Soto (2001) conclude that FDI and portfolio equity flows increase growth while portfolio
bond flows and official flows do not. They also find that foreign bank lending—both short-
term and long-term—is negatively associated with growth, except in countries where local
banks are well capitalized. By contrast, Durham (2004) finds that both FDI and total portfolio
flows (bond and equity) could have growth-enhancing effects, depending on the level of a
country’s financial and institutional development. Portfolio flows have a larger growth
impact in countries that have higher stock market capitalization or are more open to trade.

A different theme that emerges from the evidence we have reviewed thus far is that many of
the benefits of financial openness seem to be masked in cross-country analysis using
macroeconomic data but are more apparent in disaggregated analyses using micro data. The
latter approach has the advantage of being able to provide more detailed analyses of how
capital account opening affects the allocation of capital and overall efficiency. However,
even using micro data it is difficult to separate out the effects of capital account liberalization
from those of other reforms. In addition, micro data are usually available only for a limited
set of countries. Nevertheless, this literature has the potential of enabling a closer look at how
capital account liberalization affects life in the corporate trenches—how firms are affected
and what some of the distributional consequences might be.

Costs of capital controls

One strand of the literature using micro data has focused on estimating the costs of capital
controls, an enterprise that is very complicated in aggregate data due to endogeneity, timing
and other problems.34 Forbes (2005a) provides a comprehensive survey of this literature and


34
  Magud and Reinhart (2006) argue that the literature analyzing the macroeconomic implications of
capital controls using aggregate data has only limited value added since the studies in this literature
                                                                                            (continued)
                                             - 29 -




concludes that capital controls can cause distortions in the behavior of firms (and individuals)
as they adjust their behavior to evade capital controls. By insulating an economy from
competitive forces, they may also reduce market discipline.35 In addition, the administration
of capital controls imposes a cost on the government, especially since the controls often have
to be continually updated in order to close loopholes and limit evasion.

Forbes (2005b) argues further that capital controls may reduce vulnerability to crises but
have large costs not just in terms of efficiency losses and less market discipline but also
reduced capital flows. She acknowledges that these effects are difficult to detect at the
macroeconomic level but notes that the costs are apparent in microeconomic data. Desai,
Foley and Hines (2004) use firm-level data to argue that the cost of capital is higher for
multinationals when capital controls are in place. 36 The wedge arises because capital controls
typically result in costs of avoidance of those controls as well as higher domestic interest
rates. Multinational affiliates located in countries with capital controls are found to face
interest rates that are about 5 percentage points higher than affiliates of the same parent
company borrowing locally in countries without capital controls. These authors also
conclude, based on the cross-country investment patterns of multinationals, that the level of
FDI inflows into a country is adversely affected by capital controls.

In short, the existence of capital controls appears to result in significant efficiency costs at the
level of individual firms or sectors. We find this evidence plausible although, as before, the
fact that this strand of the literature largely uses de jure measures of integration gives one
pause. A mitigating circumstance is that some of the papers noted above (including many in
the survey by Forbes, 2005a) are based on data from individual countries or small groups
of countries where one has good reason to believe that the capital controls really had a bite,
although this might generate subtle sample selection problems.

                                   VII. Organizing Principles

To put together the disparate strands of evidence that we have assembled thus far, we now
introduce a framework that may help reconcile some of the apparently inconsistent results in
the literature and also shed some light on why empirical evidence at different levels of
disaggregation may reach different conclusions.




suffer from various problems, including the use of heterogeneous samples, differences in
methodologies, and multiple definitions of outcomes associated with the success of controls.
35
  For instance, Johnson and Mitton (2002) argue that capital controls reduced market discipline
among Malaysian firms and created a screen for cronyism.
36
  These authors use the IMF 0-1 capital account openness indicator and also a measure of openness
to FDI that reflects restrictions on capital repatriation and remittances of profits.
                                              - 30 -




                                     VII.1 Collateral Benefits

  A key component of our argument is that it is not just the capital inflows themselves, but
  what comes along with the capital inflows, that drives the benefits of financial globalization
  for developing countries. There is considerable evidence, as we discuss below, that financial
  integration serves as an important catalyst for a number of indirect benefits, which we term
  potential “collateral benefits” since those may not generally be the primary motivations for
  countries to undertake financial integration. These collateral benefits could include
  development of the domestic financial sector, improvements in institutions (defined broadly
  to include governance, the rule of law etc.), better macroeconomic policies etc. These
  collateral benefits then result in higher growth, usually through gains in allocative efficiency.


                                    The Traditional View


                                 More efficient international
                                   allocation of capital
     Financial                                                            GDP growth
    Globalization                     Capital deepening
                                                                         Consumption
                                  International risk-sharing              volatility


The traditional view focuses on the importance of channels through which capital flows could
directly increase GDP growth and reduce consumption volatility.


                                   A Different Perspective

                                     Traditional Channels



      Financial                 Potential Collateral Benefits
     Globalization                                                          GDP / TFP
                                Financial market development                 growth
                                  Institutional development
                                      Better governance                    Consumption
                                 Macroeconomic discipline                   volatility

Our perspective acknowledges the relevance of the traditional channels, but argues that the
role of financial globalization as a catalyst for certain collateral benefits may be more
important in increasing GDP/TFP growth and reducing consumption volatility.
                                              - 31 -




The empirical implications of this perspective are powerful. First of all, it suggests that the
beneficial impact of financial integration on growth may take a while to show up because it
operates through these indirect channels rather than just directly through financing of
domestic investment.37 More importantly, it suggests that, in a regression framework, it may
be difficult to disentangle the effects of financial integration if one includes measures of
institutional quality, financial sector development, quality of macroeconomic policies etc.
After all, it is these very channels through which financial integration generates growth
benefits. This problem cannot be resolved simply by using a technique such as instrumental
variables estimation; that would entirely miss the logic of the scheme above since our interest
is in how financial integration affects growth through all channels, direct and indirect.

One can not of course overstate the case that financial integration leads to the collateral
benefits. It is equally plausible, for instance, that, all else being equal, more foreign capital
tends to flow to countries with better-developed financial markets and institutions. As the
literature that we discuss later in the paper shows, however, there is a fair amount of evidence
to support the proposition that financial integration serves as a catalyst for many collateral
benefits. We also do not dismiss the importance of traditional channels—that financial
integration may increase investment by relaxing the constraints imposed by low levels of
domestic saving and by reducing the cost of capital. But our view is that the importance of
this direct channel by which financial integration influences growth may have been
overemphasized in previous literature.

                                          VII.2 Thresholds

A large related literature has attempted to tackle the question of what initial conditions help
prepare the ground for financial openness to generate good growth benefits for a country and
lower the risks. There is plenty of evidence that premature opening of the capital account
without having in place well-developed and well-supervised financial sectors, good
institutions, and sound macroeconomic policies can hurt a country by making the structure of
inflows unfavorable and by making the country vulnerable to sudden stops or reversals of
flows. Furthermore, the process of globalization seems to proceed more smoothly when trade
liberalization precedes financial integration. Thus, it is the interaction between financial
globalization and this set of initial conditions that determines growth and volatility outcomes.



37
  A number of papers have explicitly taken the tack that the costs of financial globalization—
including crises—are in the nature of growing pains that will recede once globalizing economies
achieve fuller integration. Krugman (2002) contends that “In the long run, integration may solve the
problems it initially creates.” Martinez, Tornell, and Westermann and (2004) argue that crises are the
price that must be paid to attain rapid growth in the presence of contract enforceability problems.
These authors present some evidence that developing economies that have registered higher growth
rates have typically experienced boom-bust cycles (also see Kaminsky and Schmukler, 2003, and
Bussiere and Fratzscher, 2004).
                                                - 32 -




                                       But There are Thresholds

                                                    Above Thresholds              GDP / TFP growth

                                                                                    Risks of Crises
                                        Threshold Conditions
 Comparing the schematic above to that of the previous one on collateral benefits highlights a
  Financial
 deep              X                Financial market development
       tension between the costs and benefits of financial globalization. Note that most (but
Globalization                    Institutional Quality, Governance
 not all) of the elements on the list of threshold conditions are identical to the list of collateral
                                       Macroeconomic policies
 benefits. In other words, financial globalization serves as a catalyst for a number of important
                                           Trade integration
 collateral benefits but can greatly elevate the risks to benefits ratio if the initial conditions in
 these dimensions are inadequate.
                                                     Below Thresholds           GDP / TFP growth ?
 Unfortunately, as we discuss in detail later in the paper, existing papers have identified only
 the importance of threshold effects in specific dimensions. There is as yet Risks        of Crises
                                                                                  little work    on the
 relative importance of different thresholds and the trade-offs among different threshold
 conditions.globalization
 Financial    What wouldleadsbe most  usefulmacroeconomic
                                  to better   for a country contemplating
                                                              outcomes when liberalization   of its
                                                                               certain threshold
 capital account
 conditions         would
             are met.  Thisbegenerates
                              a composite   threshold
                                        a deep  tensionmeasure
                                                         as manythat would
                                                                  of the    determine
                                                                         threshold      its
                                                                                    conditions    are also
 preparedness    to undertake  this
 on the list of collateral benefits.policy change.   In the absence  of such a measure,   it is hard to
 determine when a country is ready for financial integration.


 Does this imply that there is simply no alternative for a country desirous of benefiting from
 the collateral benefits of financial globalization but to expose itself to substantial risks of
 crises? Or to remain closed and stay on what might be a much lower growth path? Our view
 is that, while the risks can never be totally avoided, there are ways to improve the benefit-risk
 calculus of financial globalization. There is, however, unlikely to be a uniform approach to
 opening the capital account that will work well for all countries. Indeed, the collateral
 benefits perspective may provide a way for moving forward on capital account liberalization
 that takes into account individual country circumstances (initial conditions) as well as the
 relative priorities of different collateral benefits for that country.

               VII.3 A Corollary: Collateral Benefits Enhance Productivity Growth

 The collateral benefits that we have identified above should enhance efficiency and, by
 extension, total factor productivity (TFP) growth. Thus, our approach ties in nicely with the
 recent literature emphasizing the importance of TFP growth as the main driver of long-term
                                             - 33 -




growth.38 But there is as yet little empirical work looking at whether financial integration
boosts TFP growth.

This has important implications for analyzing how international capital mobility can affect
growth. The classical notion that capital mobility allows capital-poor countries to grow faster
through higher investment has been challenged, for instance, by Gourinchas and Jeanne
(2006), who argue that the welfare gains from capital mobility are likely to be small. Their
key proposition is that capital controls constitute a transitory distortion since even a
financially closed economy eventually accumulates capital domestically, so the distortion
vanishes over time. Hence, viewing the benefits of capital account liberalization as those
resulting from a permanent reduction in this distortion (as captured, for instance, by the
wedge between domestic and international interest rates) is an overstatement of the benefits.
These authors conclude (as do Hall and Jones, 1999) that less developed countries have
lower per capita income because they are less productive (in terms of TFP) or have more
distortions; not because they are capital scarce. Caselli (2005) and Gourinchas and Jeanne
(2005) provide further theoretical support (and some evidence based on parameterizations of
growth models) for the notion that it is TFP growth rather than capital accumulation that is
crucial for long-term growth.

Indeed, this literature may provide a useful guide to where one should be looking for the
benefits of financial integration. Ultimately, if financial integration is to have a lasting effect
on growth, it must be by moving economies closer to their production possibility frontiers by
eliminating various distortions and creating efficiency gains, including in financial
intermediation, technological adoption etc.

The hypothesis that financial integration raises TFP growth has not yet been investigated
carefully in the literature. An early exception is a paper by Edwards (2001a), who looks at
this issue rather cursorily and concludes that, while there is some evidence that financial
integration increases TFP growth, the evidence is not robust. More recently, Bonfiglioli
(2006) and Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2006b) have assembled some preliminary evidence
suggesting that financial integration raises TFP growth. Some of the literature on the effects
of equity market liberalization and FDI flows discussed above does show, using micro data,

38
   The question of what determines the large cross-country differences in output growth has motivated
an extensive literature. Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992) come down strongly on the side of factor
accumulation as the key determinant. The influential paper of Hall and Jones (1999) changed the
terms of the debate and it has now come to be accepted as conventional wisdom that TFP growth is
far more important than factor accumulation. The debate is far from settled, however. Bosworth and
Collins (2003) argue that many previous studies over-estimate the importance of TFP growth; they
argue that factor accumulation and TFP growth are about equally important, even for long-run
growth. By contrast, Jones and Olken (2005) present evidence that TFP growth fluctuations constitute
the primary determinant of not just long-term but also short-term growth. In the context of the Asian
newly industrialized countries, Young (1995) argues that capital accumulation was the main driver of
growth in those countries during the miracle years, a view disputed by Hsieh (2002).
                                              - 34 -




how capital inflows result in efficiency gains at the micro level. Clearly, there is more work
to be done and this seems to us an important dimension of the future research program on the
macroeconomic effects of financial integration.

                                          VII.4 Summary

Our conceptual framework can be summarized as follows. The first point is that financial
integration should generate a number of indirect but important benefits; the second is that
these benefits should then boost growth. Indeed, these ancillary benefits could in some ways
be more important than the direct effects of external financing on investment growth. The
fact that well-developed and efficient financial sectors, good institutions, and sound
macroeconomic policies contribute to higher growth are, in our view, relatively non-
controversial (although there may not be a consensus about the magnitude of these causal
relationships).

Hence, we turn our attention next to building the case for the first piece of our argument—
that financial globalization has significant collateral benefits. As noted above, a corollary of
our reasoning is of course that these benefits should show up in TFP growth; this we leave to
future research.

Following that, we review the literature on threshold conditions. The basic idea here is that
whether or not initial conditions are above threshold levels in some dimensions is crucial for
determining growth and volatility outcomes. This literature could be important for
understanding why the macroeconomic evidence on the growth effects of financial
integration is rather mixed, while the microeconomic evidence finds more positive effects.

                     VIII. Collateral Benefits of Financial Globalization

Although financial globalization is in theory supposed to work its magic through increased
capital flows, there are, as discussed above, indirect benefits to undertaking financial
globalization that are arguably of greater potential importance than the direct benefits. We
now review the evidence for three key areas in which the indirect benefits ought to be
important—financial sector development, institutional quality and macroeconomic policies.

Figure 6 shows that, during the recent period of financial globalization (1985-2004), there is
indeed a strong positive correlation between financial openness and measures of financial
development and institutional quality, and a negative correlation between financial openness
and log inflation. The correlation with the government budget deficit is, however, essentially
zero.39

39
  As with Figure 5, we excluded a few countries that were outliers. Inclusion of all the countries in
our sample strengthened all of the unconditional results reported here. We emphasize that these plots
only show unconditional correlations, so we do not wish to make too much of them.
                                              - 35 -




Formal empirical evidence suggests strongly that financial integration boosts domestic
financial market development, although this does not of course rule out the possibility that de
facto financial integration is fostered by a well-developed financial sector. While there is a
strong presumption in the literature that financial globalization improves institutional quality
and governance, the empirical evidence—most of which is very recent—is limited. The
evidence that financial globalization disciplines macroeconomic policies is weak and fraught
with a number of problems.

                               VIII.1 Financial Sector Development

An area that has received a fair amount of attention is the issue of whether international
financial flows indeed serve as an important catalyst for domestic financial market
development, as reflected in both straightforward measures of the size of the banking sector
and equity markets as well as broader concepts of financial market development, including
supervision and regulation.

There is a large body of theory suggesting that foreign ownership of banks can, in principle,
generate a variety of benefits (e.g., Levine, 1997, 2005; Mishkin, 2006). First, foreign bank
participation can make a country’s access to international financial markets easier. Second, it
can help improve the regulatory and supervisory frameworks of the domestic banking
industry. Third, it can improve the quality of loans as the influence of the government on the
financial sector should decline in more open economies. Fourth, in practice, foreign banks
may introduce new financial instruments and technologies which can increase competition
and improve the quality of financial services. The presence of foreign banks can also provide
a safety valve when depositors become worried about the solvency of domestic banks.

What does the empirical evidence say? Work based on a variety of techniques, including
country case studies, does seem to support the notion that increased foreign bank presence
raises competition and appears to lead to a decline in both bank overhead costs and profits.40
As for equity markets, the overwhelming theoretical presumption is that foreign entry
increases efficiency and the evidence seems to support this channel. For example, applying
an event study approach to data from 16 emerging markets, Levine and Zervos (1998) report
that stock markets tend to become larger and more liquid after equity market liberalizations.
In the same vein, Karolyi (2004) finds that the growth of ADRs in emerging markets could
have a positive impact on the development of the local stock markets. In a cross-county
regression framework, Chinn and Ito (2005), however, identify one possible caveat. While
they find that financial openness contributes to equity market development once a certain

40
  See Claessens, Demirguc-Kunt, and Huizinga (2001), Errunza (2001), Levine (2001), Claessens
and Laeven (2003), Clarke, Cull, Martinez Peria, and Sanchez (2003) and Schmukler (2003) One
cannot, however, rule out the view that, in very poor countries, the entry of foreign banks could wipe
out domestic banks and thereby have detrimental effects on access to financing for small- and
medium-sized enterprises (Detragiache, Poonam and Tressel, 2006).
                                              - 36 -




moderate level of legal and institutional development has been attained (a hurdle cleared by
most emerging markets), less developed countries do not necessarily gain this benefit.

A number of studies also find that international financial integration helps overall financial
sector development.41 For instance, Bailliu (2000) and Klein and Olivei (2006) find that, in
financially integrated economies, the degree of domestic financial sector development is
higher than in countries that maintain restrictions on capital account transactions.

                           VIII.2 Institutional Quality and Governance

Another focus of the recent literature on “collateral benefits” has been on the relationship
between financial globalization and corporate governance. More recent work has started to
examine the implications of financial globalization for broader public governance, as well as
for the relationship between corporate and public governance. However, the evidence on
these two latter points is rather limited at this stage.

Corporate governance

Stulz (2005) discusses some channels through which globalization could improve corporate
governance and thereby reduce the cost of capital. Foreign investors may have skills and
information technologies that allow them to monitor management better than local investors.
Globalization also transforms the market for corporate control—it increases the monitoring
of managers both by existing shareholders and potential external bidders. Stulz (2005) argues
that financial globalization weakens certain agency problems by reducing the cost of outside
finance, thereby creating incentives for firms that use more external finance to improve their
governance. A missing step in this logic is that improved governance gives firms more access
to external capital—there is as yet little evidence on this. Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2004)
note that financial globalization may lead to greater investment in governance for another
reason, namely that it reduces the cost of such investments.

The empirical evidence on financial globalization and corporate governance, while still
relatively sparse, does seem to support the notion that increased foreign competition leads to
better corporate governance. A volume edited by Cornelius and Kogut (2003) has a set of
papers by academics and practitioners discussing how financial globalization has induced
some countries to adjust their corporate governance structures in response to demands from
international investors. Goldberg (2004) surveys the literature about the implications of
financial-sector FDI and argues that financial-sector FDI from well-regulated and well-
supervised source countries can support emerging market institutional development and

41
   Mishkin (2006) enumerates various direct and indirect channels through which financial
globalization could have a positive impact on financial sector development. He argues that foreign
financial institutions could lead to improvements in the quality of domestic prudential supervision and
could be instrumental in the reform of domestic regulatory institutions.
                                            - 37 -




governance. Morck, Wolfenzen, and Yeung (2005) document that, in many countries, small
numbers of controlling shareholders (often a few wealthy families) tend to govern a vast
number of listed public companies through corporate pyramids, cross-holdings, and other
devices. The corporate governance problems associated with this phenomenon can be
mitigated by financial globalization, in part by raising expectations and demands among local
investors through exposure to better standards of governance. Kim, Sung and Wei (2006)
report some evidence that foreign investment has improved corporate governance in Korea.

Public governance, corruption

There is a nascent body of research on the linkage between financial globalization and public
governance (as measured by corruption, red tape, transparency of government policies etc.).
For example, poor public governance as measured by severity of bureaucratic corruption
discourages inward FDI (Wei, 2000a) while poor governance as measured by lack of
government transparency discourages portfolio equity inflows (Gelos and Wei, 2005).

O f course, public and corporate governance issues are deeply interconnected. Doidge,
Karolyi and Stulz (2005) explore the relative importance of country and firm characteristics
in explaining firm-level variations in corporate governance around the world. They find that,
for two out of their three measures of corporate governance, country characteristics explain
over seventy percent of the variation. This suggests that, without good overall public
governance, there is limited hope of improvements in corporate governance.

They also find, however, that listing on a stock exchange in a country with a substantially
better court system, less corrupt bureaucracy, and stricter disclosure requirements is one way
to “rent” good public governance in order to improve corporate governance. Doidge, Karolyi
and Stulz (2004) present some evidence that, when a foreign firm lists in the United States,
its value increases. This suggests that, by listing in the United States and subjecting itself to
U.S. laws and regulations, a foreign firm can make a credible commitment to better
governance practices, including protection of the rights of minority shareholders.

Political economy considerations enter into the picture as well, with financial integration
helping to shake loose power structures that allow certain groups to thwart reforms. Rajan
and Zingales (2003) propose an interest group theory wherein financial sector development is
obstructed by incumbents who could be hurt by the competition that it fosters. When an
economy allows cross-border trade and financial flows, it weakens incumbents’ opposition to
reforms and facilitates financial sector development. These authors find some support in the
cross-sectional and time-series dimensions of historical data to support this theory.

                                VIII.3 Macroeconomic Policies

We have already discussed how capital account liberalization might impose discipline on
macroeconomic policies since it increases the potential costs associated with weak policies
and enhances the benefits of good ones. Precisely because capital account liberalization
makes a country more vulnerable to sudden shifts in global investor sentiment, it can serve as
                                              - 38 -




a signal of commitment to better macroeconomic policies.42 Indeed, even skeptics of the
benefits of financial integration such as Stiglitz (2000) have accepted that this is likely to be
one of the most important potential benefits of capital account liberalization. Unfortunately,
while the empirical evidence is suggestive, it remains sparse.

Monetary and fiscal policies

The fact that the recent period of financial globalization has been marked by disinflationary
trends in virtually all economies around the world has led some authors to contend that
financial globalization improves monetary policy outcomes. Rogoff (2004) argues forcefully
that globalization has fostered rising competition in goods and labor markets (which reduces
price levels and also increases wage and price flexibility), thereby making the real effects of
unanticipated monetary policy actions smaller and more transitory. Consequently, there is
less incentive for central banks to pursue inflationary policies (and less incentive for
politicians to pressure them to do so).

In any event, financial openness appears to complicate monetary policy implementation in
developing countries (Wagner, 2002; and Hawkins, 2005). For instance, globalization
increases uncertainty about the output gap (more exposure to productivity shocks emanating
abroad), the inflation gap (through the effects of inflows on asset prices) and the monetary
transmission mechanism (central banks have less control over the operations of domestic
commercial banks). Whether these factors improve monetary policy outcomes is, however,
not clear, although the fact that so many emerging markets have successfully instituted more
independent, inflation-focused central banks, is quite noteworthy.

The very limited research on how globalization affects fiscal outcomes has been done mostly
by political scientists. For instance, using data on OECD countries for the period 1960-1994,
Garrett and Mitchell (2001) find some weak evidence that capital account openness may be
negatively associated with government consumption or spending. Kim (2003) finds some
evidence that capital account liberalization helps to reduce fiscal deficits. Unfortunately, such
papers typically use only de jure measures of capital account openness and rarely deal with
potential problems of spurious correlations, reverse causality, or endogeneity bias.

Tytell and Wei (2004) systematically examine the disciplining effect of capital flows on both
monetary and fiscal policies. They attempt to account for potential endogeneity of observed
capital flows in a given country with respect to macroeconomic policies in that country. They
find that countries with higher levels of financial openness are more likely to generate better

42
  See Bartolini and Drazen (1997), Tytell and Wei (2004) and Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006). Many
countries have in fact received significant capital inflows upon removing restrictions on outflows (see
Mathieson and Rojas-Suarez, 1993; Laban and Larrain, 1997). Rodrik (2001) and Tytell and Wei
(2004) note that the policy discipline effect would be weaker if international investment is driven by
herding, momentum trading, or other patterns of flows that are not related to economic fundamentals.
                                                - 39 -




monetary policy outcomes in terms of lower inflation. However, there is no evidence of a
systematic relationship between financial openness and better fiscal policies.

Choice of exchange rate regime

Openness to capital flows can have important implications for the tradeoffs among different
exchange rate regimes. We will, however, defer this discussion until Section IX, where we
will point to the fact that countries are much better able to handle international capital flows
if they either have a more flexible exchange rate regime or meet the extremely stringent pre-
conditions to sustain a peg.

                                          VIII.4 Implications

While we can hardly argue that the evidence that we have surveyed in this section is decisive,
it does consistently point to a role for international financial integration as a catalyst for
financial sector and institutional development, in line with our schematic view about the
channels through which financial globalization affects growth. Some evidence of a catalytic
role in improving macroeconomic policies is also present. Given the difficulties that we have
identified in interpreting the cross-country growth evidence, it is useful to see that financial
market integration seems to be operating through some of the indirect channels.
Before turning to the implications of this line of reasoning, we review the literature on a
closely-related matter--the main factors that affect the benefits and risks of financial
globalization.

              IX. Threshold Effects in the Outcomes of Financial Globalization

We turn now to a fuller discussion of four sets of structural and policy-related features that
appear to interact with financial globalization in important ways to determine the eventual
macroeconomic outcomes and also influence the short-run tradeoffs. This list includes
financial sector development, overall institutional quality, the macroeconomic policy
framework and trade integration.43 Each of these factors has in its own right been shown to
influence growth, but our interest here is in the narrower question of how they affect the
outcomes (in terms of growth and volatility) of financial integration. As we noted earlier,
there is a great deal of similarity between the list of collateral benefits of financial integration
and the list of threshold conditions that we discuss below. Indeed, this discussion highlights
the difficulties involved in trying to make strong causal statements about the effects of
financial integration.
43
  Another threshold effect, on which the literature is still rather limited, is related to human capital.
Borensztein, De Gregorio and Lee (1998) and Blonigen and Wang (2005) find that countries that
have more human capital get larger growth benefits from FDI. Xu (2000) finds that U.S.
multinational enterprises (MNEs) make a larger contribution to productivity growth in developed
countries than in developing ones; his interpretation is that, in order to benefit from technological
spillovers from MNEs, a country needs good human capital.
                                               - 40 -




      IX.1 Interaction between Financial Sector Development and Financial Integration

Financial sector development is a key determinant of the extent of growth and stability
benefits associated with financial globalization. It not only enhances the growth benefits but
also reduces vulnerability to crises, through both direct and indirect channels.44 Mishkin
(2006) emphasizes that inadequate or mismanaged domestic financial sector liberalizations
have been a major contributor to crises that may be associated with financial integration.

Evidence

Recent research provides empirical evidence supportive of the view that financial sector
development amplifies the growth benefits associated with FDI flows. Using a large sample
of developing countries over the period 1970-1995, Hermes and Lensink (2003) find that, in
order to enjoy the growth benefits of FDI, a threshold level of financial sector development is
a prerequisite. While more than half of the countries in their sample (mostly in Latin America
and Asia) appear to meet the necessary threshold, almost all of the countries in sub-Saharan
Africa, with their relatively weak financial systems, are below this level. Alfaro, Chanda,
Kalemli-Ozcan, and Sayek (2004) and Durham (2004) also find that the growth impact of
FDI is stronger in economies with well-developed financial sectors.45

Financial sector development also improves the growth benefits of equity flows. BHL find
that financial market development enhances the growth benefits of equity market
liberalizations. Oddly, however, their results are weaker when they use equity market
turnover rather than the ratio of private credit to GDP to measure financial development.

Another major benefit of financial sector development is its positive impact on
macroeconomic stability, which in turn has implications for the volume and composition of
capital flows. In theory, by expanding the scope of diversification possibilities, developed
financial markets moderate the effects of shocks and help reduce macroeconomic volatility.46

44
   Well-developed domestic financial markets are instrumental in efficiently allocating foreign
financial flows to competing investment projects (see Aoki, Benigno and Kiyotaki, 2006). Deep
domestic financial markets can also provide the necessary credit to local firms when they need
financing to take advantage of technological spillovers associated with FDI. Developed financial
markets enhance macroeconomic stability⎯an important determinant of the volume and composition
of foreign financial flows.
45
  In the sample of Alfaro et al., a one standard deviation increase in financial development (the ratio
of private sector credit to GDP) would raise the annual growth rate of a country receiving the mean
level of FDI inflows by 0.6 percentage points. Durham reports that an increase from the minimum to
the average (maximum) level of financial development in his sample is associated with a 0.4 (4.3)
percentage points increase in per capita GDP growth, for the average in-sample level of FDI flows.
46
 See Easterly, Islam, and Stiglitz (2001), Beck, Lundberg and Majnoni (2001), Denizer, Iyigun, and
Owen (2002), and Larrain (2004).
                                           - 41 -




Economic crises in emerging markets have repeatedly demonstrated the importance of deep
and well-supervised domestic financial markets during the process of financial integration.
Mishkin (2006) discusses how, after capital account liberalization, excessive risk taking by
domestic banks played a major role in triggering the financial crises in Mexico in 1994 and
many East Asian countries in 1997. Ishii et. al. (2002) document that countries with stronger
financial systems generally avoided crises following capital account liberalization. However,
countries with underdeveloped and poorly supervised financial markets suffered financial
crises after liberalizing their capital accounts. Sudden changes in the direction of capital
flows tend to induce or exacerbate boom-bust cycles in developing countries which lack deep
financial sectors that could help cope with the volatility of these flows (Caballero and
Krishnamurthy, 2001; Aghion and Banerjee, 2005).

          IX.2 The Role of Institutions and Governance in Driving Growth Benefits
                                    of Financial Integration

Institutional quality appears to play an important role in determining not just the outcomes of
financial integration but the level of de facto integration itself. Furthermore, institutional
quality also appears to have a strong influence on the composition of inflows into developing
economies, which is another channel through which it affects macroeconomic outcomes.

Klein (2005) finds evidence of a non-monotonic interaction between institutional quality and
the responsiveness of growth to capital account liberalization. Interestingly, he finds a
statistically significant and economically meaningful effect of capital account openness on
growth among countries that have better (but not the best) institutions. He notes a strong
correlation between institutional quality and income per capita, implying that countries that
get the most growth benefits from capital account liberalization are upper-middle-income
countries. Chanda (2005) finds that the cross-country relationship between capital controls
and growth depends on the degree of ethnic heterogeneity, which he interprets as a proxy for
rent-seeking and common pool problems. For countries with more heterogeneity (more
competing groups), capital controls lead to greater inefficiencies and lower growth.

Effects on levels of total flows

Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan and Volosovych (2006) analyze why capital doesn’t flow from rich to
poor countries, as predicted by neoclassical models. They conclude that institutional quality
is the most important factor determining capital flows to developing countries. Financial
globalization could even result in capital flows from poor (and poorly governed) countries to
rich ones. Collier, Hoeffler and Pattillo (2001) report regression results, based on data for the
1980s from 43 countries, that worsening governance is linked with a rise in capital flight.

Effects on levels of FDI and equity inflows

Governance and institutional indicators seem to have a quantitatively significant influence on
FDI inflows. Based on the distribution of U.S. multinational firms around the world, Hines
(1995) reports that American companies tend to invest less in destination countries where
                                               - 42 -




levels of corruption are higher. Using bilateral stocks of FDI from 12 OECD source countries
to 45 host countries, Wei (2000c) shows that countries’ corruption levels are negatively
associated with inward FDI. An increase in the corruption level from that of Singapore to that
of Russia has the same negative effect on FDI as raising the marginal corporate tax rate by as
much as 50 percentage points. Moreover, for any given level of corruption, less centralized
and more arbitrary types of corruption tend to discourage FDI even more strongly.
Better governance also appears to lead to more equity inflows. Based on country allocations
of over 300 international mutual funds, Gelos and Wei (2005) find that better institutions--
measured by high degrees of government and corporate transparency--attract more foreign
equity investment relative to the prediction of the international capital asset pricing model.

Effects on composition of inflows

There is a considerable body of evidence that institutions affect the structure of a country’s
capital inflows in a systematic way. This has important consequences since the composition
of inflows seems to have strong predictive power for currency crashes. In particular, the
share of FDI in a country’s total capital inflows is negatively associated with the probability
of a currency crisis (see, e.g., Frankel and Rose, 1996; Frankel and Wei, 2005). Other
dimensions of composition are the maturity structure of external debt (the greater the share of
short-term debt, the more likely a crisis), and the currency denomination of external debt (the
greater the share of foreign currency debt, the more likely a crisis).

Wei (2000a, 2000b, 2001) and Wei and Wu (2002) suggest that countries with better public
institutions are more likely to attract more direct investment relative to bank loans. These
authors provide evidence based on total inflows (based on data from the IMF’s Balance-of-
Payments Statistics) and bilateral flows from source to destination countries (based on
bilateral FDI data from the OECD and bilateral bank lending data from the BIS).

Faria and Mauro (2005) find that better institutional quality helps tilt a country’s capital
structure towards FDI and portfolio equity flows which, as noted earlier, tend to bring more
of the collateral benefits of financial integration. These authors find that, in a cross-section of
emerging markets and other developing countries, equity-like liabilities as a share of
countries’ total external liabilities (or as a share of GDP) are positively associated with
indicators of institutional quality.47




47
  Their measure of institutional quality is an average of six indicators—voice and accountability,
political stability and absence of violence, government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law,
and control of corruption—from Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2003). Faria and Mauro
instrument the institutional index using settler mortality (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001)
and ethno-linguistic fragmentation. The IV approach reaffirms their basic conclusion.
                                            - 43 -




Do institutions really tilt inflows towards FDI?

Hausmann and Fernandez-Arias (2000) provide a contrarian view on the determinants and
implications of the composition of flows to developing countries. They argue that countries
that are poorer, riskier, more volatile, less financially developed, and have weaker institutions
tend to attract less capital, but more of it in the form of FDI. Hence, a declining share of FDI
in the context of rising overall flows may be a good sign. Albuquerque (2003) argues that
financially constrained countries are likely to get more FDI than other types of flows since it
is harder to expropriate—not because it is more productive or intrinsically less volatile.
Using measures of creditworthiness and credit risk ratings as measures of financing
constraints, he finds some evidence in support of this hypothesis.

To reconcile the results of these two papers with those of other authors, it turns out to be
crucial to distinguish between two classes of institutions: (i) property rights institutions, as
proxied by control of corruption, control of expropriation risks, judicial independence, and
government transparency; and (ii) financial institutions, as represented by measures of stock
market and/or banking sector development, credit worthiness, and credit risk rating.

Ju and Wei (2006) provide a framework to think about how different institutions may affect
patterns of international capital flows. In their model, a developing country that is financially
underdeveloped would experience an exodus of domestic savings. However, because the
country has a low capital-to-labor ratio, multinational firms come in to take advantage of low
wage rates and high profit opportunities as they do not have to rely on inefficient local
financial institutions for financing. Thus, a country may simultaneously experience a large
FDI inflow and an outflow of domestic financial capital. By contrast, poor property rights
institutions could lead to an exodus of domestic savings but, by reducing profit opportunities
for both foreign and domestic firms, would not generate compensating inflows of FDI.

Viewed from this angle, Albuquerque’s (2003) finding of a negative association between
financial institutions and the share of FDI in total inflows as attributable to his focus on
financial development. Hausmann and Fernandez-Arias (2000) confound financial
development and property rights institutions, which is why they fail to find a clear-cut
relationship between institutions and the share of FDI in total inflows. It is also worth noting
that neither of these papers uses IV estimation to deal with potential endogeneity issues.

Re-examining how institutions affect the composition of capital inflows, but distinguishing
between property rights and financial institutions, Wei (2006) finds that weaker property
rights and higher levels of corruption do reduce the share of FDI in total foreign liabilities,
consistent with earlier papers. On the other hand, lower financial sector development is
associated with a higher share of FDI in total foreign liabilities.
                                              - 44 -




     IX.3 Why Do Macroeconomic Policies Affect the Outcomes of Financial Integration?

There is a large literature tying the quality of domestic macroeconomic policies to the level
and composition of inflows as well as vulnerability to crises.48 A number of papers focusing
on sequencing of liberalization argue that capital account liberalization is more likely to be
successful if it is implemented in an environment supported by sound fiscal, monetary, and
exchange rate policies (e.g., Eichengreen, 2000).

Ishii et. al.’s (2002) case study analysis underscores the importance of stable macroeconomic
policies for averting crises in countries with open capital accounts.49 Mody and Murshid
(2005) examine how policies affect the relationship between financial flows and domestic
investment growth in a larger dataset covering 60 countries over the period 1979-99 (they use
a composite variable of macroeconomic policy quality constructed by the World Bank). They
conclude that financial flows have a stronger impact on investment growth in countries with
better macro policies. In models of early warning systems, proxies for exchange rate and
monetary policies appear to be important for predicting financial crises.50

Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (2003) examine whether bad macroeconomic policies can
hurt growth. They are unable to find evidence to support this proposition. But they report
some evidence that is consistent with the importance of threshold effects in generating
positive growth effects of financial openness. These positive effects are present only when
macroeconomic imbalances that lead to inconsistencies between the administered exchange
rate and other policies have first been eliminated (i.e., if there is no large black market
premium). They find no evidence that the effects of capital account liberalization vary with
financial depth, but do find that its effects vary with the rule of law.
48
  The importance of macroeconomic policies is not uniformly accepted. Acemoglu, Johnson,
Robinson and Thaicharoen (2003) note that countries with high inflation, large budget deficits and
misaligned exchange rates do appear to have suffered more macroeconomic volatility (and posted
lower growth) during the postwar period. But they argue that weak macroeconomic policies are
symptoms of underlying institutional problems including the absence of institutions that restrain rent-
seeking political elites, ineffective enforcement of property rights, widespread corruption, and
political instability. Albouy (2006) has contested the consistency of the data underlying the
instrument—settler mortality—used by these authors for the institutional quality variable. Glaeser, La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2004) argue that the importance of institutions has been
overplayed and that the level of human capital may be a far more important determinant of growth.
49
  Austria and Hungary, for example, were able to avoid crises after they liberalized their capital
accounts since they had relatively stable macroeconomic policies. Mexico and Turkey ran into
difficulties in the mid-1990s after liberalizing their capital accounts since they had tightly managed
exchange rates for a prolonged period, along with uncertain policy settings and growing imbalances.
50
   See Berg, Borenzstein, and Patillo (2004). Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1995) show that these
issues are relevant for more advanced economies as well. Using quarterly panel data for 20 OECD
countries over the period 1959-1993, they document that high money and credit growth as well as
large deficits in current account and fiscal positions tend to raise the probability of devaluations.
                                           - 45 -




Exchange rate regime

Fixed exchange rate regimes in principle provide a transparent and credible monetary anchor,
an important consideration for many developing economies. But it comes at a significant
cost—the loss of monetary independence. The tradeoff between monetary stability and
independence is one where it is difficult to draw general prescriptive conclusions. What the
evidence does show is that an open capital account puts a greater burden on other policies
and structural features of the economy (e.g., product and labor market flexibility) to support a
fixed exchange rate. In particular, for economies with weak financial systems, an open
capital account and a fixed exchange rate regime are not an auspicious combination. Indeed,
there is a compelling case to be made that rigid exchange rate regimes can make a country
more vulnerable to crises when it opens its capital markets (Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1995). It
can be argued that, in the absence of de facto or de jure fixed rates, most of the crises of the
1990s, from Mexico to Asia to Russia to Brazil, might have been much less virulent, or
might even have been avoided entirely. Fischer (2001) also comes around to this conclusion.

The problems posed by fixed exchange rates for monetary independence has been
emphasized in the context of China by Eichengreen (2005) and Prasad, Rumbaugh and Wang
(2005). These authors argue that moving toward greater exchange rate flexibility would give
China some degree of monetary independence from the United States. But they note that
capital account liberalization should be a lower priority given the weak state of the domestic
banking system. Appendix I in the paper by Prasad, Rumbaugh and Wang surveys a number
of industrial and developing country experiences showing that the combination of capital
account liberalization and a fixed exchange rate regime have often ended in forced and messy
exits to more flexible exchange rate regimes.

However, the literature does not imply that fixed exchange rates are necessarily a problem
for countries that are at early stages of domestic financial development or that they are
inappropriate prior to international capital market liberalization. Husain, Mody and Rogoff
(2005) and Aghion, Bacchetta, Ranciere and Rogoff (2006) find that poorer developing
countries seem to enjoy faster growth and lower inflation with relatively fixed rates.

Using the de facto approach to classifying exchange rate regimes developed by Reinhart and
Rogoff (2004), Husain, Mody and Rogoff (2005) find that pegged exchange rate regimes
confer some advantages such as lower inflation upon developing countries that do not have
much exposure to international capital. For emerging markets, standard measures of
macroeconomic performance are not systematically associated with the nature of the
exchange rate regime, but the likelihood of financial crises is higher for countries with
pegged or nearly pegged exchange rates. Husain, Mody and Rogoff attribute the latter result
under a regime with “hard commitment” to the inability to adapt to changed circumstances,
the incentives of economic agents including entrepreneurs and financial intermediaries to
                                              - 46 -




undertake risky activities on the presumption that exchange rates will not change, and
speculative pressures from investors who seek to test the commitment.51

Wyplosz (2004) highlights the difficulties and risks associated with maintaining currency
pegs when the capital account is open. As a short-term strategy for developing economies, he
recommends a combination of a soft peg or managed exchange rate regime along with well-
designed limits on capital mobility. Maintaining either a free float or a hard peg along with
capital account openness requires a strong commitment to fostering good institutions,
especially with respect to financial market regulation and supervision.

     IX.4 Does the Level of Trade Openness Matter for the Effects of Financial Openness?

Trade integration appears to have a better cost-benefit tradeoff than financial integration. It
also reduces the probability of crises associated with financial openness and mitigates the
costs of such crises if they do occur. Thus, the recent literature strengthens the case made by
the old sequencing literature for putting trade liberalization ahead of financial integration.

Recent research shows how interactions between trade and financial integration could affect
macroeconomic outcomes. Trade integration reduces the likelihood of financial crises
associated with sudden stops and current account reversals. Less open economies have to
undergo larger real exchange rate depreciations for a given current account adjustment, face
more severe balance sheet effects stemming from these depreciations, and, as a result, are
more likely to default on their debt obligations. This creates a link between the probability of
sudden stops and the likelihood of default, implying that more open economies are less
vulnerable to sudden stops because of their lower probability of default.

Is the impact of trade openness on the likelihood of sudden stops empirically important?
Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia (2004) show that trade openness indeed makes countries less
vulnerable to financial crises, including sudden stops and currency crashes; controlling for
the endogeneity of trade strengthens this effect. Frankel and Cavallo (2004) and Cavallo
(2005) report similar findings. They conclude that a 10 percentage point increase in trade
openness reduces the probability of a sudden stop by about 30 percent.52

Some papers argue that trade integration should play an important role in mitigating the
adverse growth effects of financial crises and in facilitating recoveries from crises. The real
costs of financial crises depend on the degree of openness of an economy since less open
economies have to go through larger contractions of aggregate demand and/or larger changes

51
  These authors also find that that banking crises are more likely under rigid exchange rate regimes.
They note that this result is opposite to that of Ghosh, Gulde and Wolf (2003) and trace the
differences to the latter authors’ use of a de jure exchange rate regime classification.
52
  For a more detailed analysis of the causes and effects of sudden stops, see Mendoza (2006) and
references therein.
                                               - 47 -




to the real exchange rate change in order to adjust to large shocks. Trade integration could
help a developing economy to export its way out of a recession since a given exchange rate
depreciation would have a larger impact on its export revenues than in a less open
economy.53 Export revenues could also help service external debt, which is quite substantial
in a number of developing countries. These predictions are supported by recent empirical
research showing that, among countries that have experienced sudden stops and current
account reversals, those that are more open to trade suffer smaller adverse growth effects.54

While trade integration can apparently proceed well even in the absence of financial
integration, financial integration in the absence of trade integration could lead to a
misallocation of resources. Eichengreen (2001) notes that, under these circumstances, capital
inflows may be directed to sectors in which a country doesn’t have a comparative advantage.

Indeed, trade integration in general seems to be less risky than financial integration. Martin
and Rey (2006) highlight this point in a model in which trade integration has a positive
growth effect, but financial integration can lead to asset price crashes and financial crises.
While earlier models in the literature point to various types of market failures--including
credit constraints and moral hazard problems--as the main culprits of financial crises, these
authors argue that costs associated with international trade in goods and assets alone could
increase the vulnerability of developing countries to financial crises.55 The model has a clear
implication—consistent with the received wisdom—that developing countries should
liberalize trade in goods before trade in financial assets.

                IX.5 Threshold Effects and Composition of Inflows: A Summary

Our discussion of the factors that improve the cost-benefit calculus of financial globalization
indicates that there are some basic supporting conditions—thresholds—that determine where
on the continuum of potential costs and benefits a country ends up. As described in the sub-
sections above, the literature has emphasized threshold effects in different dimensions and
there is as yet no unified framework to think about the relative importance of each of these

53
  Calvo and Talvi (2005) argue that this is why the collapse of capital flows to Argentina and Chile
in the 1990s had a smaller impact on Chile. Kose, Meredith, and Towe (2004) analyze the impact of
NAFTA and argue that trade integration has made the Mexican economy more resilient to shocks and
contributed to its faster recovery from the 1994–95 peso crisis than from the 1982 debt crisis.
54
   See Edwards (2004, 2005), Desai and Mitra (2004), and Guidotti, Sturzenegger and Villar (2004).
Edwards (2005) reports that a decline in trade openness by roughly 30 percentage points increases the
negative effect of a current account reversal on growth by approximately 1.2 percentage points. He
finds that capital account restrictiveness, on the other hand, does not affect the intensity with which
current account reversals affect real economic activity. He also shows that capital account restrictions
do not affect the probability of experiencing current account reversals in the first place.
55
  Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001) emphasize the importance of frictions related to trade costs (broadly
defined) for explaining a number of puzzles in international macroeconomics.
                                              - 48 -




individual thresholds and what sort of tradeoffs there might be among these thresholds in
terms of prioritization for a country that wants to seek the benefits of financial globalization
without exposing itself to too much risk.56

An alternative way of posing the question about thresholds is to ask if there is any direct
evidence that capital account openness is bad for growth in countries with underdeveloped
financial markets, weak institutions or severe macroeconomic imbalances. For instance,
Eichengreen (2001) conjectures that capital account liberalization can be counterproductive if
it takes place before severe policy-related distortions have been removed and before domestic
financial markets, institutions and administrative capacity are strong enough to ensure that
capital inflows can be channeled productively. Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (2003) look
at this question explicitly and, somewhat comfortingly, find no evidence to support this
proposition. But, as noted earlier, their results do confirm the importance of threshold effects
in generating positive growth effects of financial openness.

A different threshold is related to the level of integration itself. Industrial economies, which
are far more integrated into global financial markets are clearly able to do better than
emerging markets in terms of using international capital flows to efficiently allocate capital,
using it to generate TFP gains and share income risk. Does this mean that the only hope for
developing countries to realize the full benefits is to attain high levels of financial integration
similar to that of industrial economies and that the risks en route are unavoidable? After all,
if the short-term costs take the form of crises, they could have persistent negative effects that
detract from the long-term growth benefits. Furthermore, the distributional effects associated
with these short-term consequences can be particularly painful for low-income countries.

Some comfort may still be provided by a newly developing literature on how globalization
affects the relationship between growth and volatility. While macroeconomic volatility does
have a negative effect on growth, this relationship is attenuated for more open economies
(Kose, Prasad and Terrones, 2005, 2006a). That is, economies that are more open to trade
and financial flows are able to tolerate higher levels of volatility--other things being equal--
than less open economies, without this volatility having an adverse effect on growth.57

56
  There isn’t a consensus, however, on the importance of threshold effects. Edison, Levine, Ricci,
and Slok (2004) are unable to show that financial integration has a larger growth impact in countries
with more developed financial markets and better macroeconomic policies and institutions.
57
   Ramey and Ramey (1995), Aghion and Banerjee (2005), and Aizenman and Pinto (2006) document
the negative relationship between growth and volatility. Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2005, 2006a)
confirm this result for the recent period of globalization. However, they find that the unconditional
relationship between growth and volatility is positive for industrial economies. For emerging market
economies, this relationship is negative before trade and financial liberalization and weakly positive
after liberalizations have taken place in both dimensions. Formal econometric analysis shows that the
negative growth-volatility relationship is weakened by trade openness and financial openness,
although the result for financial openness is weaker and less robust than that for trade openness.
                                            - 49 -




Furthermore, some of the collateral benefits generated by financial integration, including
macroeconomic discipline and financial market development, could also reduce volatility.

                                   X. Concluding Remarks

We conclude by highlighting our main findings and then note some areas where we think
future research could have significant payoffs.

Main findings

Measuring the extent of a country’s integration into global financial markets is an important
but complicated issue. In particular, the distinction between de jure and de facto integration
appears to matter a great deal in understanding the macroeconomic implications of financial
globalization. The basic problem with de jure measures that capture legal and regulatory
restrictions on capital flows is that implementation and enforcement differs so greatly across
countries as to make international comparisons dubious. Thus, although most empirical
papers analyzing the effects of financial integration rely on de jure measures of openness, de
facto integration measures may be more relevant for analyzing the direct and indirect benefits
associated with financial globalization.

It is notable that, whereas the majority of cross-country empirical studies are unable to find
robust evidence in support of the growth benefits of capital account liberalization, studies
that use measures of de facto integration or finer measures of de jure integration tend to find
more positive results. At the same time, using either approach, there is little systematic
evidence that capital account liberalization by itself increases vulnerability to financial crises.

The composition of capital inflows has a substantial influence on the growth benefits of
financial globalization for developing countries, although the evidence is far from decisive.
Studies based on both macroeconomic and microeconomic (industry- or firm-level) data find
that equity market liberalizations have positive effects on output growth. Interestingly,
despite the general consensus that foreign direct investment (FDI) is the form of capital
inflows most likely to spin off positive growth benefits, these benefits are harder to detect in
aggregate data than is the case for equity flows. Fortunately, recent work using micro data is
starting to confirm that FDI flows do have significantly positive effects on output and
productivity growth, especially through spillover effects associated with vertical linkages.
Overall, studies using micro data are better able to detect the growth and productivity gains
stemming from financial integration as well as the distortionary effects of capital controls.

In addition to the traditional channels such as efficient allocation of capital and expanded
international risk-sharing opportunities, the growth and stability benefits of financial
globalization are also realized through a broad set of “collateral benefits”—financial market
development, better institutions and governance, and macroeconomic discipline. These
collateral benefits affect growth and stability dynamics indirectly, implying that the
associated macroeconomic gains may not be fully evident in the short run and may be
difficult to uncover in cross-country regressions.
                                            - 50 -




Various threshold effects play important roles in shaping the macroeconomic outcomes of
financial globalization. Some key thresholds are related to the level of development of
domestic financial markets, the quality of institutions and corporate governance, the nature of
macroeconomic policies (including the exchange rate regime), and the extent of openness to
trade. Recent research suggests that countries meeting these threshold conditions are better
able to reap the growth and stability benefits of financial globalization.

Issues for further research

Our synthesis of the literature on financial globalization, while offering a guardedly positive
overall assessment, points to some major complications during the transition from low to
high levels of financial integration. For developing countries, financial globalization appears
to have the potential to play a catalytic role in generating an array of collateral benefits that
may help boost long-run growth and welfare. At the same time, premature opening of the
capital account in the absence of some basic supporting conditions can delay the realization
of these benefits, while making a country more vulnerable to sudden stops of capital flows.
Still, we see this as a fundamental tension between the costs and benefits of financial
globalization that may be difficult to avoid.

The collateral benefits perspective presented in this paper does suggest a way for moving
forward on capital account liberalization. If one can identify which reform priorities are the
key ones for a particular country, then one can design an approach to capital account
liberalization that could generate specific benefits while minimizing the associated risks.
However, further research is clearly needed in a number of areas before one can derive strong
policy conclusions about the specifics of such an approach.

First, it is imperative to extend the research program on measuring financial openness.
Additional work on constructing measures that line up with theoretical notions of what
integration means would be useful. Understanding the specific channels through which
different types of inflows affect growth dynamics would also be an important step in
evaluating their relative benefits.

Research on many of the potential collateral benefits of financial globalization is still in its
infancy but is growing rapidly. The links between certain aspects of open capital accounts
(e.g., unrestricted foreign bank entry) and domestic financial sector development have been
analyzed extensively, but evidence on other indirect benefits is limited. In particular, despite
the existence of a theoretical literature positing a link between financial globalization and
governance (both public and corporate), the empirical literature remains sparse.

It is clear from the discussion here that the benefits of financial openness should be more
apparent in terms of the effects on TFP growth, since per capita income growth depends also
on physical and human capital accumulation. Empirical evidence on how different types of
flows affect productivity growth would be an integral part of the research agenda on financial
openness. Another promising research avenue is a more detailed analysis of threshold
                                           - 51 -




effects—especially the relative importance of different threshold conditions and the tradeoffs
among them for a country contemplating liberalization of its capital account.

A key theme that comes out of our survey of existing empirical studies is that macro-level
data often do not, and perhaps cannot, offer definitive answers about the effects of financial
globalization. Further research based on industry- and firm-level data as well as event and
case studies may provide useful corroborative evidence and, often, more informative insights
about the channels through which these effects operate. In the meantime, we should
recognize that some of the more extreme polemic claims made about the effects of financial
globalization on developing countries, both pro and con, are far less easy to substantiate than
either side generally cares to admit.
                                          - 52 -




                               Appendix I: Capital Controls

As we discuss in the text, a number of papers in the literature use de jure measures of
financial openness that are mostly based on the extent of various forms of capital controls.
This appendix provides some basic information about de jure capital controls and their
measurement in practice. We first analyze the main categories of capital controls. Next, we
discuss how detailed capital control measures are presented in the main data sources and
explain how these measures are utilized in empirical studies. We conclude with a brief
discussion about the overlap between capital controls and prudential measures.

Capital Controls: Direct versus Indirect Controls

Controls on capital account transactions can be studied under two main categories: direct (or
administrative) controls and indirect (market-based) controls. Direct controls are associated
with administrative measures, such as direct prohibitions, explicit limits on the volume of
transactions, or approval procedures to limit capital account transactions. These controls
often aim at restricting the volume of financial flows.

Indirect (or market-based) capital controls include dual or multiple exchange rate systems,
explicit or implicit taxation of cross-border financial flows (e.g., Tobin taxes), and other--
mainly price-based--measures. While these measures primarily affect the price of a financial
transaction, they could also affect the volume (see Ariyoshi et. al., 2000).

Measuring Capital Controls

Capital control measures in most of the studies discussed in the text are based on the
information provided by the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
Restrictions (AREAER). Since 1996, the AREAER publishes detailed descriptions about
exchange rate policies, arrangements for payments and receipts, and controls on capital
transactions of each member country of the IMF. The publication also includes a summary
table of codes about the features of exchange rate arrangements and regulatory frameworks
for current and capital account transactions. The main categories relating to exchange rate
arrangements and regulatory frameworks for current account transactions are as follows
(these are drawn from the compilation guide of the 2005 AREAER):

•   Exchange rate arrangements: Various categories of arrangements, including regimes such
       as pegged exchange rate, crawling band, and independently floating rates.
•   Exchange rate structure: Dual vs. multiple exchange rates.
•   Arrangements for payments and receipts: Bilateral and regional arrangements for
       international payments and receipts; controls on exports and imports of gold and
       banknotes.
•   Resident/Nonresident accounts: Regulations about the nature and operation of different
       types of accounts.
                                            - 53 -




•   Imports and import payments/Exports and export proceeds: Restrictions on the nature and
       extent of exchange and trade restrictions on imports/Restrictions on the use of export
       proceeds, as well as regulations on exports.
•   Payments for (Proceeds from) invisible transactions and current transfers: Procedures and
       regulations governing a wide set of payments, such as trade- and investment-related
       payments, and repatriation requirements from various transactions and transfers.

In addition, the summary table provides information about controls and provisions involving
capital account transactions in the following 13 categories:

•   Capital market securities: Shares and other securities of a participating nature, and bonds
       and other securities with an original maturity of more than one year.
•   Money market instruments: Securities with an original maturity of one year or less, such
       as certificates of deposit and bills of exchange.
•   Collective investment securities: Share certificates and registry entries or other evidence
       of investor interest in an institution for collective investment, such as mutual funds
       and investment trusts.
•   Derivatives and other instruments: Refers to operations in other negotiable instruments
       and nonsecuritized claims not covered under the subsections above.
•   Commercial credits: Covers operations directly linked to international trade transactions
       or with the rendering of international services.
•   Financial credits: Includes credits other than commercial credits granted by all residents,
       including banks, to nonresidents, or vice versa.
•   Guarantees, sureties, and financial backup facilities: Includes those provided by residents
       to nonresidents and vice versa. Also includes securities pledged for payment of a
       contract, such as warrants, performance bonds, and letters of credit.
•   Direct investment: Refers to investments for the purpose of establishing lasting economic
       relations both abroad by residents and domestically by nonresidents.
•   Liquidation of direct investment: Refers to the transfer of principal, including the initial
       capital and capital gains, of a direct investment defined above.
•   Real estate transactions: Refers to the acquisition of real estate not associated with direct
       investment, including, for example, investments of a purely financial nature in real
       estate or the acquisition of real estate for personal use.
•   Personal capital transactions: Transfers initiated on behalf of private persons and
       intended to benefit other private persons, e.g., gifts, endowments, loans, inheritances.
•   Provisions specific to commercial banks and other credit institutions: Describes
       regulations that are specific to these institutions, such as monetary, prudential
       controls, and foreign exchange controls.
•   Provisions specific to institutional investors: Describes controls specific to institutions
       such as insurance companies and pension funds, such as a limit on the share of the
       institution’s portfolio that may be held in foreign assets.

Since most of the de jure based studies we cite draw on the AREAER issues published before
1996, it is important to note that the coverage in prior years was similar in scope, but less
                                           - 54 -




detailed.58 For example, before 1996, the summary table of codes presented information
about restrictions involving payments, exports and imports in only six categories:

•    Restrictions on payments on capital account transactions
•    Restrictions on payments for current account transactions
•    Bilateral payments arrangements with members and nonmembers
•    Import surcharges
•    Advance imports deposits
•    Surrender/repatriation requirements for export proceeds

The information in the AREAER has been used to produce various de jure measures of
financial openness (see Edison et. al., 2004). Most of the studies first produce a binary
measure of financial openness based on the information in the line labeled “Restrictions of
payments on capital account transactions” in the summary table. This binary measure is then
used to generate a “share” variable measuring the proportion of years in which countries had
no restrictions on payments on capital accounts (see Grilli and Milessi-Ferretti, 1995 and
Rodrik, 1998). Other studies consider more comprehensive de jure measures by analyzing the
information content of other lines in the AREAER involving restrictions on payments on
current account transactions, exchange rate arrangements, and surrender requirements of
export proceeds in addition to restrictions on payments on capital account transactions (see
Chinn and Ito, 2005). Instead of just relying on the summary table, some others construct
measures by translating the information content of the narrative descriptions in the AREAER
into binary variables (see Quinn, 1997). As we discuss in the text, there are advantages and
disadvantages associated with each of these measures.

Capital Controls and Prudential Measures

In addition to the long-list of problems involving de jure measures that are discussed in the
text, a further complication is that these measures are unable to capture the full extent of
controls since they do not necessarily differentiate a prudential measure from a capital
control even though some prudential policies could effectively restrict capital flows (see Ishii
et. al., 2002). For example, prudential measures such as reserve and deposit requirements,
maturity restrictions, reporting requirements, limits on the use of derivatives can be
considered capital controls under certain circumstances. Some prudential measures include
treating deposit accounts held by residents and nonresidents differently by imposing
discriminatory reserve requirements and interest rate controls. Reporting requirements for
specific transactions are also employed to monitor and control capital movements (e.g.,
derivative transactions, non-trade-related transactions with nonresidents).



58
  Miniane (2004) extends the summary measures of disaggregated capital controls in the AREAER’s
post-1996 format back to 1983 for a small group of countries.
                                          - 55 -




                                       Data Appendix

This appendix lists the countries included in the analysis and also indicates the acronyms
used for each country. The full sample of 71 countries is divided into three groups.59

Advanced Economies

The 21 advanced industrial economies in our sample are Australia (AUS), Austria (AUT),
Belgium (BEL), Canada (CAN), Denmark (DNK), Finland (FIN), France (FRA), Germany
(DEU), Greece (GRC), Ireland (IRL), Italy (ITA), Japan (JPN), Netherlands (NLD), New
Zealand (NZL), Norway (NOR), Portugal (PRT), Spain (ESP), Sweden (SWE), Switzerland
(CHE), United Kingdom (GBR) and the United States (USA).

Emerging Market Economies

This group includes 20 countries--Argentina (ARG), Brazil (BRA), Chile (CHL), China
(CHN), Colombia (COL), Egypt (EGY), India (IND), Indonesia (IDN), Israel (ISR), Korea
(KOR), Malaysia (MYS), Mexico (MEX), Pakistan (PAK), Peru (PER), Philippines (PHL),
Singapore (SGP), South Africa (ZAF), Thailand (THA), Turkey (TUR) and Venezuela
(VEN).

Other Developing Economies

This group has 30 countries--Algeria (DZA), Bangladesh (BGD), Bolivia (BOL), Cameroon
(CMR), Costa Rica (CRI), Dominican Republic (DOM), Ecuador (ECU), El Salvador (SLV),
Fiji (FJI), Ghana (GHA), Guatemala (GTM), Honduras (HND), Iran (IRN), Jamaica (JAM),
Kenya (KEN), Malawi (MWI), Mauritius (MUS), Nepal (NPL), Niger (NER), Papua New
Guinea (PNG), Paraguay (PRY), Senegal (SEN), Sri Lanka (LKA), Tanzania (TZA), Togo
(TGO), Trinidad and Tobago (TTO), Tunisia (TUN), Uruguay (URY), Zambia (ZMB) and
Zimbabwe (ZWE).




59
  For presentational reasons, in Figures 5 and 6 we excluded the following countries that were
outliers: United Kingdom (GBR), Netherlands (NLD), Belgium (BEL), Singapore (SGP), Switzerland
(CHE), Ireland (IRL), Zambia (ZMB), and China (CHN). Inclusion of outliers did not change our
qualitative findings.
                                         - 56 -




                                       References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 1997, “Was Prometheus Unbound by Chance?
     Risk, Diversification, and Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, No. 4
     (August), pp. 709–51.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, 2001, “The Colonial Origins of
     Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic
     Review, Vol. 91, pp. 1369-1401.
———, and Yunyong Tchaicharoen, 2003, “Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic
   Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50,
   No. 1 (January), pp. 49–123.
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, Romain Ranciere and Kenneth Rogoff, 2006,
      “Exchange Rate Volatility and Productivity Growth: The Role of Financial
      Development,” NBER Working Paper No. 12117 (Cambridge, Massachusetts:
      National Bureau of Economic Research).
Aghion, Philippe, and Abhijit Banerjee, 2005, Volatility and Growth: Clarendon Lectures in
      Economics (Oxford University Press).
Aitken, Brian J., and Ann E. Harrison, 1999, “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct
       Foreign Investment? Evidence from Venezuela,” American Economic Review, Vol.
       89, No. 3 (June), pp. 605–18.
Aizenman, Joshua, and Brian Pinto eds., 2006, Managing Economic Volatility and Crisis
      (Cambridge University Press).
Aizenman, Joshua, and Ilan Noy, 2006, “Links Between Trade and Finance—A
      Disaggregated Analysis,” in Strengthening Global Financial Markets, (Inter-
      American Seminar on Economics) in December 2005, ed. by Sebastian Edwards and
      Márcio G. P. Garcia (Forthcoming from The University of Chicago Press).
Albouy, David, 2006, “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: A
      Reinvestigation of the Settler Mortality Data,” American Economic Review,
      Forthcoming.
Albuquerque, Rui, 2003, “The Composition of International Capital Flows: Risk Sharing
      Through Foreign Direct Investment,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 61,
      No. 2, pp. 353–83.
———, Norman Loayza, and Luis Servén, 2005, “World Market Integration Through the
   Lens of Foreign Direct Investors,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 66, No.
   2 (July), pp. 267–95.
Alesina, Alberto, Vittorio Grilli, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 1994, “The Political
       Economy of Capital Controls,” in Capital Mobility: The Impact on Consumption,
       Investment, and Growth, ed. by Leonardo Leiderman and Assaf Razin (Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press for CEPR).
                                         - 57 -




Alfaro, Laura, and Eliza Hammel, 2006, “Capital Flows and Capital Goods,” manuscript,
        Harvard Business School.
Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek, 2004, “FDI and
        Economic Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets,” Journal of International
        Economics, Vol. 64, No. 1 (October), pp. 89–112.
———, 2006, “How Does Foreign Direct Investment Promote Economic Growth? Financial
   Markets as a Catalyst for Linkages,” Manuscript, Harvard Business School.
Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych, 2006, “Capital Flows in a
        Globalized World: The Role of Policies and Institutions,” presented at the Capital
        Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and
        Consequences in December 2004, ed. by Sebastian Edwards (forthcoming from The
        University of Chicago Press).
Alfaro, Laura, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, 2004, “Multinationals and Linkages: An
        Empirical Investigation,” Economía, Vol. 4, No. 2 (Spring), pp. 113–70.
Aoki, Kosuke, Gianluca Benigno and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2005, “Adjusting to Capital
       Account Liberalization, Working Paper, London School of Economics.
Ariyoshi, Akira, Karl Friedrich Habermeier, Andrei Ki, Jorge Iván Canales Kriljenko, and
       Inci Ötker, 2000, "Capital Controls: Country Experiences with Their Use and
       Liberalization," IMF Occasional Papers 190 (Washington: International Monetary
       Fund).
Arteta, Carlos, Barry Eichengreen, and Charles Wyplosz, 2003, “When Does Capital
        Account Liberalization Help More than It Hurts?” in Economic Policy in the
        International Economy: Essays in Honor of Assaf Razin, ed. by Elhanan Helpman and
        Efraim Sadka (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Aykut, Dilek, and Selin Sayek, 2005, “The Role of the Sectoral Composition of Foreign
       Direct Investment on Growth” (unpublished; Washington: World Bank).
Bailliu, Jeannine, 2000, “Private Capital Flows, Financial Development, and Economic
        Growth in Developing Countries,” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2000–15
        (Ontario, Canada: Bank of Canada).
Bakker, Bas, and Bryan Chapple, 2002, “Advanced Country Experiences with Capital
      Account Liberalization,” IMF Occasional Paper No. 214 (Washington: International
      Monetary Fund).
Balasubramanyam, V.N., M. Salisu, and David Sapsford, 1996, Economic Journal, “Foreign
       Direct Investment and Growth in EP and IS Countries,” Vol. 106, No. 434 (January),
       pp. 92–105.
Baldwin, Robert E., 2004, “Openness and Growth: What’s the Empirical Relationship?” in
      Challenges to Globalization: Analyzing the Economics, ed. by Robert E. Baldwin and
      L. Alan Winters (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press).
                                          - 58 -




Barlevy, Gadi, 2004, “The Cost of Business Cycles under Endogenous Growth,” American
       Economic Review, vol. 94, issue 4, pages 964-990.
Bartolini, Leonardo, and Allan Drazen, 1997, “Capital-Account Liberalization as a Signal,”
       American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 1 (March), pp. 138–54.
Beck, Thorsten, Mattias Lundberg, and Giovanni Majnoni, 2001, “Financial Intermediary
       Development and Growth Volatility: Do Intermediaries Dampen or Magnify
       Shocks?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2707.
Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell R. Harvey, 2000, “Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity
       Markets,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 55, No. 2 (April), pp. 565–613.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey,and Christian Lundblad, 2001, “Emerging Equity
       Markets and Economic Development,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 66,
       No. 2 (December),pp. 465–504.
———, 2005, “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?” Journal of Financial
   Economics, Vol. 77, No. 1 (July), pp. 3–55.
———, 2006 “Growth Volatility and Equity Market Liberalization," Journal of
   International Money and Finance, forthcoming.
Berg, Andrew, Eduardo Borensztein, and Catherine Pattillo, 2004, “Assessing Early Warning
       Systems: How Have They Worked in Practice?” IMF Working Paper 04/52
       (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Bhagwati, Jagdish, 1998, 'The Capital Myth. The Difference between Trade in Widgets and
     Dollars,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 7-12.
Blalock, Garrick, and Paul J. Gertler, 2005, “Foreign Direct Investment and Externalities:
       The Case for Public Intervention,” in Does Foreign Investment Promote
       Development? ed. by Theodore H. Moran, Edward M. Graham, and Magnus
       Blomström (Washington: Institute for International Economics Center for Global
       Development).
Blankenau, William F. Ayhan Kose and Kei-Mu Yi, 2001, “Can Real World Interest Rates
      Explain Business Cycles in Small Open Economies?” Journal of Economic Dynamics
      and Control, Vol. 25, pp. 867-89.
Blonigen, Bruce A., and Miao Grace Wang, 2005, “Inappropriate Pooling of Wealthy and
       Poor Countries in Empirical FDI Studies,” in Does Foreign Investment Promote
       Development? ed. by Theodore H. Moran, Edward M. Graham, and Magnus
       Blomström (Washington: Institute for International Economics).
Bonfiglioli, Alessandra, 2006, “Financial Integration, Productivity and Capital
       Accumulation,” Manuscript (Barcelona, Spain: Universitat Pompeu Fabra).
———, and Caterina Mendicino, 2004, “Financial Liberalization, Banking Crises and
   Growth: Assessing the Links,” Working Paper Series in Economics and Finance 567,
   Stockholm School of Economics.
                                         - 59 -




Bordo, Michael D., and Thomas Helbling, 2003, “Have National Business Cycles Become
       More Synchronized?” NBER Working Paper No: 10130 (Cambridge, MA: National
       Bureau for Economic Research).
Bordo, Michael, Alan M. Taylor and Jeffrey G. Williamson, 2003, Globalization in
       Historical Perspective, University of Chicago Press for the NBER, Chicago 2003.
Borensztein, Eduardo, José De Gregorio, and Jong-Wha Lee, 1998, “How Does Foreign
      Direct Investment Affect Growth?” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 45
      (June), pp. 115–35.
Bosworth, Barry P., and Susan M. Collins, 1999, “Capital Flows to Developing Economies:
      Implications for Saving and Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 1,
      Brookings Institution.
———, 2003, “The Empirics of Growth: An Update,” Brookings Papers on Economic
   Activity: 2, Brookings Institution.
Buch, Claudia M., Jörg Döpke, and Christian Pierdzioch, 2005, “Financial Openness and
       Business Cycle Volatility,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 24, pp.
       744–65.
Bussiere, Matthieu, and Marcel Fratzscher, 2004, “Financial Openness and Growth: Short-
       run Gain, Long-run pain?” ECB Working Paper No. 348.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2001, “International and Domestic
       Collateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of Monetary
       Economics, Vol. 48, No. 3 (December), pp. 513-48.
Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi, 2006, “Phoenix Miracles in
       Emerging Markets: Recovering without Credit from Systemic Financial Crises,”
       NBER Working Paper No. 12101 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
       Research).
Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejía, 2004, "On the Empirics of
       Sudden Stops: the Relevance of Balance-sheet Effects," Proceedings, Federal
       Reserve Bank of San Francisco, issue Jun.
Calvo, Guillermo, and Ernesto Talvi, 2005, “Sudden Stop, Financial Factors, and Economic
       Collapse in Latin America: Learning from Argentina and Chile,” NBER Working
       Paper No. 11153 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Caselli, Francesco, 2005, “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences.” in Handbook
        of Economic Growth ed. by Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf (The Netherlands:
        Elsevier Science), pp. 679-741.
Carkovic, Maria, and Ross Levine, 2005, “Does Foreign Direct Investment Accelerate
      Economic Growth?” in Does Foreign Investment Promote Development? ed. by
      Theodore H. Moran, Edward M. Graham, and Magnus Blomström (Washington:
      Institute for International Economics Center for Global Development), pp. 195-220.
                                           - 60 -




Cavallo, Eduardo A., 2005, “Output Volatility and Openness to Trade: A Reassessment,”
       Manuscript, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University (Cambridge, MA).
Chanda, Areendam, 2005, “The Influence of Capital Controls on Long Run Growth: Where
      and How Much?” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 77, pp. 441-66.
Chari, Anusha, and Peter Blair Henry, 2004, “Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence From
       a Natural Experiment,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 59, No. 3 (June), pp. 1295–324.
———, 2005, “Firm-Specific Information and the Efficiency of Investment,” Working Paper
   (Michigan: University of Michigan).
Choe, Jong Il, 2003, “Do Foreign Direct Investment and Gross Domestic Investment
       Promote Economic Growth?” Review of Development Economics, Vol. 7, No. 1
       (February), pp. 44–57.
Chinn, Menzie, and Hiro Ito, 2005, “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital
       Controls, Institutions and Interactions,” (forthcoming), Journal of Development
       Economics.
Claessens, Stijn, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Harry Huizinga, 2001, “How Does Foreign Entry
       Affect Domestic Banking Markets?” Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 25, No. 5
       (May), pp. 891–911.
Claessens, Stijn, and Luc Laeven, 2004, “What Drives Bank Competition? Some
       International Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol: 36, No. 3, pp.
       563-583.
Clarke, George R. G., Robert Cull, Martinez Peria, Maria Soledad and Susana M. Sanchez,
       2003, “Foreign Bank Entry: Experience, Implications for Developing Economies, and
       Agenda for Further Research,” World Bank Research Observer, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp.
       25-59.
Collier, Paul, Anke Hoeffler and Catherine Pattillo, 2001, “Flight capital as a portfolio
        choice,” World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 55-80.
Collins, Susan M., 2005, “Comments on “Financial Globalization, Growth and Volatility in
       Developing Countries,” by Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and
       M. Ayhan Kose,” forthcoming in Globalization and Poverty, ed. by Ann Harrison.
Cornelius, Peter K., and Bruce Kogut, eds., 2003, Corporate Governance and Capital Flows
       in a Global Economy (U.S.: Oxford University Press).
Crucini, Mario J., 1997, “Country Size and Economic Fluctuations,” Review of International
       Economics, Vol. 5, No. 2 (May), pp. 204-20.
De Mello, Luiz, 1999, “Foreign Direct Investment-Led Growth: Evidence from Time Series
      and Panel Data,” Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 51, No. 1 (January), pp. 133–51.
                                          - 61 -




Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache, 1999, “Financial Liberalization and Financial
      Fragility,” in B. Pleskovic and J.E. Stiglitz, eds, Annual World Bank Conference on
      Development Economics 1998, (Washington: World Bank).
Denizer, Cevdet, Murat F. Iyigun, and Ann L. Owen, 2002, “Finance and Macroeconomic
       Volatility,” Contributions to Macroeconomics, Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 7.
Desai, Mihir, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., 2004, “Capital Controls, Liberalizations
       and Foreign Direct Investment,” NBER Working Paper No. 10337 (Cambridge, MA:
       National Bureau of Economic Research).
Desai, Padma, and Pritha Mitra, 2004, “Why Do Some Countries Recover More Readily
       from Financial Crises?” paper presented at the IMF Conference in honor of Guillermo
       A. Calvo, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., April.
Detragiache, Enrica, Gupta, Poonam, and Tressel, Thierry, 2006, “Foreign Banks in Poor
       Countries: Theory and Evidence,” IMF Working Papers06/18 (Washington:
       International Monetary Fund).
Diamond, Douglas, and Raghuram Rajan, 2001, “Banks, Short term Debt, and Financial
      Crises: Theory, Policy Implications, and Applications,” Proceedings of Carnegie
      Rochester Series on Public Policy 54, pp. 37-71.
Djankov, Simeon, and Bernard Hoekman, 2000, “Foreign Investment and Productivity
      Growth in Czech Enterprises,” World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 14, No. 1
      (January), pp. 49-64.
Doidge, C., Andrew Karolyi, and René Stulz, 2004, “Why Are Foreign Firms Listed in the
      U.S. Worth More?” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 71, pp. 205–38.
———, 2005, “Why Do Countries Matter So Much More for Corporate Governance?” Ohio
   State University Working Paper.
Dollar, David & Kraay, Aart, 2003, "Institutions, trade, and growth," Journal of Monetary
        Economics, Vol. 50, No. 1 (January), pp. 133-62.
Doyle, Brian M., and Jon Faust, 2005, “Breaks in Variability and Co-Movement of G-7
       Economic Growth,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87, No. 4 (November),
       pp. 721-40.
Durham, J.B., 2004, “Absorptive Capacity and the Effects of Foreign Direct Investment and
      Equity Foreign Portfolio Investment on Economic Growth,” European Economic
      Review, Vol. 48, No. 2 (April), pp. 285–306.
Easterly, William, R. Islam, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 2001, “Shaken and Stirred: Explaining
       Growth Volatility,” Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, ed.
       by B. Pleskovic and N. Stern.
Edison, Hali, Ross Levine, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sløk, 2002, “International Financial
       Integration and Economic Growth,” Journal of International Monetary and Finance,
       Vol. 21, No. 6 (November), pp. 749–76.
                                         - 62 -




Edison, Hali J., and Francis E. Warnock, 2003, “A Simple Measure of the Intensity of
       Capital Controls,” Journal of Empirical Finance, Vol. 10, No. 1/2, pp. 81-103.
Edison, Hali J., Michael Klein, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sløk, 2004, “Capital Account
       Liberalization and Economic Performance: Survey and Synthesis,” IMF Staff Papers,
       International Monetary Fund, Vol. 51, No. 2.
Edwards, Sebastian, 2001, “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging
      Economies Different?” NBER Working Paper No. 8076 (Cambridge, MA: National
      Bureau of Economic Research).
———, 2004, “Financial Openness, Sudden Stops and Current Account Reversals,” NBER
   Working Paper No. 10277 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
   Research).
———, 2005, “Capital Controls, Sudden Stops and Current Account Reversals,” NBER
   Working Paper No. 11170 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
   Research).
———, 2006, “Financial Openness, Currency Crises and Output Losses,” in Strengthening
   Global Financial Markets, (Inter-American Seminar on Economics) ed. by Sebastian
   Edwards and Márcio G. P. Garcia, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press)
   Forthcoming,
Eichengreen, Barry J., 2000, “Taming Capital Flows, “ World Development, Vol. 28, No. 6
      (June), pp. 1105-16
———, 2001, “Capital Account Liberalization: What Do Cross-Country Studies Tell Us?”
   World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 15 (October), pp. 341–65.
———, 2005, “Is a Change in the Renminbi Exchange Rate in China's Interest?,” Asian
   Economic Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1: 40-75.
——— and Leblang, David A., 2003, “Capital Account Liberalization and Growth: Was Mr.
   Mahathir Right?” NBER Working Paper No. W9427.
———, Andrew Rose, and Charles Wyplosz, 1995, “Exchange Market Mayhem: The
   Antecedents and Aftermath of Speculative Attacks,” Economic Policy, Vol. 10, No.
   21 (October) , pp. 249-312.
———, Ricardo Hausmann, and Ugo Panizza, 2006, “The Pain of Original Sin,” in Other
   People’s Money, ed. by Barry Eichengreen, and Ricardo Hausmann (Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press).
Errunza, Vihang R., 2001, “Foreign Portfolio Equity Investments, Financial Liberalization
       and Economic Development,” Review of International Economics, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp.
       703-726.
Faria, André, and Paolo Mauro, 2005, “Institutions and the External Capital Structure of
        Countries,” IMF Working Paper 04/236 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
                                         - 63 -




Fischer, Stanley, 1998, “Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF,” in “Should
       the IMF Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility?,” Essays in International Finance,
       Department of Economics, Princeton University, Vol. 207, pp. 1–10.
———, 2001, "Exchange Rate Regimes: Is the Bipolar View Correct?", Journal of
   Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 3-24.
Forbes, Kristin, 2005a, “The Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls: No Free Lunch”
       NBER Working Paper, No. 11372 (February) (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
       Economic Research).
———, 2005b, “Capital Controls: Mud in the Wheels of Market Efficiency,” Cato Journal,
   Vol. 25, No. 1 (Winter).
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1992, “Measuring International Capital Mobility: A Review,” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 82 (May), pp. 197–202.
———, and Andrew K. Rose, 1996, “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An Empirical
   Treatment,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 41, No. 3–4 (November), pp.
   351–66.
———, and David Romer, 1999, “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic Review,
   Vol. 89, No. 3 (June), pp. 379–99.
———, and Eduardo A. Cavallo, 2004, “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries More
   Vulnerable to Sudden Stops or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality,” NBER
   Working Paper No. 10957 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
   Research).
———, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2005, “Managing Macroeconomic Crises: Policy Lessons,” in
   Managing Economic Volatility and Crises: A Practitioner’s Guide, ed. by Joshua
   Aizenman and Brian Pinto (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Garret, Geoffrey, and Deborah Mitchell, 2001, “Globalization, Government Spending and
        Taxation in the OECD,” European Journal of Political Research, Vol. 39, pp. 145–
        77.
Gelos, R. Gaston, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2005, “Transparency and International Portfolio
       Holdings,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 60, No. 6 (December), pp. 2987–3020.
Ghosh, Atish , Anne-Marie Gulde, and Holger Wolf, 2003, Exchange Rate Regimes: Choices
       and Consequences (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Glaeser, Edward L, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, ““Do
       Institutions Cause Growth?” NBER Working Paper No. 10568 (Cambridge, MA:
       National Bureau of Economic Research).
Glick, Reuven, and Michael Hutchison, 2001, “Banking and Currency Crises: How Common
       Are Twins?” in Financial Crises in Emerging Markets, ed. by Glick, Moreno, and
       Spiegel (New York: Cambridge University Press).
                                          - 64 -




———, Xueyan Guo, and Michael Hutchison, 2006, “Currency Crises, Capital Account
   Liberalization, and Selection Bias,” forthcoming Review of Economics and Statistics.
Goldberg, Linda, 2004, “Financial-Sector Foreign Direct Investment and Host Countries:
      New and Old Lessons,” NBER Working Paper No. 10441 (Cambridge, MA: National
      Bureau of Economic Research).
Görg, Holger, and David Greenaway, 2004, “Much Ado about Nothing? Do Domestic Firms
       Really Benefit from Foreign Direct Investment?” World Bank Research Observer,
       Vol. 19, No. 2 (Fall), pp. 171–97.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne, 2005, “Capital Mobility and Reform,” IMF
      Manuscript (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
———, 2006, “The Elusive Gains from International Financial Integration,” Review of
   Economic Studies, Forthcoming.
Grilli, Vittorio, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 1995, “Economic Effects and Structural
        Determinants of Capital Controls,” Staff Papers, Vol. 42, No. 3 (September),
        International Monetary Fund, pp. 517–51.
Guidotti, Pablo E., Federico Sturzenegger, and Agustín Villar, 2004, “On the Consequences
       of Sudden Stops,” Economía, Vol. 4 (Spring), pp. 171–214.
Gupta, Nandini, and Kathy Yuan, 2005, “On the Growth Effects of Liberalizations,”
       Working Paper, Indiana University.
Haddad, Mona, and Ann Harrison, 1993, “Are There Positive Spillovers from Direct Foreign
      Investment? Evidence from Panel Data for Morocco,” Journal of Development
      Economics, Vol. 42, No. 1 (October), pp. 51–74.
Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones, 1999, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much
       More Output Per Worker Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114,
       No. 1 (February), pp. 83–116.
Hammel, Eliza, 2006, “Stock Market Liberalization and Industry Growth,” Manuscript,
     Harvard Business School.
Hanson, Gordon, Raymond J. Mataloni Jr., and Matthew J. Slaughter, 2005, “Vertical
      Specialization in Multinational Firms,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
      forthcoming.
Harrison, Anne, Inessa Love, and Margaret McMillan, 2004, “Global Capital Flows and
       Financing Constraints,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 75, No. 1
       (October), pp. 269-301.
Haskell, Jonathan E., Sonia C. Pereira, and Matthew J. Slaughter, 2002, “Does Inward
       Foreign Direct Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?” NBER
       Working Paper No.8724 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau for Economic Research).
                                          - 65 -




Hausmann, Ricardo, and Eduardo Fernández-Arias, 2000, “Foreign Direct Investment: Good
     Cholesterol?” IADB Working Paper No. 417 (Washington: Inter-American
     Development Bank).
Haveman, Jon D., Vivian Lei, and Janet S. Netz, 2001, “International Integration and
     Growth: A Survey and Empirical Investigation,” Review of Development Economics,
     Vol. 5, No. 2 (June), pp. 289–311.
Hawkins, John, 2005, “Globalization and Monetary Operations in Emerging Economies,” in
      Globalization and Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets, BIS Papers No. 23, Bank
      for International Settlements, 59–80.
Henry, Peter B., 2000a, “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging
       Market Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 55, No. 2 (April), pp. 529–64.
———, 2000b, “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?” Journal of
   Financial Economics, Vol. 58, No. 1–2 (October-November), pp. 301–34.
———, 2003a, “Capital-Account Liberalization, the Cost of Capital, and Economic
   Growth,” American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 2 (May), pp. 91–6.
———, 2003b, “Commentary on Equity Market Liberalization in Emerging Markets,”
   Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July/August, pp. 75–80.
Hermes, Niels, and Robert Lensink, 2003, “Foreign Direct Investment, Financial
      Development and Economic Growth,” Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 40, No.
      1 (October), pp. 142–63.
Hines, James R. Jr., 1995, “Forbidden Payment: Foreign Bribery and American Business
       After 1977” NBER Working Paper 5266 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau for
       Economic Research).
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, 2002, “What Explains the Industrial Revolution in East Asia? Evidence
       from Factor Markets,” American Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 3, pp. 502-26.
Husain, Aasim, Ashoka Mody, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2004, “Exchange Rate Regime
       Durability and Performance in Developing Versus Advanced Economies,” Journal of
       Monetary Economics, Vol. 52, No. 1, pp. 35–64.
Hutchinson, Michael, and Ilan Noy, 2005, “How Bad Are the Twins? Output Costs of
       Currency and Banking Crises,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 37, No. 4
       (August), pp. 725-52.
Imbs, Jean, 2006, “The Real Effects of Financial Integration,” Journal of International
       Economics, Vol. 68, No. 2 (March), pp. 296-324.
———, and Roman Wacziarg, 2003, “Stages of Diversification,” American Economic
   Review, Vol. 93, pp. 63–86 (March).
                                        - 66 -




Ishii, Shogo, Karl Habermeier, Bernard Laurens, John Leimone, Judit Vadasz, and Jorge Ivan
        Canales-Kriljenko, 2002, “Capital Account Liberalization and Financial Sector
        Stability,” IMF Occasional Paper No. 211, (Washington: International Monetary
        Fund).
Javorcik, Beata S., 2004, “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of
       Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers through Backward Linkages,” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 3 (June), pp. 605–27.
Jeanne, Olivier, 2003, “Why do Emerging Economies Borrow in Foreign Currency?” IMF
       Working Paper No. 03/177 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Johnson, Simon, and Todd Mitton, 2002, “Cronyism and Capital Controls: Evidence from
      Malaysia,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 67, No. 2 (February), pp. 351–82.
Johnston, R. Barry, and Natalia Tamirisa, 1998, “Why do Countries Use Capital Controls?”
       IMF Working Paper No. 98/181.
Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken, 2005, “Do Leaders Matter? National
       Leadership and Growth Since World War II,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
       120, No. 3 (August), pp. 835-864.
Ju, Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei, 2006, “A Solution to Two Paradoxes of International
        Capital Flows,” NBER Working Paper, Forthcoming.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent E. Sørensen, and Oved Yosha, 2001, “Risk Sharing and
      Industrial Specialization: Regional and International Evidence,” American Economic
      Review, Vol. 93, No. 3 (June), pp. 903–18.
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1999, “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
      Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89,
      No. 3 (June), pp. 473–500.
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Sergio Schmukler, 2003, “Short-run Pain, Long-run Gain: the
      Effects of Financial Liberalization,” NBER Working Paper 9787 (Cambridge, MA:
      National Bureau for Economic Research).
Karolyi, George Andrew, 2004, "The Role of ADRs in the Development of Emerging Equity
       Markets," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 86, No. 3 (August), pp. 670-90.
———, and René M. Stulz, 2003, “Are Assets Priced Locally or Globally?” in Handbook of
   the Economics of Finance, ed. by Milton Harris George and René M. Stulz (Elsevier:
   North-Holland).
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi, 2003, “Governance Matters III:
      Governance Indicators for 1996-2002,“ World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
      No. 3106.
                                         - 67 -




Keller, Wolfgang, and Stephen R. Yeaple, 2003, “Multinational Enterprises, International
        Trade, and Productivity Growth: Firm-Level Evidence from the United States,”
        NBER Working Paper No. 9504 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
        Research).
Kim, E. Han, and Vijay Singal, 2000, “Stock Market Openings: Experience of Emerging
      Economies,” Journal of Buiness, Vol. 73, No. 1, pp. 25-66.
Kim, Woochan, 2003, “Does Capital Account Liberalization Discipline Budget Deficit?”
      Review of International Economics, Vol. 11, No. 5, pp. 830–44.
———, Taeyoon Sung, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2006, “Foreign Investors and Local Corporate
   Governance: The Case of Korea,” IMF Working Paper. Forthcoming.
Klein, Michael, 2005, “Capital Account Liberalization, Institutional Quality and Economic
       Growth: Theory and Evidence,” NBER Working Paper No. 11112 (Cambridge, MA:
       National Bureau of Economic Research).
———, and Giovanni Olivei, 2006, “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth, and
   Economic Growth” Working Paper, Tufts University.
Kose, M. Ayhan, 2002, “Explaining Business Cycles in Small Open Economies: How Much Do
       World Prices Matter?” Journal of International Economics, Vol: 56, pp. 299-327.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones, 2003a, “How Does Globalization
      Affect the Synchronization of Business Cycles?” American Economic Review, Vol.
      93, No. 2, pp. 57–63.
———, 2003b, “Financial Integration and Macroeconomic Volatility,” IMF Staff Papers,
   Vol. 50, No. 1 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
———, 2004, “Volatility and Comovement in an Integrated World Economy: An Exploration”
   in Horst Siebert ed., Macroeconomic Policies in the World Economy, Springer, 89-122.
———, 2005, “Growth and Volatility in an Era of Globalization” IMF Staff Papers, vol:52, 31-
   63.
———, 2006a, “How Do Trade and Financial Integration Affect the Relationship Between
   Growth and Volatility?” Journal of International Economics, vol: 69, 176-202.
———, 2006b, “Globalization and Productivity Growth”, IMF Working Paper, forthcoming.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Charles Whiteman, 2005, “Understanding the
      Evolution of World Business Cycles,” IMF Working Paper No. 05/211.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Guy Meredith and Christopher Towe, 2005, “How Has NAFTA Affected
      the Mexican Economy? Review and Evidence” in Rolf J. Langhammer and Lucio
      Vinhas de Souza ed., Monetary Policy and Macroeconomic Stabilization in Latin
      America, 35-81, Springer.
                                          - 68 -




Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Eswar S. Prasad, 2006, “Regionalization vs.
       Globalization: Explaining North-South Business Cycles”, IMF Working Paper,
       forthcoming.
Kraay, Aart, 1998, “In Search of the Macroeconomic Effects of Capital Account
       Liberalization,” (unpublished; Washington: World Bank).
Krugman, Paul, 2002, “Crises: The Price of Globalization?” Paper presented at 2000
     Symposium on Global Economic Integration, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Labán, Raúl, and Felipe B. Larraín, 1997, "Can a Liberalization of Capital Outflows Increase
       Net Capital Inflows?", Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 16 No. 3,
       pp. 415-31.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2001, “The External Wealth of Nations:
       Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Nations,”
       Journal of International Economics, Vol. 55, pp. 263–94.
––––––, 2002, “External Wealth, The Trade Balance, and The Real Exchange Rate,”
      European Economic Review, Vol. 46, pp. 1049-71.
––––––, 2003, “International Financial Integration,” IMF Staff Papers Special Issue, Vol. 50,
      pp. 82-113.
––––––, 2005, “Financial Globalization and Exchange Rates,” IMF Working Paper 05/03.
———, 2006, “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of
   Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970–2004,” IMF Working Paper 06/69 (Washington:
   International Monetary Fund).
Larrain, Borja, 2004, "Financial development, financial constraints, and the volatility of
       industrial output," Public Policy Discussion Paper 04-6, Federal Reserve Bank of
       Boston.
Leblebicioglu, Asli, 2006, “Financial Integration, Credit Market Imperfections and
       Consumption Smoothing,” Working Paper, North Carolina State University.
Lensink, Robert, and Oliver Morrissey, 2002, “Foreign Direct Investment: Flows, Volatility
       and the Impact on Growth,” Review of International Economics, forthcoming.
Levchenko, Andrei A., 2005, “Financial Liberalization and Consumption Volatility in
      Developing Countries,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 52, No. 2.
Levine, Ross, 1997, “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda,”
       Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 35, No. 2, pp. 688-725.
———, 2005, “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence,” in Handbook of Economic
   Growth ed. by Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf (The Netherlands: Elsevier
   Science), pp. 865-934.
———, 2001, “International Financial Integration and Economic Growth.” Review of
   International Economics, 9(4), November 2001, pp. 684-698.
                                        - 69 -




———, and Sara Zervos, 1998a, “Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market
   Development,” World Development, Vol. 26, No. 7, pp. 1169–83.
Lewis, Karen K., 1999, “Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption,”
       Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 37, June, 571-608.
Li, Zhen, 2003, “Equity Market Liberalization and Economic Performance,” Working Paper,
       Princeton University.
Lipsey, Robert E., 2004, “Home and Host Country Effects of FDI,” in Challenges to
       Globalization, ed. by Robert E. Baldwin and L. Alan Winters (Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press), forthcoming.
———, and Fredrik Sjöholm, 2005, “The Impact of Inward FDI on Host Countries: Why
   Such Different Answers?” in Does Foreign Investment Promote Development? ed. by
   Theodore H. Moran, Edward M. Graham, and Magnus Blomström (Washington:
   Institute for International Economics Center for Global Development).
López-Córdova, J. Ernesto, 2003, “NAFTA and Manufacturing Productivity in Mexico,”
      Economía, Vol. 4 (Fall), pp. 55–98.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., 1990, “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries,”
       American Economic Review, vol. 80, pp. 92-96.
———, 1987, Models of Business Cycles. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Magud, Nicolas, and Carmen Reinhart, 2006, “Capital Controls: An Evaluation,”
      forthcoming in International Capital Flows, edited by Sebastian Edwards, (Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press).
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil, “A Contribution to the Empirics of
      Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No.2 (May), pp. 407–
      37.
Martell, Rodolfo, and René M. Stulz, 2003, “Equity Market Liberalizations as Country
       IPOs,” American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 2 (May), pp. 97–101.
Martin, Philippe, and Hélène Rey, 2006, “Globalization and Emerging Markets: With or
       Without Crash?” forthcoming in American Economic Review.
Martinez, Lorenza, Aaron Tornell, and Frank Westermann, 2004. “The Positive Link
       Between Financial Liberalization Growth and Crises,” NBER Working Paper No.
       10293 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Mathieson, Donald J., and Liliana Rojas-Suarez, 1993, "Liberalization of the Capital
      Account: Experiences and Issues." IMF Occasional Paper No. 103 (Washington:
      International Monetary Fund).
Mauro, Paolo, Nathan Sussman and Yishay Yafeh, 2006, Emerging Markets, Sovereign
      Debt, and International Financial Integration: 1870-1913 and Today, forthcoming,
      Oxford University Press.
                                         - 70 -




McKenzie, David J., 2001, “The Impact of Capital Controls on Growth Convergence,”
     Journal of Economic Development, Vol. 26, No.1.
McKinnon, Ronald, and Huw Pill, 1996, “Credible Liberalizations and International Capital
     Flows: The ‘Overborrowing Syndrome,’” NBER East Asia Seminar on Economics,
     Vol. 5, pp. 7–42 (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press).
––––––, 1998, “International Overborrowing: A Decomposition,” World Development,
      Vol. 26, No. 7 (July), pp. 1267–82.
Melitz, Marc J., 2005, “Comment” in Does Foreign Investment Promote Development? ed.
        by Theodore H. Moran, Edward M. Graham, and Magnus Blomström (Washington:
        Institute for International Economics Center for Global Development), pp. 273-280.
Mendoza, Enrique, 2006, Lessons from the Debt Deflation Theory of Sudden Stops,
     forthcoming American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings.
Miniane, Jacques, 2004, “A New Set of Measures on Capital Account Restrictions,”
      Staff Papers, International Monetary Fund, Vol. 51, No. 2, pp. 276–308.
Mishkin, Frederic S., 2006, The Next Great Globalization: How Disadvantaged Nations Can
      Harness Their Financial Systems to Get Rich (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
      Press). Forthcoming.
Mitton, Todd, 2006, “Stock Market Liberalization and Operating Performances at the Firm
       Level,” Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
Mody, Ashoka, and Antu Panini Murshid, 2005, “Growing Up With Capital Flows,” Journal
      of International Economics, Vol. 65, No. 1, (January), pp. 249–66.
Moran, Theodore H., 2005, “How Does FDI Affect Host Country Development? Using
      Industry Case Studies to Make Reliable Generalizations,” in Does Foreign Investment
      Promote Development? ed. by Theodore H. Moran, Edward M. Graham, and Magnus
      Blomström (Washington: Institute for International Economics Center for Global
      Development).
———, Edward M. Graham, and Magnus Blomström, eds., 2005, Does Foreign Direct
   Investment Promote Development?(Washington: Institute for International Economics
   Center for Global Development).
Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon, and Bernard Yeung, 2004, “Corporate Governance,
      Economic Entrenchment and Growth,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 43, pp.
      657-722.
Neumeyer, Pablo A., and Fabrizio Perri, 2005, “Business Cycles in Emerging Economies:
     the Role of Interest Rates,’’ Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 52, No. 2, pp. 345-
     80.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1994, “Risk-taking, Global Diversification, and Growth,” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 84, pp. 1310–1329.
                                         - 71 -




Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor, 2004, Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis,
       and Growth, Cambridge University Press.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2004, Foundations of International
       Macroeconomics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
———, 2001, “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics Solved,” NBER
   Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 339–90.
———, 2002, “Global Implications of Self-Oriented National Monetary Rules,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, Vol. 117, No. 2 (May), pp. 503-36.
———, 1995, “The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
   Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 73-96.
O’Donnell, Barry, 2001, “Financial Openness and Economic Performance” (unpublished;
     Dublin: Trinity College).
Pallage, Stephane, and Michel A. Robe, 2003a, “On the Welfare Cost of Economic
       Fluctuations in Developing Countries,” International Economic Review, Vol. 44,
       No. 2 (May), pp. 677–98.
Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and Ayhan Kose, 2003, “Effects of
       Financial Globalization on Developing Countries: Some New Evidence,” IMF
       Occasional Paper No. 220.
Prasad, Eswar, Thomas Rumbaugh, and Qing Wang, 2005, “Putting the Cart Before the
       Horse? Capital Account Liberalization and Exchange Rate Flexibility in China,” IMF
       Policy Discussion Paper No. 05/1, (January).
Prasad, Eswar, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2007, “The Chinese Approach to Capital Inflows:
       Patterns and Possible Explanations,” forthcoming in International Capital Flows ed.
       by Sebastian Edwards (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Quinn, Dennis, 1997, “The Correlates of Changes in International Financial Regulation,”
       American Political Science Review, Vol. 91 (September), pp. 531-51.
———, 2003. “Capital Account Liberalization and Financial Globalization, 1890-1999: A
   Synoptic View,” International Journal of Finance and Economics, vol.8 no. 3, pp.
   189-204.
———, Carla Inclan, and A. Maria Toyoda, 2001, “How and Where Capital Account
   Liberalization Leads to Economic Growth,” Paper prepared for the 2001 Annual
   Meeting of the American Political Science Association, San Francisco.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 2003, “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
       Development in the 20th Century,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 69, (July),
       pp. 5-50.
———, 1998, “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American Economic Review, Vol. 88,
   No. 3 (June), pp. 559-86.
                                         - 72 -




Ramey, Garey, and Valerie A. Ramey, 1995, “Cross-Country Evidence on the Link Between
      Volatility and Growth,” American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 1138–51.
Razin, Assaf, and Andrew K. Rose, 1994, “Business-Cycle Volatility and Openness: An
       Exploratory Cross-Sectional Analysis,” in Capital Mobility: The Impact on
       Consumption, Investment, and Growth, ed. by Leonardo Leiderman and Assaf Razin,
       pp. 48–76 (Cambridge, United Kingdom).
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth Rogoff, 2004, “The Modern History of Exchange Rate
      Arrangements: A Reinterpretation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119,
      (February), pp. 1-48.
———, and Miguel A. Savastano, 2003, “Debt Intolerance,” in Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity 1:2003, ed. by William Brainard and George Perry, pp. 1-74
   (Brookings Institution).
Reisen, Helmut, and Marcelo Soto, 2001, “Which Types of Capital Inflows Foster
       Developing-Country Growth?” International Finance, Vol. 4, No. 1 (Spring),
       pp. 1–14.
Rodrik, Dani, 1998, “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?,” Essays in International
       Finance, No. 207 (Princeton: Princeton University).
———, 2001, “The Developing Countries’ Hazardous Obsession with Global Integration,”
   Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.
———, and Andres Velasco, 2000, “Short-Term Capital Flows,” Annual World Bank
   Conference on Development Economics 1999, pp. 59–90 (Washington: World Bank).
Rodriguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik, 2002, “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A
      Skeptic’s Guide to the Cross-National Evidence,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual
      2000, ed. by Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Rogoff, Kenneth, 1985, “Can International Monetary Policy Cooperation be
       Counterproductive?,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 18, pp. 254–81.
———, 1985, “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100 (November), pp. 1169–89.
———, 2004, “Globalization and Global Disinflation,” Paper presented at the 2003
   conference on Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy,
   Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Rose, Andrew K., 2005, “One Reason Countries Pay Their Debts: Renegotiation and
       International Trade,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 77, No. 1 (June), pp.
       189–206.
Schmukler, Sergio L., 2004, “Financial Globalization: Gain and Pain for Developing
     Countries,” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review, Second Quarter, pp.
     39-66.
                                          - 73 -




Smarzynska, Beata K., and Shang-Jin Wei, 2000, “Corruption and Composition of Foreign
      Direct Investment: Firm-Level Evidence,” NBER Working Paper No. 7969
      (October), pp. 1–24, (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Stiglitz, Joseph, 2000, “Capital Market Liberalization, Economic Growth, and Instability,”
        World Development, Vol. 28, No. 6, pp. 1075–86.
———, 2002, Globalization and Its Discontents, (New York: W.W. Norton and Company).
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, 2003. “Understanding Changes in International
        Business Cycles,” NBER Working Paper No: 9859 (Cambridge, MA: National
        Bureau of Economic Research).
Stulz, René, 1999a, “International Portfolio Flows and Security Markets,” International
        Capital Flows, NBER Conference Report Series, pp. 257–93 (Chicago and London:
        University of Chicago Press).
———, 1999b, “Globalization of Equity Markets and the Cost of Capital,” NBER Working
   Paper No. 7021 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).
———, 2005, “The Limits of Financial Globalization,” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 60, No.
   4 (August), pp. 1595–1637.
Summers, Lawrence H., 2000, “International Financial Crises: Causes, Prevention, and
     Cures,” American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No. 2, pp.1–16.
Tytell, Irina, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2004, “Does Financial Globalization Induce Better
        Macroeconomic Policies?” IMF Working Papers 04/84 (Washington: International
        Monetary Fund).
Vanassche, Ellen, 2004, “The Impact of International Financial Integration on Industry
      Growth,” Manuscript (Belgium: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven).
Van Wincoop, Eric, 1999, “How Big are Potential Welfare Gains from International Risk
      Sharing?” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 47, No. 1, pp. 109–135.
Vlachos, Jonas, and Daniel Waldenström , 2005, “International Financial Liberalization and
      Industry Growth,” International Journal of Finance and Economics, Vol.10, No.3,
      pp. 263-284.
Wagner, Helmut, 2002, “Implications of Globalization for Monetary Policy,” University of
      Hagen Working Paper.
Wei, Shang-Jin,, 2000a, “How Taxing is Corruption on International Investors?,” Review of
       Economics and Statistics, Vol. 82, No. 1 (February), pp. 1–11.
———, 2000b, “Local Corruption and Global Capital Flows,” Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity, Vol. 2.
———, 2000c, “Natural Openness and Good Government,” NBER Working Paper No. 7765
   (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).
                                        - 74 -




———, 2001, “Domestic Crony Capitalism and International Fickle Capital: Is There a
   Connection?,” International Finance, Vol. 4. (Spring), pp. 15–46.
––––––, 2006, “Connecting Two Views on Financial Globalization: Can We Make Further
      Progress?’ NBER working paper, forthcoming.
––––––, and Yi Wu, 2002, “Negative Alchemy? Corruption, Composition of Capital Flows,
      and Currency Crises,” in Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, ed. by
      Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel (Chicago: University of Chicago Press),
      pp. 461–501.
Winters, L. Alan, 2004, “Trade Liberalization and Economic Performance: An Overview,”
       Economic Journal, Vol. 114, No. 493 (February), pp. F4-F21.
World Bank, 2000, The Benefits and Risks of Short-Term Borrowing, Global Development
      Finance, Vol. 1, Chapter 4, pp. 77–95 (Washington).
Wyplosz, Charles, 2004, “Financial Instability in Emerging Market Countries: Causes and
      Remedies,” presented at the Forum on Debt and Development (FONDAD)
      Conference “Stability, Growth and the Search for a New Development Agenda:
      Reconsidering the Washington Consensus,” Santiago, Chile, March.
Xu, Bin, 2000, “Multinational Enterprises, Technology Diffusion, and Host Country
       Productivity Growth,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 62, No. 2 (August),
       pp. 477–93.
Young, Alwyn, “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East
      Asian Growth Experience,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 110, No. 3
      (August), pp. 641-80.
                    Figure 1. Gross International Financial Assets and Liabilities: 1970-2004
                                             (trillions of U.S. dollars)
                                                    Advanced Economies

                                                   Debt      FDI    Equity     Other

      100

       80

       60

       40

       20

        0
        1970            1975           1980            1985                 1990        1995        2000



                                                      Emerging Markets

                                                   Debt      FDI    Equity     Other

      10

        8

        6

        4

        2

        0
        1970           1975           1980           1985               1990           1995        2000




                                                Other Developing Economies

                                                   Debt     FDI    Equity    Other


      0.6



      0.4



      0.2



      0.0
         1970          1975            1980           1985              1990           1995        2000


Notes: The financial integration data are based on a dataset constructed by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006).
The charts show how the components add up to the total integration measure in each period. Debt includes
both official and unofficial debt. The category "Other" includes financial derivatives and total reserves minus
gold. See the Data Appendix for a listing of countries in each group.
        Figure 2. Gross International Financial Liabilities of Developing Economies: 1970-2004
                                        (trillions of U.S. dollars)

                                               Emerging Markets

                      Debt Liabilities    FDI Liabilities   Equity Liabilities     Other Liabilities
                                         g(      )          p          g
  5.0


  4.0


  3.0


  2.0


  1.0


  0.0
    1970           1975           1980           1985           1990             1995          2000



                                         Other Developing Economies

                      Debt Liabilities    FDI Liabilities   Equity Liabilities     Other Liabilities

  0.4



  0.3



  0.2



  0.1



  0.0
    1970           1975           1980           1985           1990             1995          2000
Notes: The financial integration data are based on a dataset constructed by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006).
The charts show how the components add up to the total integration measure in each period. Debt includes
both official and unofficial debt. The category "Other" includes financial derivatives and total reserves minus
gold. See the Data Appendix for a listing of countries in each group.
                    Figure 3. Evolution of International Financial Integration: 1970-2004


                           All Countries                                                 Advanced Economies
1.0                                                            300   1.0                                                             600


                                                               250                                                                   500
0.8                                                                  0.8


                                                               200                                                                   400
0.6                                                                  0.6
                                De facto                                                                  De jure (left
                              (right scale)                    150                                          scale)                   300

0.4                                                                  0.4
                                              De jure (left    100                                                                   200
                                                scale)                                                             De facto
                                                                                                                 (right scale)
0.2                                                                  0.2
                                                               50                                                                    100



0.0                                                            0     0.0                                                             0
      1970   1975   1980    1985    1990      1995     2000                1970   1975   1980   1985   1990      1995      2000




                     Emerging Markets                                                Other Developing Economies

1.0                                                            200   1.0                                                             200




0.8                                                            160   0.8                                                             160

                                                                                                   De facto
                                                                                                 (right scale)
0.6                                                            120   0.6                                                             120

                                                De facto
                                              (right scale)
0.4                                                            80    0.4                                                             80



                                                                                                                     De jure (left
0.2                                                            40    0.2                                                             40
                                                                                                                       scale)
                                              De jure (left
                                                scale)

0.0                                                            0     0.0                                                             0
      1970   1975   1980     1985    1990     1995      2000               1970   1975   1980   1985   1990      1995      2000


      Notes: This figure shows unweighted cross-country averages, within each group, of two measures of capital
      account openness. The de jure measure is based on the IMF 0-1 capital account restrictiveness classification,
      with 1 representing countries that have open capital accounts. The de facto measure is based on the ratio of
      gross stocks of foreign assets and liabilities to GDP, with the raw data taken from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
      (2006). See the Data Appendix for a listing of countries in each group.
                      Figure 4. GDP (per capita, PPP weighted): 1970-2004


350

                         Advanced Economies
300
                         Emerging Markets

                         Emerging (excluding China and India)
250
                         Other Developing Economies

200



150



100
      1970        1975           1980           1985            1990         1995           2000


  Notes: This plot shows cumulative changes in indexes of per capita GDP for each group of countries, computed
  using growth rates of real GDP for each country and weighting these by a PPP adjustment factor. The indexes
  are set to 100 in the base period. See the Data Appendix for a listing of countries in each group.
                                                     Figure 5A. Level of Financial Openness and GDP Growth, 1985-2004

                                                       Unconditional Relationship                                                                                Conditional Relationship
                                      0.06                    KOR                                                                            0.06


                                      0.05                                                                                                   0.05
                                                                  THA
                                                                MUS             CHL
                                                                                                                                             0.04
                                      0.04
Growth rate of per capita GDP




                                                                                                        Growth rate of per capita GDP
                                                       IND
                                                                    IDN          MYS
                                                                    LKA                                                                      0.03
                                      0.03                                                                                                                            MUS
                                                                      ESP    PRT                                                                                             CHL
                                                            DOM      TUN                                                                     0.02
                                                        BGDTUR EGY AUSNOR                                                                                              EGY      MYS
                                                           NPLJPN
                                                          PAK     USA
                                                                CRI           FIN
                                      0.02                          GHAURY
                                                                  GRC      DEUAUT
                                                                      ISR CAN
                                                                    ITA           FRA SWE                                                                          DOMCRI TUN
                                                                                                                                                             IND KOR
                                                                     TTO            DNK                                                      0.01                GTM
                                                             SLV
                                                       IRN COL        TZA                                                                                           SLV   GHA
                                                                                                                                                                            ISR
                                                                FJI       NZL
                                                                            JAM                                                                                   TUR
                                                                                                                                                                 PAK  IDNUSA
                                                                                                                                                                           TTO
                                      0.01                 BRA                                                                                                        LKA  AUSURY
                                                            MEX PHL
                                                          GTM                                                                                                 BGDCOL    SEN
                                                                 ARG
                                                                  ECU
                                                                 SEN
                                                                PER   BOL
                                                                      PNG                                                                       0                   ZAFTHA ESP
                                                                                                                                                                            TZA
                                                                        HND                                                                                        MEX VEN
                                                                                                                                                             IRN BRA        FJI CANPRT
                                                                                                                                                                            BOL            SWE
                                                               KEN                                                                                                    KEN
                                                                                                                                                                        ARG    NOR FIN
                                                                                                                                                                          ITA HND   AUTFRA
                                                                                                                                                                                         DNK
                                                            DZA         MWI                                                                                         PRY GRC      DEU
                                         0                   ZAF                                                                                                   DZA
                                                                                                                                                                  NPL   NER
                                                                                                                                                                         ECU NZL
                                                                                                                                                                       ZMB
                                                             PRY VEN                                                                         -0.01                   CMR
                                                                                                                                                                      JPNPHL      JAM
                                                                 NER      TGO                                                                                          PER
                                                                                                                                                                                TGO
                                                                                                                                                                              MWI
                                      -0.01                  ZWECMR                                                                          -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                   ZWE
                                      -0.02                                                                                                  -0.03
                                              0       50        100       150     200       250   300                                                0      50        100     150    200     250       300
                                                             Mean financial openness                                                                               Mean financial openness


                                                     Figure 5B. Change in Financial Openness and GDP Growth, 1985-2004

                                                       Unconditional Relationship                                                                             Conditional Relationship
                                       0.06                       KOR                                                                         0.06


                                       0.05                                                                                                   0.05
                                                                   THA
                                                                 MUS
                                                                  CHL
                                                                                                                                              0.04
      Growth rate of per capita GDP




                                       0.04
                                                                                                             Growth rate of per capita GDP




                                                                  IND
                                                                   IDNMYS
                                                                 LKA                                                                          0.03
                                       0.03                                                                                                                        MUS
                                                               DOM
                                                               TUN            ESP PRT                                                                                CHL
                                                              BGD TUR
                                                                EGY       AUS NOR                                                             0.02
                                                                                                                                                                     EGYMYS
                                       0.02            CRI     PAK NPL
                                                                    JPN USA AUT FIN
                                                                      GHA
                                                                       GRC
                                                                      URY
                                                              ISR TTOCAN  ITA DEU
                                                                               DNKFRASWE                                                                    CRI     TUN
                                                                                                                                                                     IND
                                                                                                                                                                     KOR
                                                                                                                                                                    DOM
                                                           TZA                                                                                0.01                 GTM
                                                              IRNSLV NZL
                                                                 COL                                                                                               ISRSLV  GHA
                                                         JAMZMB                                                                                                     PAKTUR
                                                                                                                                                                      IDN
                                                                                                                                                                        TTO USA
                                       0.01                     BRA
                                                                PHL
                                                              MEX                                                                                                  LKACOL URYAUS
                                                              GTM                                                                                                  BGD
                                                            SENFJI HND ARG
                                                               ECU
                                                               BOL
                                                             PER                                                                                 0               SENZAF
                                                                                                                                                                TZA FJI
                                                                                                                                                                   MEX
                                                                                                                                                                       THA        ESP PRTSWE
                                                                                                                                                                      VEN
                                                                                                                                                                    BOL
                                                                                                                                                                   IRNBRA CAN
                                                                                                                                                                         HND       NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                  AUT   FIN
                                                           KEN
                                                             MWI  DZA                                                                                           KENPRY             DNKFRA
                                                                                                                                                                              ITA DEU
                                                                                                                                                                             ARG
                                          0                                                                                                                                 GRC
                                                              PRYZAF
                                                                 VEN                                                                         -0.01                NER
                                                                                                                                                                  ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                    ECU
                                                                                                                                                              JAM CMR  DZA
                                                                                                                                                                        NPL
                                                                                                                                                                          NZL
                                                                                                                                                                     PHLJPN
                                                          TGONER                                                                                                  PER
                                                                                                                                                               TGOMWI
                                      -0.01                      CMR
                                                                ZWE                                                                          -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                      ZWE
                                      -0.02                                                                                                  -0.03
                                              -150    -50        50       150         250   350   450                                                -150   -50       50      150     250        350   450
                                                            Change in financial openness                                                                          Change in financial openness

                    Notes: Growth refers to the average real per capita GDP growth. Financial openness is defined as the ratio of
                    gross stocks of foreign assets and liabilities to GDP and is based on a dataset constructed by Lane and Milesi-
                    Ferretti (2006). The second panel uses residuals from a cross-section regression of growth on initial income,
                    population growth, human capital and the investment rate.
                                    Figure 6A. Financial Openness and Financial Development: 1985-2004


                                         Private Credit/ GDP                                                                        Stock Market Capitalization/ GDP

                         1.2                                                                                             1.6

                                              JPN
                                                             DEU                                                         1.4                  ZAF             MYS
                          1




                                                                                      Stock Market Capitalization/ GDP
                                                               AUT                                                       1.2
                                                              PRT FRA
                         0.8                           ESP NZL                                                                                      USA
                                                           MYS
Private Credit/ GDP




                                                 THA                                                                      1
                                                     AUS
                                                      ISR    FIN
                         0.6                        ITA NOR         DNK                                                  0.8                                     FIN          SWE
                                         KORZAF                                                                                                 JPN
                                                          CAN                                                                                            AUS CAN
                                                     TUN                  SWE                                                                             CHL
                                                        CHL
                                                                                                                         0.6
                         0.4              MUS GRC                                                                                                                FRA
                                                USA                                                                                                   ESP JAM
                                           SLVEGY BOL
                                             IDN     URY                                                                                                           DNK
                                              FJI TTO                                                                                                  ISR
                                         BRA     PHL HND                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                          KOR
                                                                                                                                                THA  TTO NZL
                                                                                                                                                   PHL
                                                                                                                                                           DEU
                                    IND                                                                                                           GRC
                                     BGDPAK
                                          DZAKEN ECU
                                                SEN                                                                                         MUS     ITA NOR
                         0.2        IRN MEX  LKA        JAM
                                                    PNGTGO                                                                                ZWE                PRT
                                          DOM
                                          COL
                                           PRY
                                         NPL    ARG
                                               CRI
                                              PER                                                                                     INDCHN
                                                                                                                                           BRA
                                                                                                                                            MEX   ARG
                                        ZWE
                                        GTM
                                         TURCMR    VEN                                                                   0.2                    EGY
                                                                                                                                      IRN TURKEN
                                                                                                                                               IDN
                                                                                                                                                PER GHA        AUT
                                                NER TZA                                                                                   PAKSLV
                                                                                                                                            COLLKA    TUN
                                                  GHAMWI                  ZMB                                                                    CRI
                                                                                                                                           NPL FJI   VEN
                                                                                                                                                   ECUBOLMWI
                                                                                                                                                         HND          ZMB
                          0                                                                                               0            BGDGTMPRY       TZA
                                                                                                                                                         URY
                                0   50    100       150      200    250     300                                                 0    50     100         150    200      250     300
                                         Mean financial openness                                                                           Mean financial openness



                                     Figure 6B. Financial Openness and Institutional Quality: 1985-2004

                                         Institutional Quality                                                                             Control of Corruption

                          2.5                                                                                              3


                           2                                                                                              2.5                                 FIN
                                                            FIN                                                                                           NZL     DNK
                                                                                                                                                                    SWE
                                                        NZL      DNK
                                                                   SWE                                                                                    CAN
                                                    AUSNOR
                                                        CAN AUT                                                            2                          AUS
                                                                                                                                                         NOR
                                                         DEU                                                                                               DEUAUT
                          1.5                     USA                                                                                               USA
                                                           PRT FRA
                                                JPN ESP
                                                      CHL                                                                 1.5
                                                                                         Control of Corruption




                                                                                                                                                                       FRA
 Institutional Quality




                           1                                                                                                                                CHL PRT
                                                                                                                                                          ESP
                                                CRIITA                                                                                            JPN     ISR
                                           MUS GRCISR  URY                                                                 1
                                         KOR                                                                                                      CRIITA
                          0.5                       TTO MYS                                                                                        GRC URY
                                             ZAF                                                                          0.5                  ZAF
                                               THA TUN                                                                                       MUS           MYS
                                          BRA             JAM                                                                              KOR         TUN
                           0                SLV ARG
                                           MEX                                                                                                   FJI TTO
                                     IND TUR   FJI
                                           DOM PHL GHA                                                                     0
                                               PER
                                               EGY
                                                 SEN BOL                                                                                    BRA
                                       CHN LKA         MWI
                                                       HND                 ZMB                                                         INDCHNMEX
                                                                                                                                                 EGY
                                                                                                                                            TURLKA
                                                                                                                                                 PER
                                                                                                                                                 THA
                         -0.5              COL ECUTZA
                                         GTM         PNG                                                                                     DOM
                                                                                                                                              SLV
                                                                                                                                             COL   SEN
                                                                                                                                                     GHA
                                                                                                                                                   ARG       JAM
                                      BGD NPL    NER                                                                     -0.5               NPL PHL
                                     IRN PAK  IDN VEN TGO
                                            PRY
                                              KEN                                                                                       BGD
                                                                                                                                             DZA
                                                                                                                                       IRN ZWE           MWI
                                                                                                                                                        PNG
                                                                                                                                                       BOL
                                             CMR                                                                                           GTM NER    VENHNDTGO                ZMB
                                        ZWE                                                                                                PAK IDNECU   TZA
                           -1              DZA                                                                             -1                 PRY
                                                                                                                                                KEN
                                                                                                                                               CMR

                         -1.5                                                                                            -1.5
                                0   50     100         150    200   250         300                                             0     50     100        150    200      250         300
                                         Mean financial openness                                                                           Mean financial openness
                           Figure 6C. Financial Openness and Macroeconomic Policies: 1985-2004

                                  Monetary Policy                                                                               Fiscal Policy
                  0                                                                                        10

                -0.5              TUR
                                                                 ZMB                                                        DZA




                                                                        Government Budget Balance (%GDP)
                 -1                         VEN                                                             5                             NOR
                                 ZWE     ECU URY
                -1.5              BRA      GHA                                                                            KOR
                                   MEX         MWI
                             IRN COL
Log Inflation




                 -2                PRYCRI
                                   DOM
                                                   JAM                                                      0               PRY
                                                                                                                           DOM THA
                                                                                                                             CMR  ECU CHL         DNK
                                       PER TZA                                                                                IDN VEN
                                                                                                                            SLV     AUS  NZL
                                                                                                                                           JAM
                                 GTM         BOL
                                               HND                                                                      CHN
                                                                                                                          BRA
                                                                                                                         GTM              DEU
                                      KEN
                                    ZAF      ISR                                                                      BGD
                                                                                                                     IRN   MUS PHL  TTOURY FINAUT
                -2.5                  LKA
                                      IDN
                                        ARG
                                       EGY
                                         GRC CHL                                                                     IND COL     USA
                                                                                                                                CRI  ESP            SWE
                                    SLV
                                   DZA
                                  NPL PHLPNG
                             IND PAK                                                                                       MEX PER   TZACAN
                                                                                                                                   GHA
                                                                                                                                    TUN  MYS
                                                                                                                                         TGO
                                            TTO                                                                          PAKZAFEGY     HND      FRA
                              BGD  MUS              PRT                                                                       KEN
                 -3            CHN                                                                          -5                       PNG
                                 KOR NER     TUN
                                             ESP                                                                         ZWE         BOL
                                           ITA                                                                                 FJI
                                                                                                                              JPNARG        PRT
                                       FJI       NZL                                                                      TUR    SEN
                -3.5                   THA
                                     CMR USAAUSNOR                                                                        NPL NER  ITA
                                                                                                                                     ISR
                                                          DNK
                                                            SWE                                                               LKA
                                        SEN      TGO
                                                 CAN AUT
                                                 MYSFIN FRA                                                                            MWI           ZMB
                 -4                               DEU                                                      -10
                                                                                                                                  GRC
                -4.5
                                       JPN
                 -5                                                                                        -15
                       0    50     100       150   200     250    300                                            0   50    100      150    200      250   300
                                 Mean financial openness                                                                  Mean financial openness


          Notes: The financial integration data are based on a dataset constructed by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006).
          Financial Development data are taken from Beck and Al-Hussainy (2006). Private Credit refers to credit given
          to the private sector by deposit money banks and Stock Market Capitalization is defined as the value of listed
          shares. Institutional quality data are from Daniel Kaufmann, Aart Kraay and Massimo Mastruzzi (2005) and
          cover the period 1996-2004. Institutional Quality is the average of the following indicators: Voice and
          Accountability, Political Stability, Government Effectiveness, Regulatory Quality, Rule of Law, and Control of
          Corruption. Monetary and fiscal data are from the World Bank's World Development Indicators and the IMF's
          International Financial Statistics and World Economic Outlook databases. Inflation is defined as the annual
          change in CPI. Government Budget Balance is the difference between government revenues and government
          expenditures.
                         Table 1. International Financial Integration :
                         Gross Stocks of Foreign Assets and Liabilities


                                              80-84      85-89       90-94      95-99       00-04


All Countries (bln. $)                        7,124     14,957      26,411     46,638     76,133
 Share of FDI                                  15.6       16.6        17.9       20.9       21.8
 Share of Equity                                 4.9        7.5         9.5      15.7       15.9
 Share of Debt                                 75.1       72.5        69.4       60.0       58.7
 Share of Other                                  4.4        3.4         3.3        3.3        3.6

Advanced Economies (bln. $)                   6,100     13,492      23,969     42,052     69,432
 Share of FDI                                  16.1       16.9        17.9       20.7       21.4
 Share of Equity                                 5.5        8.1         9.9      16.5       16.5
 Share of Debt                                 74.8       72.0        69.7       60.5       59.8
 Share of Other                                  3.6        3.0         2.5        2.3        2.3

Emerging Markets (bln. $)                        859      1,259      2,167      4,236       6,221
 Share of FDI                                   12.0       13.3       17.6       23.2        26.6
 Share of Equity                                  1.3        2.1        6.1        9.4       10.6
 Share of Debt                                  77.9       76.6       64.6       54.4        46.6
 Share of Other                                   8.8        8.0      11.7       13.0        16.2

Other Developing Economies (bln. $)              165        207        276         351        480
 Share of FDI                                   16.0       14.0       14.4        18.7       22.7
 Share of Equity                                  0.2        0.3        0.3         0.6        1.0
 Share of Debt                                  73.8       79.9       78.5        71.3       58.3
 Share of Other                                 10.0         5.7        6.8         9.4      18.0

Notes: Data shown in this table are based on cross-country averages of annual data over the
relevant five-year period for each group of countries. The sample comprises 21 industrial, 20
emerging market and 30 other developing countries. See the Data Appendix for a listing of
countries in each group. The category "Other" includes financial derivatives and total reserves
minus gold. Shares are in percentage of total. The raw data are based on a dataset constructed by
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006).
                         Table 2. International Financial Integration :
                                         Gross Inflows


                                              80-84      85-89       90-94      95-99      00-04


All Countries (bln. $)                          397         803      1,209      2,453      3,564
 Share of FDI                                  12.9        15.8       15.6       21.7       19.6
 Share of Equity                                 3.9         7.7        9.4      12.2       12.0
 Share of Debt                                 83.2        76.5       75.0       66.1       68.4

Advanced Economies (bln. $)                     325         739      1,008      2,112      3,260
 Share of FDI                                  12.3        14.9       13.9       18.6       16.9
 Share of Equity                                 4.4         8.1        9.0      12.5       12.1
 Share of Debt                                 83.3        77.0       77.2       68.9       71.0

Emerging Markets (bln. $)                        66          60        194        328         288
 Share of FDI                                  15.5        27.3       24.4       40.7        48.6
 Share of Equity                                1.5         3.4       11.7       11.0        12.1
 Share of Debt                                 83.0        69.3       63.9       48.2        39.3

Other Developing Economies (bln. $)               6           4          7         13          16
 Share of FDI                                  15.1        17.2       27.7       40.9        44.2
 Share of Equity                                1.1         0.6        0.5        0.5         0.4
 Share of Debt                                 83.8        82.2       71.8       58.6        55.4

Notes: Data shown in this table are based on cross-country averages of annual data over the
relevant five-year period for each group of countries. Shares are in percentage of total. The
sample comprises 21 industrial, 20 emerging market and 30 other developing countries. See the
Data Appendix for a listing of countries in each group. Authors' calculations based on flow data
from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006).
                   Table 3. Volatility of Different Types of Inflows: 1985-2004

                                        FDI             Equity            Debt          FDI+Equity
                                        GDP              GDP              GDP             GDP

Standard deviation
 All Countries
   Mean                                 1.90             1.42             4.42             2.78
   Median                               1.52             0.71             3.15             1.75
 Advanced Economies
   Mean                                 2.43             2.36             6.18             4.38
   Median                               1.66             0.87             4.84             2.57
 Emerging Markets
   Mean                                 1.45             0.84             3.38             1.87
   Median                               1.31             0.69             2.57             1.83
 Other Developing Economies
   Mean                                 1.76             0.11             3.36             1.76
   Median                               1.24             0.12             2.65             1.25

Coefficients of variation
  All Countries
    Mean                                 0.85              0.98              0.76              0.80
    Median                               0.77              0.98              0.66              0.75
  Advanced Economies
    Mean                                 0.92              0.99              0.64              0.84
    Median                               0.87              0.98              0.64              0.77
  Emerging Markets
    Mean                                0.75               1.07              0.85              0.71
    Median                               0.76              1.00              0.67              0.66
  Other Developing Economies
    Mean                                 0.89              0.65              0.80              0.87
    Median                               0.77              0.70              0.70              0.77
Notes: Data shown in this table are the cross-country means and medians for each group of countries
of the standard deviation and coefficient of variation of the different categories of gross capital
inflows over the period 1985-2004. The coefficient of variation is the standard deviation divided by
the mean. The sample comprises 21 industrial, 20 emerging market and 30 other developing
countries. See the Data Appendix for a listing of countries in each group. The raw data are based on a
dataset containing flow data constructed by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006).
                                               Table 4A
                   Summary of Key Empirical Studies on Financial Integration and Growth
                                          Number of       Dependent Variable /        Financial                   Main Findings
                                          Countries /    Regression Methodology       Openness
Study                                     Time Period                                 Measure
                                              20        ∆Y and ∆Yc                    Binary      NO EFFECT: No clear impact of capital controls
Alesina, Grilli, Milesi-Ferretti (1994)    1950-1989    Annual panel pooled OLS                   on growth in the OECD countries.
                                              61        ∆Yc                           Share       NO EFFECT: No evidence of a robust correlation
Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti (1995)          1966-1989    5-yearly panel pooled IV                  of capital account restrictions with growth.
                                              64        ∆Yc                           ∆Quinn      POSITIVE: There is a robust positive association
Quinn (1997)                               1960-1989    Cross section OLS                         between capital account liberalization and growth.
                                                                                                  MIXED: Change in financial openness is not
                                                                                      Share,      significantly related to growth (coefficient on
                                              117       ∆Yc                           Quinn,      Volume significantly positive but result not
Kraay (1998)                               1985-1997    Cross section OLS and IV      Volume      robust).
                                              95        ∆Yc                                       NO EFFECT: No evidence of a significant effect
Rodrik (1998)                              1975-1989    Cross section OLS             Share       of financial openness on growth.
                                                                                                  MIXED: FDI is highly beneficial for domestic
                                                                                                  investment while portfolio flows have no
                                                                                                  discernible effect and loans lie in between.
                                              58        I/Y, S/Y                                  Insignificant impact of international flows on
Bosworth and Collins (1999)                1978-1995    Annual panel FE and IV        Volume      saving.
                                                                                                  MIXED: Capital inflows foster higher economic
                                              40        ∆Yc                                       growth but only for economies where the banking
Bailliu (2000)                             1975-1995    5-yearly panel dynamic GMM    Volume      sector has reached a certain level of development.
                                                                                                  MIXED: Evidence on positive association between
                                                                                                  capital account liberalization and growth fragile
                                                        ∆Yc                                       but stronger correlation with growth when
Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz               61        Cross section OLS and IV;     Quinn,      openness measures are interacted with trade
(2001)                                     1973-1992    sub-period panel pooled OLS   ∆Quinn      openness and rule of law.
                                                                                                  MIXED: Capital account openness positively
                                                                                      Share,      affects growth only after a country has achieved a
                                              62        ∆Yc, ∆TFP                     Quinn,      certain degree of economic development and
Edwards (2001)                             1980-1989    Cross section WLS, IV WLS     ∆Quinn      financial development.
                                         Table 4A (Continued)
                   Summary of Key Empirical Studies on Financial Integration and Growth
                                         Number of       Dependent Variable /          Financial                    Main Findings
                                         Countries /    Regression Methodology         Openness
Study                                    Time Period                                   Measure
                                                       ∆Yc
                                             112       Cross-sectional OLS;5-yearly                MIXED: No robust evidence of significant impact
McKenzie (2001)                           1960-1989    panel dynamic GMM               Binary      of capital controls on economic growth.
                                             94        ∆Yc                             Share,      MIXED: No evidence of capital controls on
O'Donnell (2001)                          1971-1994    Cross section OLS, IV           Volume      growth, but volume is sometimes significant.
                                                                                                   POSITIVE/MIXED: Capital account liberalization
                                             76        ∆Yc                             Quinn,      has a robust positive impact on growth in most
Quinn, Inclan and Toyoda (2001)           1960-1998    5-yearly panel FE               ∆Quinn      countries.
                                                                                                   MIXED: Both FDI and portfolio equity flows have
                                                                                                   a significant positive impact on growth, but bank
                                             44        ∆GNPc                                       lending contributes to growth only if banking
Reisen and de Soto (2001)                 1986-1997    Annual panel dynamic GMM        Volume      system is well capitalized.
                                                                                                   NO EFFECT/MIXED: With isolated exceptions,
                                                                                                   unable to reject the null hypothesis that
                                                                                                   international financial integration does not
                                                       ∆Yc                                         accelerate growth even when controlling for
                                             57        Cross section OLS, IV; 5-       Share,      particular economic, financial, institutional, and
Edison, Levine, Ricci, and Slok (2002)    1980-2000    yearly panel dynamic GMM        Volume      policy characteristics.
                                                                                                   MIXED: An open capital account boosts growth in
                                                                                                   periods of financial stability in international
                                                       ∆Yc                                         markets with controls playing insulating role
                                             47        5-yearly panel dynamic system               during instability. Similar results for 27
Eichengreen and Leblang (2003)            1975-1995    GMM                             Binary      economies, 1880-1997.
                                                                                                   MIXED: Capital liberalization has positive effect
                                                                                                   on growth but mainly via indirect channels, e.g.
                                                       ∆Yc                                         mitigating effects of banking crises (whereas
                                             90        5-yearly panel dynamic system               equity market liberalization has direct effect but no
Bonfiglioli and Mendicino (2004)          1975-1999    GMM                             Binary      interaction with banking crises).
                                                                                                   MIXED: Growth effects of FDI and portfolio
                                                                                                   flows depend on the absorptive capacity of host
                                             80        ∆Yc                                         countries, especially financial or institutional
Durham (2004)                             1979-1998    Cross section OLS               Volume      development.
                                          Table 4A (Continued)
                    Summary of Key Empirical Studies on Financial Integration and Growth
                                         Number of          Dependent Variable /        Financial                      Main Findings
                                         Countries /       Regression Methodology       Openness
 Study                                   Time Period                                    Measure
                                              73         ∆Yc                           Share,         MIXED: Capital account liberalization has
 Edison, Klein, Ricci, and Slok (2004)     1976-1995     Cross section OLS             Quinn          positive growth effect in middle income countries.
                                                                                                      MIXED: Positive short-run growth impact of
                                                                                                      capital account liberalization but longer term effect
                                              45         ∆Yc                           KS,            depends on institutional quality, FDI flows, and
 Fratzscher and Bussiere (2004)            1980-2002     5-yearly panel dynamic GMM    Volume         liberalization sequencing.
                                                                                                      POSITIVE: Financial openness has a positive
                                                                                                      effect on sectoral value added growth but with
                                              45         ∆IND                          Share,         greater relative impact on those sectors more
 Vanassche (2004)                          1980-1997     Cross section OLS, IV         Quinn          reliant on external financing.
                                                                                                      MIXED: Capital account liberalization
                                              82         ∆Yc                                          significantly raises growth in more ethnically
 Chanda (2005)                             1976-1995     Cross section OLS             Share          homogeneous countries.
                                                                                                      MIXED: Capital account openness has a
                                              71         ∆Yc                                          statistically significant impact on growth in
 Klein (2005)                              1976-1995     Cross section OLS, IV, NLLS   Share          countries with better (not the best) institutions.
                                                                                                      MIXED: FDI had strongest positive impact on
                                                         I/Y                                          domestic investment. Positive relationship
                                              60         Annual and 3-yearly panels    Volume,        between capital flows and investment growth is
 Mody and Murshid (2005)                   1979-1999     FE, IV, dynamic GMM           A Sum          more emphasized with stronger policies.
                                                                                                      MIXED: Value added growth in sectors more
                                                         ∆IND                                         dependent on external finance no higher post-
                                              42         Cross section with FE, OLS    Volume,        liberalization but positive effects on growth in
 Vlachos and Waldenström (2005)            1980-1990     and IV                        Binary         output and number of firms.
                                                                                                      MIXED: Developed countries with open capital
                                                                                                      accounts enjoyed greater growth and financial
                                              70         ∆Yc                                          deepening (with latter effect not present for
 Klein and Olivei (2006)                   1976-1995     Cross section OLS, ,IV        Share          developing economics).
Notes:

Dependent variable:
EBITDA: Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization; ∆GNPc: Growth rate of real per-capita GNP; I: Investment; I/Y:
Investment over GDP; ∆Ic: Growth rate in investment per capita; ∆IND: Growth rate of industry-level measures, e.g., real value added, output or
number of firms; ∆lnI: Growth rate of real private investment; S/Y: Saving over GDP; ∆TFP: Growth rate of total factor productivity; ∆Yc:
Growth rate of real per-capita GDP; ∆Y: Growth rate of real GDP.

Regression methodology:
Cross-section: Single observation for each country over entire period; FE: Country and/or industry fixed effects; GMM: Generalized Method of
Moments; IV: Instrumental Variables; NLLS: Non-Linear Least Squares; OLS: Ordinary Least Squares; Panel: Repeated observations on
countries (or country industries) observed over multiple periods (which may be, for example, annual, five years or a decade); Pooled: Assumes no
country-specific fixed effects; RE: Country random effects; SUR: Seemingly Unrelated Regressions; WLS: Weighted Least Squares.

Financial openness measure:
A Sum: Sum of four binary AREAER liberalization indicators across the following categories – capital account; current account; export proceeds
and multiple exchange rates; Binary: 0/1 dummy variable from AREAER taking the value of one when capital controls in place; KS: Measure
based on Kaminsky and Schmukler (2003); Quinn: Measure based on Quinn (1997); ∆Quinn: Change in Quinn measure; Share: The proportion of
years in which countries had liberalized capital accounts based on the binary variable from AREAER; SMLD: Official Date of Stock Market
Liberalization; Volume: Variable based on actual flows/stocks of financial flows.

Main findings:
NO EFFECT: No evidence of a significant effect of greater financial integration on growth; MIXED: Evidence of positive effect of financial
integration on growth is conditional upon other economic characteristics (for example, financial development or human capital) or otherwise non-
robust (for example, conditional on different country samples); POSITIVE: Significant positive effect of greater financial integration on growth.
                                              Table 4B
             Summary of Key Empirical Studies on Equity Market Liberalization and Growth
                                       Number of       Dependent Variable /          Financial                    Main Findings
                                       Countries /    Regression Methodology         Openness
 Study                                 Time Period                                   Measure
                                           11        ∆lnI                                        POSITIVE: Positive growth of real private
 Henry (2000)                           1977-1994    Annual panel FE                 SMLD        investment following stock market liberalization.
                                                     ∆Yc                                         POSITIVE: Positive effect on growth following
                                           30        5-yearly panel GMM                          equity market liberalization which is greater for
 Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2001)    1980-1997    (overlapping periods)           SMLD        countries with above median education levels.
                                                                                                 POSITIVE: Positive growth impact of opening
                                                                                                 equity markets due mainly to productivity channel
                                           95        ∆Yc, I/Y, ∆Yc/∆Ic                           (∆Yc/∆Ic) in middle- and high-income countries
 Li (2003)                              1975-2000    Annual panel FE, IV             SMLD        and to capital accumulation (I/Y) in low-income.
                                                     ∆Yc                                         POSITIVE: Equity liberalizations increased
                                                     5-yearly panel pooled OLS; 5-               growth (controlling for policy endogeneity) with
                                           95        yearly panel (overlapping                   stronger effects in better legal and investment
 Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2005)    1980-1997    periods) GMM, IV                SMLD        environment and financial development.
                                                                                                 POSITIVE/MIXED: Stock market liberalization
                                                                                                 leads to higher real value added growth in sectors
                                                     ∆IND                                        more dependent on external finance (but,
                                           31        Annual panel dynamic GMM,                   controlling for liberalization endogeneity, not in
 Gupta and Yuan (2005)                  1981-1998    IV                              SMLD        those with higher growth opportunities).
                                                     Firm-level indicators, e.g.                 POSITIVE: Significant improvement in sales
                                                     ∆log(sales), EBITDA/total       Firm-       performance associated with liberalization of a
                                           28        assets; log(sales/employees).   specific    firm’s equity to foreign investors (controlling for
 Mitton (2006)                          1980-2000    Annual panel FE                 SMLD        growth opportunities).
                                                                                                 MIXED: Real value added in sectors more
                                                                                                 dependent on external finance grows faster
                                           13        ∆IND                                        following equity liberalization in countries with
 Hammel (2006)                          1982-1995    3-yearly panel FE               SMLD        larger stock market capitalization to GDP.
Notes: See notes to Table 4A.
                                                   Table 4C
                                Summary of Key Empirical Studies on FDI and Growth
                                     Number of       Dependent Variable /        Financial                   Main Findings
                                     Countries /    Regression Methodology       Openness
Study                                Time Period                                 Measure
                                                                                             MIXED: FDI has a positive impact on economic
Balasubramanyam, Salisu,                 46        ∆Y                                        growth in countries which have export-oriented
and Sapsford (1996)                   1970-1985    Cross section OLS, IV         FDI/Y       rather than import substituting trade policies.
                                                   ∆Yc
Borensztein, De Gregorio,                69        Cross-section IV; decade                  MIXED: FDI contributes to growth in countries
and Lee (1998)                        1970-1989    panel pooled SUR, IV          FDI/Y       with a higher level of human capital.
                                                   ∆Y, I, ∆TFP                               MIXED: Growth effects of FDI depend on the
                                         31        VARs, cointegration; annual               degree of complementarity and substitution
De Mello (1999)                       1970-1990    panel FE IV, pooled group     FDI         between FDI and domestic investment.
                                         74        ∆Yc
Haveman, Lei, and Netz (2001)         1970-1989    5-yearly panel FE             FDI/Y       POSITIVE: FDI leads to increased growth.
                                                   ∆Yc                                       MIXED: FDI has a positive impact on growth, but
                                         88        Cross section OLS, decade                 evidence is weak in developing countries. FDI
Lensink and Morrisey (2002)           1970-1998    panel FE, IV                  FDI/Y       volatility has a negative growth effect.
                                                   ∆Yc
                                         67        Cross section OLS, 5-yearly               MIXED: FDI has a positive growth impact if
Hermes and Lensink (2003)             1970-1995    panel FE, RE                  FDI/Y       financial system sufficiently developed.
                                                                                             MIXED: FDI Granger-causes economic growth,
                                         80        ∆Yc                                       and vice versa, but effects are more emphasized
Choe (2003)                           1971-1995    5-yearly panel VAR            FDI/Y       from growth to FDI than from FDI to growth.
                                                                                             MIXED: FDI has a significantly positive effect on
Alfaro, Chanda, Kalemli-Ozcan and        71        ∆Yc                                       growth in countries with well-developed financial
Sayek (2004)                          1975-1995    Cross section OLS, IV         FDI/Y       markets.
                                                   ∆Yc
                                         72        Cross section OLS, 5-yearly               MIXED: FDI inflows do not exert an independent
Carkovic and Levine (2005)            1960-1995    panel dynamic system GMM      FDI/Y       influence on economic growth.
                                                   ∆Yc                                       MIXED: FDI has a positive impact on growth in
                                         69        10-yearly panel RE, pooled                less developed countries provided education levels
Blonigen and Wang (2005)              1970-1989    SUR                           FDI/Y       are high enough, but not in developed countries.
                                                                                             MIXED: While manufacturing sector FDI has a
                                         37        ∆Yc                                       positive impact on growth, primary or service
Aykut and Sayek (2005)                1990-2002    Cross section OLS IV          FDI/Y       sector FDI has no significant impact.
Notes: See notes to Table 4A.
