                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE INTERNATIONAL ROLE OF THE DOLLAR
                            AND TRADE BALANCE ADJUSTMENT

                                             Linda Goldberg
                                               Cédric Tille

                                          Working Paper 12495
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12495


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




We thank Joseph Gagnon, Peter Kenen, and participants of the Group of Thirty for valuable comments. The
views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Linda Goldberg and Cédric Tille. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The International Role of the Dollar and Trade Balance Adjustment
Linda Goldberg and Cédric Tille
NBER Working Paper No. 12495
August 2006
JEL No. F1, F3, F4

                                             ABSTRACT


The pattern of international trade adjustment is affected by the continuing international role of the
dollar and related evidence on exchange rate pass-through into prices. This paper argues that a
depreciation of the dollar would have asymmetric effects on flows between the United States and
its trading partners. With low exchange rate pass-through to U.S. import prices and high exchange
rate pass-through to the local prices of countries consuming U.S. exports, the effect of dollar
depreciation on real trade flows is dominated by an adjustment in U.S. export quantities, which
increase as U.S. goods become cheaper in the rest of the world. Real U.S. imports are affected less
because U.S. prices are more insulated from exchange rate movements pass-through is low and
dollar invoicing is high. In relation to prices, the effects on the U.S. terms of trade are limited: U.S.
exporters earn the same amount of dollars for each unit shipped abroad, and U.S. consumers do not
encounter more expensive imports. Movements in dollar exchange rates also affect the international
trade transactions of countries invoicing some of their trade in dollars, even when these countries
are not transacting directly with the United States.


Linda Goldberg
Research Department, 3rd Floor
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

Cédric Tille
International Research Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045-1003
cedric.tille@ny.frb.org
              The International Role of the Dollar and Trade Balance Adjustment


                                              Linda Goldberg∗
                                 Federal Reserve Bank of New York and NBER
                                                Cédric Tille
                                      Federal Reserve Bank of New York

                                                May 8, 2006

I. Introduction.

         A number of things must happen before exchange rate changes lead to trade balance
adjustments. First, the exchange rate change must lead to changes in the border prices of goods
imported by the destination market. Next, the change in border prices must lead to a change in
the price of goods charged to consumers. Finally, the consumer must react to the relative price
of import goods, substituting away from imports if they have become more expensive, or
increasing demand for imports if they have become relatively cheap. If the exporters adjust their
own profit margins to insulate foreign prices from exchange rate fluctuations, nominal trade
balance implications arise purely due to revenue effects of exchange rates on existing quantities
of goods traded.
        In the current debate over global imbalances, contributors differ in their views of how
much trade balance adjustment is achievable through adjustments in global aggregate demand
versus specifically through relative prices, as in Feldstein (2006), who advocates substantial
depreciation of the U.S. dollar as a key adjustment instrument. Most of these studies share the
key premise that exchange rates play a role in influencing the relative prices of domestic and
foreign goods, so that a U.S. dollar depreciation reduces U.S. imports and spurs its exports to
foreign markets.1
        Whether or not the demand for traded goods is sensitive to exchange rates has long been
recognized as a central issue in international transmission and adjustment, and was the theme of
the first Occasional Paper published by The Group of Thirty, by Kenen and Pack (1980).


∗
  We thank Joseph Gagnon and Peter Kenen for valuable comments. The views expressed in this article are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal
Reserve System.
1
  A recent NBER volume nicely overviews some alternative positions in this debate. See G-7 Current Account
Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, edited by Richard Clarida (forthcoming, NBER and University of
Chicago Press).


                                                                                                          1
Immediately after the Bretton-Woods system ended, one concern was whether real exchange
rates were truly flexible in a way that supported real adjustments. At that time, the debate
focussed on the point that if both nominal exchange rates and domestic prices were flexible, real
exchange rates would not move enough to correct external imbalances. As a consequence, trade
adjustment would need to occur solely through changes in the aggregate demand of trading
partners and nominal exchange rate movements would be ineffective in addressing real
imbalances. Kenen and Pack (1980), however, were early proponents of the view that changes in
nominal exchange rates would induce relative price adjustments, and would help economies
adjust their international imbalances.
           Now, more than twenty-five years later, the strength of the exchange rate instrument in
trade-balance adjustment is again hotly debated. We argue that the debate needs to pay heed to
the special international role of the dollar as a vehicle currency and as a unit of account. The
theory and evidence on the use of dollars and euros as invoicing currencies in international trade
transactions are consistent with evidence on low pass through of exchange rate movements into
the import prices of the United States and the higher pass through into import prices of other
countries. A consequence of this distinction in exchange-rate pass through into prices is that the
trade balance effects of exchange rate depreciation can be dramatically different for the United
States compared with other countries. A U.S. dollar depreciation is expected to lead to little
change in U.S. demand for imports while leading to potentially large increases in world demand
for U.S. exports, which will have become cheaper in foreign currency terms. The competitive
effects of dollar depreciation are strongest for U.S. exporters and foreign producers competing
with these goods. While the U.S. trade balance will respond to changes in the value of the dollar,
the special international role of the dollar and the related low degree of exchange-rate pass
through into U.S. import prices will lead the trade balance response to be primarily through
increased quantities of U.S. exports.
           Section II begins by reviewing the theory of currency selection in invoicing international
trade transactions. Our recent contributions to this area build on the rich history of thought on
this topic, from the 1960s through the present.2 These contributions advanced a range of
explanations for why a currency becomes a vehicle for pricing and international transactions,
including transaction costs in foreign exchange markets, inertia and market depth, industry

2
    Kenen (1983) overviews the early evidence and arguments in Group of Thirty Occasional Paper no. 13.


                                                                                                          2
structure, and macroeconomic volatility. We then provide evidence on the extent to which
exporters use dollars and euros as invoicing currencies. The U.S. dollar and the euro are the
main currencies used for transactions in global markets. The dollar is dominant because of the
large weight of the United States and dollar bloc countries in international transactions, and
because of the importance of the dollar in invoicing trades of commodities and other
homogeneous goods. These findings are consistent with survey results reported in the recent
Conference Board and Group of Thirty project on “Do Exchange Rates Matter?” (2005). That
paper observed that “one of the most interesting results of the survey – one with significant
policy implications – is the extent to which global businesses manage exchange rate risk by
reducing the number of currencies that account for the majority of foreign exchange exposure.
Global companies may produce in dozens of countries and may sell in a hundred or more, but
two-thirds of the companies indicate that five currencies or less account for all of their foreign
exchange exposure.” (page 8). We argue that this dominant role for the dollar in international
transactions is likely to persist.
        In Section III we discuss exchange rate pass through into the prices of goods as they
enter a country, and reasons why this pass-through is typically incomplete. It is now well-
established that exchange-rate pass through into import prices is incomplete, variable across
types of goods, and lower for the United States than for other industrialized countries. The
special role of the U.S. dollar as a key vehicle currency in international transactions helps to
insulate U.S. prices from exchange rate fluctuations. While this insulation is immediately
apparent in the dollar prices of U.S. imports, additional damping of exchange rate effects on
prices occurs by the time the imported good reaches consumers. The damped effect on
consumption prices of imported goods occurs because local country content arising from the
distribution sector dilutes the share of the total product cost that is attributable to import content.
Moreover, distributors may actively absorb some exchange rate movements within their own
profit margins.
        In Section IV we examine how exchange rate movements affect the trade balance. When
consumption prices of imported goods are responsive to exchange rates expenditure-switching
occurs when a home currency depreciation raises the price of foreign goods sold in home
markets relative to the prices of local substitutes. A real trade surplus develops as foreign
consumers increase their demand for home exports and home consumers reduce quantities



                                                                                                 3
imported of the foreign good. This real surplus does not necessarily translate to a nominal
surplus in home currency terms, as the higher price of imports (a worsening of the terms of
trade) tends to increase the dollar cost of imports. Our twist to this well-known adjustment story
hinges on the special role of the dollar as an invoicing currency in international trade, and the
related observation that exchange-rate pass through into import prices is lower for the United
States than for other countries. This feature generates an asymmetry across countries in trade
balance effects of exchange rates. When import prices are not affected much by exchange rate
movements, which is the case when exchange-rate pass through into prices is very low,
expenditure-switching does not occur in the home market. A domestic currency depreciation
does not lead to much of a decline in import quantities. At the same time a depreciation of the
dollar raises quantities of U.S. exports through the expenditure effect, as foreign consumers
substitute away from other suppliers and toward U.S. goods. The U.S. dollar depreciation
reduces the trade deficit of the United States, but mainly by stimulating U.S. exports. As U.S.
import prices do not increase substantially and its exports are priced in dollar terms, the United
States is shielded from a depreciation of its terms of trade.
       In addition to affecting trade adjustment between the United States and the rest of the
world, the dollar’s prominence in invoicing international trade transactions even affects the trade
balances of countries engaging in transactions that do not involve the United States. The pattern
of consequences depends on the extent to which different countries use dollar for invoicing and
pricing their bilateral transactions. U.S. dollar depreciations can raise the competitiveness of
products invoiced in dollars elsewhere, both relative to produces invoicing in other currencies,
and relative to their domestic goods.
       We conclude this paper with a discussion of the policy implications of our analysis.
Some of the lessons drawn from recent research were already anticipated twenty-five years ago,
in early seminal work on this topic, including the first Occasional Paper written for the Group of
Thirty by Kenen and Pack (1980). They had concluded, “a change in the nominal exchange rate
does produce a change in the real exchange rate. The latter will be smaller than the former and
may be very small for small open economies, but it need not be trivial or transitory. Trade flows
are moderately sensitive to a change in the real exchange rate; price elasticities are not
negligible. Taken together, these conclusions say that a depreciation of one country’s currency
will increase its exports and reduce its imports, though long lags may be involved.” Now, with



                                                                                              4
the advantage of considerably more data and decades of development of theoretical tools, this
theme from the early literature is validated. We add the key observations that the special role of
the U.S. dollar in invoicing international trade transactions, and evidence on partial and
asymmetric exchange-rate pass through into import prices across countries, imply that real trade
adjustment may be asymmetric. The U.S. might not adjust demand for imported goods when the
dollar depreciates. By contrast, the dollar depreciation increases the competitiveness of U.S.
goods in foreign markets, so that real quantities adjusted would be limited to exports of U.S.
products and the foreign sales that these exports displace.


II. Invoice Currencies in International Trade Transactions
       The theoretical determinants of invoicing-currency choice include arguments that
emphasize the roles of transaction costs, industry structure, and macroeconomic volatility. Here
we briefly review the key theoretical contributions before turning to the empirical evidence on
invoicing, and the key roles currently played by the dollar and the euro.

Determinants of trade invoicing.

        Early contributions to this literature focused on the role of currencies as mediums of
exchange. The importance of using currencies with low transaction costs in foreign exchange
markets, still discussed in current analysis, was stressed by Swoboda (1968, 1969). Such low
costs could, for instance, reflect a high degree of liquidity in the foreign exchange markets for
the currencies in question (Portes and Rey, 1998). Rey (2001) argued that there are “thick
market externalities” associated with a currency’s large presence in global international trade,
which yields low transaction costs of exchange. In theoretical work by Devereux and Shi
(2005), a vehicle currency through which all trading takes place can emerge as a way to
minimize trading-post setup costs.

       Another argument for invoice currency selection centers on industry characteristics, and
in particular stresses that single currencies may be selected for use in the pricing and invoicing
of homogeneous goods. McKinnon (1979) argued that industries where goods are homogeneous
and traded in specialized markets are likely to have transactions invoiced in a single low
transaction cost currency. Krugman (1980) pointed to the presence of inertia in the choice of
currency used for this pricing and discussed the disincentives against deviating from the industry



                                                                                             5
norms. Once a currency acquires prominence, perhaps because of low transaction costs, it may
keep this role even if another currency with similarly low costs emerges.

       A third line of argument emphasizes that macroeconomic policy and volatility could
influence the emergence of vehicle currencies. Firms have an incentive to invoice their trade in
the currency of a country where the volatility of shocks, such as those arising from monetary
aggregates, is moderate, as this will ceteris paribus minimize the fluctuations in the exchange
rates associated with the currency in questions (Giovannini 1988, Wilander 2006).

       Recent research contributions by Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2005), Devereux, Engel
and Storegaard (2004), and Goldberg and Tille (2005) take these alternative arguments further.
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2005) stress the role of structural features of economies, such as
price elasticities of demand and the convexity of production costs. They also point to the
presence of a herding effect: if several currencies are available for invoicing, the exporter has an
incentive to invoice in the currency used by the majority of her competitors, as doing so limits
the volatility of output and marginal costs. Devereux, Engel and Storegaard (2004) focus on the
role for monetary fluctuations in the invoicing decision, showing that exporters choose to set
their prices in the currency of the country where monetary shocks are the least volatile.

        The research by Goldberg and Tille (2005) expands on the multi-currency analysis of
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2005) and contrasts the role of the herding motive with other
motives, such as the desire to hedge macroeconomic volatility. Herding considerations are
found to play a sizable role in choosing the single currency to be used for invoicing international
transactions, and are expected to be the dominant consideration for industries where goods are
more homogenous. Invoicing of transactions for highly differentiated goods, like manufactured
products, is likely to be more evenly spread across the various currencies and may be more
responsive to macro-economic volatility. If macroeconomic volatility is an input into invoice
currency decisions, it would enter because of patterns of correlations between exchange rates
and marginal costs, as opposed to the volatility of the exchange rate per se.
       Our model also confirms the findings in the early literature that a currency is more likely
to be used in invoicing if it has low transaction costs. While herding means that exporters will
use a common currency, it does not indicate which currency should play that role. Introducing
transaction costs complements the analysis, as we can expect exporters to coordinate their choice



                                                                                               6
of invoicing currency on the currency with low transaction costs. As in the Krugman (1980)
inertia arguments, this mechanism can feed on itself if the low costs are driven by the liquidity of
the foreign exchange market. Such a virtuous cycle mechanism can explain why a particular
currency can persist as a vehicle currency for a substantial period.


The evidence on currency invoicing in international trade
         Goldberg and Tille (2005), the follow-up study by Kamps (2005), and the ECB (2005)
report provide extensive cross-country evidence on the currency invoicing of international trade
transactions.3 These analyses show that both the U.S. dollar and the euro are extensively used in
international trade transactions, with the dollar still the dominant currency. Across countries,
“Grassman’s Law” still seems to hold, i.e. countries tend more extensively use their own
currency on export invoicing than on import invoicing (Grassman 1973).
         Table 1, using data reported in these studies, shows the use of dollars in invoicing
country exports and imports at the latest year for which data are available across countries.
International trade transactions between other countries and the United States are primarily
invoiced in U.S. dollars. More than 99 percent of U.S. exports and 92 percent of U.S. imports
were invoiced in dollars in early 2003. Those countries using their own currencies on part of
their sales to the United States are the United Kingdom, Japan, and some euro area countries.
         Approximately one third of the exports of most euro area countries (to countries outside
of the euro area) are invoiced in dollars, with nearly 40 percent of euro area imports invoiced in
dollars. The U.S. dollar is used intensively in the United Kingdom’s international trade
transactions, on 26 percent of U.K. total exports and 37 percent of U.K. imports. The EU
acceding and accession countries are mixed in the extent to which dollars are used in invoicing
their international trade transactions, with dollar shares in invoicing international trade often
lower for these countries than for euro-area countries. By contrast, the dollar remains a dominant
currency in the invoicing of both exports and imports by countries outside of Europe. Both
Korea and Thailand use the dollar in invoicing more than 80 percent of their export and import

3
  Details on the currency invoicing of international trade transactions previously were scarce. Some recent but
discrete facts focusing on individual countries or regions, as in Swedish invoicing by Friberg (1998) and Wilander
(2006), Canadian invoicing by Donnenfeld and Haug (2003), and Japan by Oi, Otani, and Shirota (2004). Evidence
for euro-area and accession countries, in part triggered by the advent of the euro and efforts to track its adoption in
goods markets and financial markets (European Central Bank 2002). See also Goldberg (forthcoming) on euro-area
accession countries.


                                                                                                                7
transactions. For Japan, Australia, and Malaysia, the dollar is used in substantially more than 50
percent of trade transactions.

 Table 1: U.S. Dollar and Euro Use in the Export and Import Invoicing of 24 Countries
                                         Export Invoicing              Import Invoicing
                           Date    Dollar Share   Euro Share     Dollar Share    Euro Share
United States             2003          99.8                         92.8
Asia
 Japan                    2003          48.0           9.6           68.7           4.5
 Korea                    2004          83.2           7.4           79.6           5.4
 Malaysia                 2000          90.0            --           90.0            --
 Thailand                 2003          84.4           2.7           76.0           4.3
Australia                 2004          69.6           1.3           50.5           9.0
Euro-Area
 Belgiuma                 2003          31.9          55.3           33.3           57.0
 Francea                  2003          33.9          52.4           47.0           45.1
 Germanya                 2003          24.1          63.0           33.9           55.2
 Italy                    2003          17.5          74.9           24.9           70.2
          a
 Greece                   2003          46.1          47.3           54.7           39.6
 Luxembourga              2003          24.5          52.7           36.9           41.7
 Portugala                2003          28.0          54.6           32.6           60.2
 Spaina                   2003          30.3          60.8           35.7           60.3
United Kingdom            2002           26            21            37.0           27.0
EU-Accession
 Bulgaria                 2004          34.9          62.4           34.2           63.5
 Cyprus                   2002          44.7          21.8           34.9           45.5
 Czech                    2003          13.3          69.5           18.4           66.4
 Estonia                  2003          70.4           8.5           22.0           61.7
 Hungary                  2002          12.2          83.1           18.5           73.1
 Latvia                   2003          26.7          57.4                          48.9
 Poland                   2003          25.9          63.6           28.2           58.8
 Slovakia                 2002          11.6          73.9           21.2           60.1
 Slovenia                 2002          9.6           86.9           13.3           82.8



                                                                                              8
       The euro is used in invoicing the international trade transactions mainly of European
countries. Basically, the euro has replaced European legacy currencies in invoicing euro-area
transactions. By contrast, euro invoicing now prevails instead of dollar invoicing mainly in
transactions of European Union (E.U.) acceding and accession countries (ECB 2002, 2005).
Grassman’s Law once more holds, in that euro area countries invoice nearly 60 percent of their
exports in euros and only 54 percent of their imports (unweighted average across the countries
reported in Table 1). For E.U. acceding and accession countries, the export invoicing is similar,
but nearly 65 percent of imported goods are invoiced in euros. Indeed, Goldberg (forthcoming)
has questioned whether this share is too high, given the amount of imports that are homogeneous
and typically dollar-priced goods and given accession country trade with dollar bloc countries.
The role of the euro in invoicing is limited for countries outside of the European Union. In the
United States, Japan, Korea, Australia, Malaysia, and Thailand, the euro shares in export and
import invoicing are below 10 percent.
       These cross-country observations on the currency of invoicing of international trade
relate to direction of trade of each country. As a first look, consider the use of dollars in country
export invoicing relative to the share of the United States as a direct destination for country
exports. This information is shown in Figure 1, which is an updated from Goldberg and Tille
(2005). If dollars were used on all country exports to the United States, and not used in other
export transactions, the country points indicated in the chart would lie along the 45 degree line.
The vehicle currency role of the dollar is reflected in the observation that all countries use
dollars more extensively in exports than would be suggested by their partnering in trade with just
the United States.




                                                                                                9
                                                                                                Figure 1: Use of the U.S. Dollar in International Export Transactions

                                                                  100

                                                                   90
            Exports to the US, Share of Total Exports (percent)




                                                                   80

                                                                   70

                                                                   60

                                                                   50

                                                                   40
                                                                               45degrees
                                                                   30
                                                                                                                                   Japan
                                                                   20                                   Portugal                                                                Malaysia
                                                                                                Germany                Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                         Korea      Thailand
                                                                                                United Kingdom           France
                                                                   10                          Italy                  Spain Greece
                                                                                                                                                      Australia
                                                                                    Hungary                                Bulgaria
                                                                            Slovenia      Czech Poland           Latvia
                                                                              Slovakia     Luxembourg                       Cyprus                       Estonia
                                                                    0
                                                                        0            10             20            30          40           50       60            70       80          90      100
                                                                                                               US Dollar Invoicing Share in Country Exports (percent)




                                                                                                Figure 2: Use of the U.S. Dollar and "Commodity " Type Exports


                                                                  100
Exports to the US + Exports of RW Goods to non-U.S. Countries,




                                                                   90

                                                                   80
                                                                                                                                                      Australia
                Share of Total Exports (percent)




                                                                   70

                                                                   60

                                                                   50                                    Belgium
                                                                                                                              Greece                                    Thailand
                                                                                                                Bulgaria                                                        Malaysia
                                                                                                                             Cyprus
                                                                   40
                                                                                           United Kingdom         Portugal         Japan
                                                                                                                                                                        Korea
                                                                                                                France
                                                                   30                                               Spain
                                                                                                    Germany                                              Estonia
                                                                              Slovakia      Italy   Poland Luxembourg
                                                                            Slovenia
                                                                                  Czech
                                                                   20          Hungary

                                                                   10
                                                                                                      Latvia
                                                                                    45degrees
                                                                    0
                                                                        0            10             20            30          40           50      60             70      80           90      100
                                                                                                               US Dollar Invoicing Share in Country Exports (percent)




                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
        Goldberg and Tille (2005) explored different motives for using the dollar as an invoicing
currency. Country exports to the United States and to other dollar bloc countries explain much
of the cross-country variation in dollar invoicing. The next, more important, force is the industry
composition of country exports.            In particular, the extent to which country exports are in
homogeneous goods (like commodities) that tend to be reference priced or traded in organized
exchanges explain a large part of the remaining gap. This point is illustrated in Figure 2, which
is different from Figure 1 only in that vehicle currency use of dollars on homogeneous goods
exports also are included to explain total invoicing in dollars. Notice that the observations more
tightly wrap around the 45 degree line, with the exception of countries like Malaysia, Thailand
and Korea that are typically considered as “dollar bloc” economies.

        In addition of the snapshot patterns illustrated in Figures 1 and 2, the available data
provide a window into the evolving pattern of dollar use and euro use in invoicing international
transactions. Only eleven countries have enough data available to show how currency use has
changed since the advent of the euro. All these countries, except Australia, reduced their use of
U.S. dollars in export invoicing between 1998 and 2004 (Table 2). The declines were large for
countries that have recently acceded or intend to accede to the European Union, for example
Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Slovakia, reinforcing the observation of Goldberg
(forthcoming) and ECB (2005) that institutional issues like exchange rate relationships matter in
these cases. Many of the acceding and accession countries have exchange rate regimes that have
been (or became) closely aligned with the euro over the past decade.4 As observed by the ECB
(2005), “countries with clear prospects of being part of the EU, as well as those with hard pegs
to the euro, make greater use of the euro in foreign trade even when controlling for actual trade
with the euro area”. Changes in euro and dollar use in invoicing by these countries are not
explained by reduction in country direct trade with the United States.
        One of the themes emphasized in the theory of invoice currency selection is that, all else
equal, a currency chosen for invoicing will be the one with lowest transaction costs. In recent

4
  Goldberg (forthcoming) overviews this information. Bulgaria, Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary, Malta, Slovakia, and
Slovenia, tied their currencies either exclusively to the DM or euro or to a basket of currencies dominated by the
DM or euro. The Czech Republic pegged their currency to a DM-dominated basket until 1997 and has been floating
since them. Poland first had a loose crawling peg to the dollar, and then to the DM and euro, and has been floating
since 2000. Slovakia also began with a loose crawling peg to a DM/dollar basket, then began effectively pegging to
the euro in 1999. Lithuania was the only country exclusively pegged to the dollar before switching to the euro in
2002 as part of the process of joining the euro zone. Latvia has also been primarily associated with the dollar,
pegging to the SDR, a basket in which the dollar has the strongest weight, throughout the period.


                                                                                                           11
decades this has generally been the U.S. dollar, which has the deepest and most liquid markets.
The dominance of the dollar has persisted in foreign exchange markets, even since the advent of
the euro. Share of dollars and euros in settlement of foreign exchange transactions provided by
the Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS) system have been broadly unchanged in recent years.
The U.S. dollar accounts for around 90 percent of all daily transactions, and the euro accounts
for around 40 percent of transactions (out of a total 200 percent of transactions). While it is an
open question on how long the strength of cost advantage associated with transacting in dollars
will be retained, bid-ask spreads still favour dollars.5


Table 2: Changes in U.S. Dollar Use in Invoicing and in U.S. Share of Country Exports

                            U.S. Dollar Share in                    U.S. Share in Total Country Exports
                             Export Invoicing
    Country
                     1998            2004          Change in          1998             2004      Change in
                                                    $ Share                                      U.S Share

Australia            66.0            69.6              3.6             9.4              8.1        -1.3
Bulgaria             65.8            34.9            -30.9             2.7              5.3         2.6
                                          b                                                  b
    Czech            16.4            13.3             -4.4             2.2             2.5         0.2 b
     Japan           51.2            48.0b           -3.2 b           30.9             24.8 b     -6.1 b
    Korea            86.3            83.2             -3.1            17.4             17.0        -0.4
    Latvia           46.7            26.7 b          -11.5             2.9             2.9 b       0.0 b
    Poland          36.2a            25.9 b          -14.9             2.8 a           2.2 b      -0.5 ab
Slovakia            28.4a            11.6 c          -9.4 ac           1.4 a           1.4 c       0.0 ac
     Spain           40.1            30.3 b          -11.0             4.3             10.4 b      6.1 b
Thailand             90.6            84.4 b          -6.2 b           22.0             17.0b       -5.0b
    Czech            16.4            13.3b            -4.4             2.2             2.5 b       0.2 b
a
    Data is for 1999, not 1998 ;b Data is for 2003, not 2004; c Data is for 2002, not 2004

Source: Author computations using International Financial Statistics, Direction of Trade data. Data sources are
provided in Goldberg and Tille (2005), Kamps (2005) and ECB (2005)




5
  Hau, Killeen and Moore (2002) find that the euro was a less attractive currency in its early years, compared with
the DM, with reduced attractiveness relative to the U.S. dollar.


                                                                                                             12
        Overall, the U.S. dollar is likely to maintain its key role as an invoice currency in
international transactions. This role is directly tied to the share of the US market as a destination
for world production, to the size of dollar bloc countries outside of the United States, to the
importance of global trade in commodities and homogeneous goods relative to total trade (which
had been declining over time), and to transaction costs that continue to support using the dollar
over the euro as a vehicle currency for transactions.


III. Trade invoicing and exchange-rate pass through

Empirical evidence on pass through
      While we have overviewed the current state of knowledge on dollar use in invoicing of
international trade transactions, a related concept is the degree to which exchange rate changes
influence prices of goods imported by countries, the so-called degree of exchange rate pass
through. Strictly speaking, invoicing need not be connected to pass through. A European
exporter selling goods to the United States can invoice in dollars, i.e. use a dollar price on the
contract with the U.S. importer, but can still adjust this price to make up for any fluctuations in
the dollar-euro exchange rate. In this case, the invoicing is done in dollars, but exchange rate
movements are passed through to the dollar price.6
      In practice, however, prices are not frequently reset to reflect exchange rate movements.
In our example, the European exporter would set a price in dollars for a delivery at a future date
and leave this price unchanged even if the dollar-euro exchange rate moves between now and the
delivery date.7 The European export is then invoiced in dollars, and the price is held constant in
dollars. This example represents a case of zero pass-through into U.S. import prices, as the
dollar price paid by the U.S. importer is insulated from near-term exchange-rate fluctuations.
An alternative scenario would be for the European exporter to fix a price in euros and allow the
dollar price of his goods to reflect exchange-rate movements. This case represents complete
exchange-rate pass through, as a depreciation of the dollar creates a proportional rise in the


6
  Theoretically, Engel (2005) shows the strong parallels between the choice of invoicing when prices are sticky and
the optimal degree of exchange rate pass through when prices are fully flexible.
7
  The ECB Monthly Bulletin (November 2005) provides an extensive report on price-setting behaviour in the euro
area. The report includes evidence on frequency of price changes across different types of producer and consumer
goods, and presents reasons for sluggish price adjustments. Gopinath and Rigobon (2006) document price stickiness
evidence in U.S. imports.


                                                                                                           13
dollar price for the imported goods. While invoicing and exchange-rate pass through need not be
tied, they are in practice, with the currency of invoicing also being the currency in which prices
are held steady. For instance, a European exporter invoicing in dollars not only writes a price in
dollars on the contract, but also keeps this price steady in the face of exchange rate movements.
     The empirical evidence documented in the previous section, along with the link between
invoicing and exchange rate pass through, identifies an asymmetry resulting from the prominent
role of the dollar. With U.S. exports and imports both predominantly invoiced in dollars, the
prices of U.S. imports are more insulated from exchange rate fluctuations than the prices in local
currency terms paid by foreign importers. This asymmetry is clearly present in empirical
evidence on exchange-rate pass through into import prices.
     The United States is typically found to have low exchange-rate pass through into import
prices, with recent estimates ranging from 25 to 40 percent (Olivei 2002, Campa and Goldberg
2005, Marazzi, Sheets, and Vigfusson et al 2005). By contrast, transmission among euro area
countries is high, although still incomplete, and different across both industries and countries.
Exchange rate changes continue to produce large changes in import prices across euro area
countries, on average at 80 percent pass-through rates over the course of a year (Campa,
Goldberg, and Gonzalez-Minguez (forthcoming), Ihrig, Marazzi, and Rothenberg 2006). Across
the OECD countries more broadly, unweighted average of pass-through elasticities across
countries is about 64 percent over one year. Across some countries, there have been statistically
significant trends towards lower pass-through rates for manufacturing industries in the period
since the 1997 Asia crisis. While, exchange rate pass through into import prices may have
broadly declined in recent years, the reasons for such declines and the permanence of lower pass-
through rates into industrialized country import prices have not been established.


Invoicing, Import Price Sensitivity and Consumption Price Sensitivity
     A central theme of our manuscript is that the invoicing of international trade is relevant to
trade adjustment because of the link between invoicing and the degree of exchange rate
transmission into import prices. Import prices influence the consumption prices of traded goods,
which interact with demand elasticities to elicit changes in quantities traded and thus real
adjustment to exchange rates. It is important to note, however, that import price sensitivity to
exchange rates is not identical to consumption price sensitivity. After goods arrive at the docks



                                                                                            14
of importing countries, other local services and costs are incurred before the goods reach
consumers. These local costs are subsumed under the heading of distribution services and
include expenditures on wholesalers, retailers, transportation, and finance and insurance services
(Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo 2003; Campa and Goldberg 2006). By adding local content to the
imported goods, such expenditures on local currency distribution services partially insulate
consumption prices from movements in import prices, and thus from exchange rate movements.
A complementary channel for insulation may arise if local distributors adjust their own profit
margins to absorb some of the exchange-rate induced changes in good prices at the border
(Devereux, Engel, and Tille 2003; Hellerstein 2004). Expenditures on local distribution services
are, on average, 32 to 50 percent of the total cost of goods across OECD countries (Campa and
Goldberg 2006). The implication is that consumption prices of imported goods may exhibit one-
third to half of the sensitivity to exchange rates of import prices at the border. In addition,
adjustments of distribution margins can absorb some of the remaining exchange-rate induced
price changes. Overall, the pass through of exchange rates into the consumption prices of
imported goods could be less than half of the pass-through into the border prices of those same
goods.
     Moreover, even this lower retail price sensitivity of imported goods may overstate the
extent to which a home currency depreciation raise the price of imports compared with
competing home products. If competing domestically-produced goods use imported inputs,
home producers’ costs rise at the same time that the prices of imports for final consumption rise.
While some relative price effects will likely be evident, the percentage change in relative prices
at the retail level will be an order of magnitude less than the actual exchange rate fluctuation.



IV. Exchange rate movements and trade adjustment

Trade adjustment and exchange-rate pass through in symmetric models.

     The general principle behind trade balance responsiveness to exchange rate movement is
that these movements induce an expenditure-switching effect. Consider the case of trade between
the United States and euro-area countries. In a situation of complete exchange-rate pass through
in all importing countries, a depreciation of the dollar vis-à-vis the euro makes U.S.-produced
goods cheaper to euro-area consumers, boosting the price competitiveness of U.S. firms.


                                                                                               15
Consider a movement from one dollar per euro to 1.25 dollars per euro and assume that U.S.
exporters charge a set price in dollars, say $10, for each unit sold. The price in euros paid by
consumers decreases from 10           to 8 . If U.S.-made goods are substitutes for euro-area-made
goods, European consumers will switch their consumption, increasing their demand for U.S.
produced goods and reducing their demand for euro area ones. A similar mechanism would be
triggered in the United States, where the dollar price of a euro-area good for which the exporter
charges 10     increases from $10 $ to $12.50.
      In this example of complete and symmetric pass through in prices of both trading partners
a dollar depreciation clearly affects the real trade balance by boosting quantities of U.S. exports
and reducing quantities of U.S. imports. However, the impact on the nominal trade balance is
more complex, because the nominal trade balance also reflects movements in the terms of trade,
i.e., the relative price of exports and imports. On the export side, the demand for U.S. goods
increases, increasing the quantities shipped by U.S. firms. As the price of each good is typically
set in dollars, the nominal dollar value of U.S. exports increases in step with the quantities sold.
The situation is more complicated on the import side. Suppose that the exchange rate
depreciation is passed through into dollar prices of imported goods. Expenditure-switching leads
U.S. consumers to buy fewer European goods, but the price in dollars higher for each unit that is
imported. The change in the dollar value of imports is therefore ambiguous: if the quantities
imported fall substantially, the U.S. nominal expenditure on imports is reduced. On the other
hand, if the quantities bought by U.S. consumers decrease only marginally, the total import bill
can increase due to the higher cost of each unit of imported goods.
      The price sensitivity of demand is thus a central aspect in trade adjustment (Corsetti and
Pesenti 2005, Tille 2001). If demand reacts more than proportionally to price changes,8 then a
depreciation of the dollar boosts U.S. exports by enough to dwarf the worsening terms-of-trade
(i.e. the price of exports relative to the price of imports) and moves the U.S. nominal trade
balance toward surplus. If foreign demand is relatively unresponsive to prices, however, the
depreciation of the dollar has only a moderate impact on U.S. exports. The adjustment is
dominated by worsening terms of trade, so that depreciation of the dollar could even move the
nominal trade balance toward higher deficits.


8
 This is the case when a 10 percent fall in the relative price of European goods boosts the demand for these goods
by more than 10 percent.


                                                                                                          16
     The example just presented assumed complete exchange rate pass through into the
consumption prices of imports across both trading partners. The previous section, however,
showed the restrictive nature of this assumption when we documented the empirical facts of
limited transmission of exchange rate movements to prices, especially at short horizons. This
evidence has led theoretical analyses to model trade balance adjustment under scenarios where
consumer prices are more insulated from exchange rate fluctuations, in some cases making the
opposite extreme assumption that exporters set their prices in the currency of their foreign
consumers (Betts and Devereux 2000). These local- currency- pricing scenarios have different
trade balance effects that are attributed to exchange–rate changes. . The expenditure-switching
effect is now absent, as all prices faced by consumers are completely insulated from exchange
rate fluctuations. As a result, quantities shipped across borders do not react to exchange rate
movements, regardless of the price sensitivity of demands. The impact of the exchange rate
comes entirely through income effects. Consider the case of the U.S. exporters and a U.S.dollar
depreciation. Under the local-currency-pricing assumption, depreciation of the dollar does not
affect the amount of goods shipped to euro area countries, as European consumers do not shift
their demand. However, the dollar revenue from each unit sold is higher. This occurs because,
with prices set in euros and no change in demand, the exporter receives the same amount of
euros as before the depreciation took place. This amount now translates into a larger amount of
dollars, increasing the revenue of the exporter in her currency. Similarly, within the United
States the dollar price of imports from the euro area would be unchanged. The revenue in euros
of European exporters would correspondingly fall. Thus, the depreciation of the dollar would
improve the U.S. terms of trade, in sharp contrast to the situation under complete exchange- rate
pass through considered above. The opposite happens in the euro area.
     The depreciation of the dollar in the case of local- currency- pricing among trade partners
unambiguously leads to a nominal trade surplus for the United States. This result entirely
reflects the improvement of the U.S. terms of trade, as the real quantities of goods traded are
unchanged. In normative terms, the gain for the United States comes at the expense of the rest of
the world, where imports are not any cheaper and the revenue from sales in the United States
falls in their local currency units. Finally, as we have discussed in our presentation of the
empirical evidence on pass through, and as Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) argue, theoretical models
of adjustment need to recognize the distinction between exchange-rate pass through into import



                                                                                          17
prices, i.e. prices at the dock, and into consumer prices. Distinguishing between prices at
different stages of the production chain allows for exchange rate movements to generate a
substantial switching effect, while having little impact on consumer prices. Obstfeld (2001)
argues that the allocation between domestic and imported goods is not limited to consumers, but
extends to firms that can substitute imported inputs for domestic ones.             Exchange rate
movements induce firms to switch between different inputs, as long as these movements are
transmitted to intermediate prices.    This action by firms is consistent with the absence of
switching from consumers who face prices that are insulated. The effective degree of switching
induced by exchange rate movements is therefore understated by the limited impact on consumer
prices.

Trade adjustment in an asymmetric world

      The theoretical connection between exchange rate pass through and the channels of trade
adjustment has been explored mostly in symmetric models, where the degree of exchange-rate
pass through into import prices and consumption prices is the same across trading partners. The
empirical evidence presented above, however, emphasizes an asymmetric world with a
prominent role of the dollar as an invoicing currency. This invoicing role implies that exchange-
rate pass through to U.S. import prices is limited, while the pass through into the import prices of
other countries around the world is substantially higher. In practice, U.S. exports and the exports
of dollar-bloc countries are primarily invoiced in dollars. A dollar depreciation keeps relatively
steadily the prices in the United States, but affects the euro prices faced by European consumers
on exports from other countries that had been dollar priced. Since asymmetric pass-through is
the appropriate scenario for exploring current account imbalances that involve the United States,
we focus exclusively on this theme in this section.

Links between the U.S. and the rest of the world
      Under asymmetric pass through, and with prices fixed in dollars, a depreciation of the
dollar leads to expenditure switching in the foreign market towards U.S. goods and increases the
quantities of goods exported by the United States. The situation is different for U.S. imports,
which follow the scenario in which exchange-rate pass through into U.S. import prices is very
low. With prices largely unchanged in dollar terms, U.S. consumers do not reallocate their



                                                                                             18
purchases, leaving real quantities imported unchanged. The revenue of European exporters
measured in euros decreases, as the set dollar revenue now translates into a smaller amount of
euros.
     This pattern of trade adjustment under asymmetric exchange-rate pass through lies between
the two polar cases previously discussed, with effects on the real trade balance of the United
States driven by higher U.S. exports without associated movements in U.S. imports. The prices
of both U.S. exports and imports are unchanged in dollar terms, so the terms of trade are
insulated from the exchange rate. The United States, then, does not suffer from any terms-of-
trade worsening, as it would under symmetric and complete pass through, but it does not benefit
from any improvement either, as it would under the case where all trading partners pursue a
local-currency-pricing strategy, where there is zero pass through into the import prices in all
trading partners.

     These mechanisms for trade balance adjustment carry over to detailed scenario analyses
and models. Simulation exercises recently performed at the Federal Reserve Board by Gust and
Sheets (2006) focus on the patterns of trade adjustment under alternative structures of pass
through using a dynamic general equilibrium model of transactions between two countries. A
depreciation of the dollar leads to a nominal trade surplus (relative to an initial condition of
balanced trade) in all scenarios, with the pace of adjustment depending on the structure of pass
through. In the absence of any pass through into import prices across countries, the nominal
trade balance of the United States immediately moves into surplus and remains steady as prices
and policies adjust.   Under complete exchange-rate pass through into import prices across
countries, the nominal trade balance of the United States initially moves into deficit due to
frictions in real trade flow adjustment, but then quickly moves into surplus, eventually stabilizing
with a larger nominal trade surplus than in the scenarios of local-currency pricing (i.e. the
absence of pass through in both countries trading). The pattern under asymmetric pass through,
with all trade flows invoiced in dollars, falls in between, with a moderate trade surplus gradually
building up for the United States.
     Within the full simulation exercise of Gust and Sheets (2006), a 10 percent depreciation of
the U.S. dollar increases the trade surplus in dollar terms by about 1 percentage point of GDP at




                                                                                             19
an horizon of 6 quarters.9 While this effect is similar in all scenarios for the authors’ assumed
model parameters, the underlying pattern of adjustment across countries varies substantially with
the assumptions made about pass-through of exchange rates into traded-goods prices. When pass
through is complete into the import prices of all trade partners (a producer-currency-pricing
scenario), the nominal trade balance adjustment is driven by movement in real quantities
exported and imported, with a partial offset through the terms-of-trade. The dollar depreciation
leads to substantial expenditure switching, with U.S. export quantities increasing by 9 percent in
real terms and import quantities contracting by a similar magnitude. This large trade surplus in
real terms is substantially offset by a 10 percent worsening of the terms-of-trade, reflecting
higher import prices.
         In the scenario with low rates of exchange-rate pass through into the import prices of both
countries, the trade-balance adjustment takes place mostly through improved terms of trade. As
local-currency import prices are shielded from exchange rate movements, the only effect of the
depreciation is a small increase in real exports. The depreciation generates an income effect by
raising the revenue-per-unit of exporters by 6.5 percent measured in their own currency. The rise
in revenue constitutes an improvement in the terms of trade, creating a trade surplus in dollar
terms.
         The adjustment in the more realistic scenario of asymmetric pass through is a combination
of both cases. The depreciation generates substantial expenditure switching on the export side,
with real exports increasing 9 percent, but without any such effect operating on the import side.
Real imports contract very little for the United States, as in the case of limited pass through.
While the depreciation generates only a moderate trade surplus in real terms, it translates nearly
one-for-one into a surplus in dollar terms, as there is only a moderate worsening of the terms of
trade.

Links between non-U.S. countries

         In addition to affecting the trade adjustment between the U.S. and the rest of the world, the
prominent role of the dollar also affects trade transactions among countries other than the United


9
  Our example uses the impulses responses of Gust and Sheets (2006) at 6 quarters. As the dollar depreciation is
slightly different across the scenarios, and above 10 percent, we re-scale all the values to correspond to a 10 percent
depreciation. The scenarios of Gust and Sheets (2006) are more complex than our simple discussion, since they
reflect both an exchange rate depreciation and the associated reaction of monetary policy to inflationary pressures.


                                                                                                               20
States (Goldberg and Tille 2006). For illustration purposes, suppose that there are two non-U.S.
“countries” that trade only with each other. Suppose we refer to these “countries” as Asia and
Latin America. If none of their bilateral trade is invoiced in dollars, their bilateral trade balance
is driven by their bilateral exchange rate, following the mechanisms described in the symmetric
models.
      The situation differs substantially if all trade between Asia and Latin America is invoiced
in U.S. dollars, consistent with the dollar’s vehicle currency role. In this case, the bilateral terms
of trade are shielded from exchange rate movements. With all trade prices set in the same
currency (the dollar), any exchange rate movement affects export and import prices equally, and
leaves the relative price unchanged. With these constant terms of trade, any trade adjustment
comes through movements in real trade flows between the two countries.                                If the dollar
depreciates against both the Asian and Latin American currencies, imports in both countries are
cheaper in local currency terms, leading consumers in each country to shift expenditure towards
imported goods. With equal depreciation against both currencies, exports and imports increase
to the same extent with little impact on the trade balance.10 The international role of the dollar
causes the exchange rate between the dollar and foreign currencies to affect even that portion of
other countries’ trade that does not directly involve the U.S. as a partner, a novel channel of
interdependence.
      The prominent role of the dollar also influences the results of bilateral exchange rate
movements between the dollar and the currencies of both hypothetical countries of our example,
“Asia” and “Latin America”. Consider a depreciation of the dollar against the Asian currency
only, with no change in the exchange rate between the dollar and the Latin American currency.
By implication, the Asian currency appreciates against both the dollar and the Latin American
currency.     These exchange rate movements make imports cheaper in Asia, leading to an
expenditure switching towards Latin American goods.                      The price of Asian goods in Latin
America remains unchanged, hence no expenditure switching.                             The dollar depreciation
asymmetrically affects trade flows, boosting Asian imports with no effect on exports, thereby
creating a trade deficit for Asia.



10
  If trade is initially balanced between the two countries, higher exports and import exactly offset each other. If, on
the other hand, one country starts with a trade surplus, an equal increase in exports and imports in percentage terms
boosts the surplus.


                                                                                                               21
     The pattern of Asia-Latin America adjustment is a mix of the symmetric cases of full and
zero exchange-rate pass through.       Assume a depreciation of the dollar against the Asian
currency, with no change against the Latin American currency. With all trade of each country
invoiced in dollars, Asia runs a larger nominal trade deficit than under full pass through, since it
does not benefit from any terms-of-trade improvement and a smaller nominal trade deficit than
under zero pass through, since it suffers no worsening either.

Ownership of the distribution sector

     The large role of the distribution sector also changes how exchange rate movements affect
the trade balance. We previously noted that local expenditure on distribution services leads
exchange-rate pass through into the final consumption prices of goods to be lower than the
exchange-rate pass through into import prices measured at the border. Another issue for trade
balance adjustment pertains to the ownership of this distribution sector. When the dollar is the
primary invoicing currency, a dollar depreciation reduces the profits of foreign exporters. With
prices fixed in dollars in the United States, the revenue in euros of a European producer is
reduced. The presence of a distribution sector affects how this change of revenue is allocated
along the production chain. For instance, suppose that dollar import prices react somewhat to the
depreciation, as is the case under the partial exchange rate pass through observed for the United
States. If there is active adjustment of distribution margins, some of the expenditure-switching
from a dollar depreciation is reduced with some of the revenue reduction borne by the
distribution sector in the United States. If retailers are subsidiaries of the European exporters,
such as dealerships for imported cars, the reduction in revenue is still borne entirely by European
firms. On the other hand, if the distribution sector is made up of U.S. firms, the reduction in
revenue is now split between the two countries.
     The relevance of the distribution sector is illustrated through the scenarios discussed above,
focusing on the case where all trade is invoiced in dollars. Consider an extreme case where there
is full exchange rate pass through to import prices in the U.S., but no pass through to consumer
prices. As U.S. consumers face constant prices, a depreciation of the dollar does not lead to any
consumption switching, and the real imports from Europe are unchanged. The only impact of the
weaker dollar is to reduce the profits of the U.S. distribution sector, where firms are caught
between higher import prices and constant consumer prices. If the distributors are European



                                                                                             22
firms, the depreciation reduces the revenue of European firms as measured in euros, which is the
worsening of the European terms of trade discussed above.
      Empirical evidence, however, suggests that the intermediaries in the U.S. distribution
sector are primarily U.S.-owned (Tille 2000). In this extreme example, European exporters are
insulated from the depreciation of the dollar: the quantities shipped to the U.S. are unchanged,
and the full pass through to import prices implies that they receive an unchanged price in euros.
The depreciation of the dollar is then beneficial to Europe, as exporters revenue is unchanged
and European consumers benefit from cheaper U.S. goods. The cost of the depreciation falls
entirely on the U.S. distribution firms which suffer from lower margins.



V. Policy implications and conclusions

     The role of the dollar as a key invoicing currency in international trade transactions is
related to the presence of the U.S. as a main producer and destination market for goods, the
importance of commodities and other homogeneous goods in world trade, the number of
countries that de facto or de jure tie their exchange rates and pricing activity to the dollar, and, to
a lesser extent, the pattern of covariances among production costs, destination market demand
conditions, and exchange rates. Transaction costs in foreign exchange markets also play a role.
In recent decades, the share of the U.S. in world imports has been fairly stable (cyclically
adjusted) at nearly 15 percent, the share of homogenous goods in world trade has been declining,
and the foreign exchange market cost advantage of the dollar has been largely maintained. The
evidence we have surveyed shows that while the euro has increased its role as an international
currency, this pattern is largely contained to countries within the European Union and has
otherwise not been at the expense of invoicing in U.S. dollars.
     This continuing international role of the dollar and related evidence on exchange rate pass
through into prices affect the pattern of international trade adjustment. We have argued that a
depreciation of the dollar, for example, would have asymmetric effects on flows between the
U.S. and its trading partners. With low exchange-rate pass through into U.S. import prices, and
high pass-through into the local prices of countries consuming U.S. exports, the impact of dollar
depreciation on real trade flows is dominated by an adjustment in U.S. export quantities, which
increase as U.S. goods become cheaper in the rest of the world. Real U.S. imports are less



                                                                                                23
affected because U.S. prices are more insulated from exchange rate movements since pass
through is low and dollar invoicing is high. In terms of prices, the effects on the U.S. terms of
trade are limited: U.S. exporters earn the same amount of dollars for each unit shipped abroad,
and U.S. consumers are not burdened with much more expensive imports.
     The use of the dollar as an invoicing currency also affects the trade adjustment between
countries, even beyond the effects of direct trade links with the United States. If the trade
transactions between other countries are fully invoiced in dollars, the bilateral terms of trade are
insulated from exchange rate movements and the adjustment comes entirely through real trade
flows. A depreciation of the U.S. dollar boosts all trade flows between these countries, with little
impact on the net trade balance. In addition, a depreciation of one of the countries’ currency
against all others, including the dollar, can have contractionary effects on that country. The terms
of trade are unchanged, export quantities are unchanged, and import quantities decline. While the
country runs a trade surplus, this arises from a reduction in imports instead of an export boom. If
two countries have different patterns of currency invoice selection on competing goods, a
depreciation of the U.S. dollar against both currencies leads to relative improvements in the
country using dollars more extensively.
     The robustness of asymmetric pass-through is an open question. Low exchange-rate pass
through into U.S. import prices has as a counterpart high absorption of exchange rate movements
in foreign profit margins. This absorption of exchange rate movements into foreign margins may
not be a phenomenon that can be maintained under large and persistent exchange rate
movements. Pass through into the United States import prices may rise if the dollar falls far
enough to cause the export price to the United States to fall below marginal cost. As long as
foreign exporters sell in the US above marginal cost they can stabilize dollar prices. However a
large enough dollar depreciation would push U.S. sales price below marginal cost. Over longer
run horizons, United States and foreign prices could share the nominal and read adjustments
associated with large terms-of-trade movements.
     Twenty-five years after Kenen and Pack (1980), we confirm two critical issues in balance-
of-payments adjustment: the size and speed of the response of domestic prices to a change in the
exchange rate, and the adjustment of trade quantities to these relative price changes. We have
argued that the important role of the dollar as an invoicing currency on international transactions
and the evidence that exchange rate pass-through is asymmetric across countries both have



                                                                                             24
strong bearing on the pattern of trade adjustments that could arise following nominal exchange
rate movements. The trade adjustments are relevant for countries that are direct counterparties in
trade with the United States, but also for those countries that use dollars as invoicing currencies
in their transactions with third parties.



References

Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2005), A Theory of the Currency Denomination of
International Trade, Journal of International Economics 67(2), pp. 295-319.

Betts, Caroline, and Michael Devereux (2000), Exchange Rate Dynamics in a Model of Pricing
to Market, Journal of International Economics 50 (1), pp. 215-244.

Burstein, Ariel, Joao Neves and Sergio Rebelo (2003), "Distribution Costs and Real Exchange
Rate Dynamics during Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations" Journal of Monetary Economics, v.
50, pp. 1189-1214.

Campa, Jose and Linda Goldberg (2006), Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs, and the
Sensitivity of the CPI to Exchange Rates, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper no. 12121 (March).

Campa, Jose and Goldberg, Linda (2005), “Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Import Prices.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, (November) 87 (4): 679-690.

Campa, Jose, Linda Goldberg, and Jose Gonzalez-Minguez. “Exchange-Rate Pass-Through to
Import Prices in the Euro Area”, The External Dimension of the Euro Area, ed. Robert Anderton
and Filippo di Mauro, Forthcoming (Cambridge University Press).

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc (2005). “DSGE Models of High Exchange-
Rate Volatility and Low Pass-Through,” International Finance Discussion Papers Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System no 845 (November).

Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Paolo Pesenti (2005), The Simple Geometry of Transmission and
Stabilization in Closed and Open Economies, mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Devereux, Michael, Charles Engel, and Peter Storegaard (2004), Endogenous Exchange Rate
Pass-Through when Nominal Prices are set in Advance, Journal of International Economics,
63(2), pp. 263-291.

Devereux, Michael, Charles Engel, and Cédric Tille (2003), Exchange Rate Pass-Through and
the Welfare Effects of the Euro, International Economic Review, vol. 44, pp. 223-252.




                                                                                            25
Devereux, Michael, and Shi, Shouyong (2005), Vehicle currency, mimeo, University of British
Columbia.

Donnenfeld, Shabtai and Alfred Haug (2003), "Currency Invoicing in International Trade: An
Empirical Investigation." Review of International Economics, 11, pp. 332-345.

Donnenfeld, Shabtai and Alfred Haug (2002), "Currency Invoicing in U.S. Imports." Mimeo,
York University Department of Economics.

Engel, Charles (2005), Equivalence Results for Optimal Pass-Through, Optimal Indexing to
Exchange Rates, and Optimal Choice of Currency for Export Pricing, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 11209.

European Central Bank (2005, 2002), Review of the International Role of the Euro, December.

Feldstein, Martin (2006), “The Dollar at Home – and Abroad”, The Wall Street Journal, April
28, 2006. http://www.nber.org/feldstein/wsj042806.html

Friberg, Richard (1998), "In which Currency Should Exporters Set their Prices?" Journal of
International Economics, 45(1), pp. 59-76.

Gagnon, Joseph (2003), “The Effect of Exchange Rates on Prices, Wages, and Profits: A Case
Study of the United Kingdom in the 1990s” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
International Finance Discussion Papers no. 772 (August).

Giovannini, Alberto (1988), Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices, Journal of International
Economics, 24, pp.45-68.

Goldberg, Linda. “Trade Invoicing in the accession countries: Are they suited to the euro?”
International Seminar on Macroeconomics, ed. Jeffrey Frankel Forthcoming (NBER and
University of Chicago Press).

Goldberg, Linda and Cédric Tille (2006), "Exchange Rate Transmission with a Vehicle
Currency", manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Goldberg, Linda, and Cédric Tille (2005), “Vehicle Currency Use in International Trade”, NBER
Working Paper 11127 February 2005.

Gopinath, Gita, and Roberto Rigobon (2006), “Sticky Borders”, National Bureau of Economic
Research working paper 12095.

Grassman, Sven (1973), A Fundamental Symmetry in International Payments, Journal of
International Economics, 3, pp. 105-16.




                                                                                       26
Gust, Christopher and Nathan Sheets (2006), “The Adjustment of Global External Imbalances:
Does Partial Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Trade Prices Matter?” International Finance
Discussion Papers number 850.

Hartmann, Philipp (1998), “The Currency Denomination of World Trade after European
Monetary Union.” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 12, pp. 424-54.

Hau, Harald, William Killeen and Michael Moore (2002), “How has the Euro changed the
Foreign Exchange Market? Economic Policy, Vol. 17, pp. 149-192.

Hellerstein, Rebecca (2004), “Who Bears the Cost of a Change in the Exchange Rate? The Case
of Imported Beer”, Staff Reports no. 179 (February), Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Ihrig, Jane E., Mario Marazzi, and Alexander Rothenberg (2006), “Exchange Rate Pass-Through
in the G-7 Countries”, International Finance Discussion Papers number 851.

Kamps, Annette (2005), “The Determinants of Currency Invoicing in International Trade”,
manuscript, Institute for World Economics.

Kenen, Peter and Clare Pack (1980), Exchange Rates, Domestic Prices, and the Adjustment
Process, Group of 30 Occasional Papers 1.

Kenen, Peter (1983), The Role of the Dollar as an International Currency, Group of 30
Occasional Papers 13.

Krugman, Paul (1980), “Vehicle Currencies and the Stucture of International Exchange,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 12 pp. 513-526.

Marazzi, Mario, Nathan Sheets, Robert Vigfusson et al. (2005), ``Exchange Rate Pass-through to
U.S. Import Prices: Some New Evidence,'   'International Finance Discussion Paper No. 833,
April.

McKinnon, Ronald (1979), Money in International Exchange: The Convertible Currency System,
Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Obstfeld, Maurice (2001), International Macroeconomics: Beyond the Mundell-Fleming Model,
International Monetary Fund Staff Paper 47.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff (2000), New Directions for Stochastic Open Economy
Models, Journal of International Economics, 50, pp. 117-153.

Oi, Hiroyuki, Akira Otani, and Toyoichiro Shirota (2004), “The Choice of Invoice Currency in
International Trade: Implications for the Internationalization of the Yen.” Monetary and
Economic Studies, pp.27-63.




                                                                                       27
Olivei, Giovanni P. (2002), "Exchange Rates and the Prices of Manufacturing Products Imported
into the United States", New England Economic Review (1st quarter) pp. 3-18.

Portes, Richard and Helene Rey (1998), "The Emergence of the Euro as an International
Currency." Economic Policy, vol. 13 vo. 26, pp.305-343.

Rey, Hélène (2001), International Trade and Currency Exchange, Review of Economic Studies,
68, pp. 443-464.

Swoboda, Alexander (1969), “Vehicle Currencies and the Foreign Exchange Market: the Case of
the Dollar”, The International Market for Foreign Exchange, ed. Robert Z. Aliber, Praeger
Special Studies in International Economics and Development, (Frederick A. Praeger, Publishers,
New York).

Swoboda, Alexander (1968), “The Euro-Dollar Market: An Interpretation”, Essays in
International Finance 64, International Finance Section, Princeton University.

The Conference Board (2005). “Do Exchange Rates Matter? A Global Survey of CEOs and
CFOs on Exchange Rates” written in cooperation with the Group of Thirty. The Conference
Board Research Report R-1349-04-RR.

Tille, Cédric (2001), The Role of Consumption Substitutability in the International Transmission
of Shocks Journal of International Economics, April 2001, vol. 53, pp. 421-444.

Tille, Cédric (2000), Beggar-Thy-Neighbor' or '   Beggar-Thyself'? The Income Effect of
Exchange Rate Fluctuations", Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 112.

Wilander, Fredrik (2006), “An Empirical Analysis of the Currency Denomination in
International Trade”, mimeo, Stockholm School of Economics.




                                                                                         28
