NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHANGES IN THE FEDERAL RESERVE’S INFLATION
TARGET: CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES
Peter N. Ireland
Working Paper 12492
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12492
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006

All data and programs used in this research are freely available at http://www2.bc.edu/~irelandp. I would like
to thank Paul Corrigan, Sharon Kozicki, Andre Kurmann, Stefan Laseen, Francesco Lippi, Jim Nason, Masao
Ogaki, Louis Phaneuf, Tao Zha, and an anonymous referee, as well as seminar participants at the Bank of
England, Boston University, Cornell University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the
University of British Columbia, and the University of Illinois, for extremely helpful comments and
suggestions and Suzanne Lorant for expert editorial assistance. Some of this work was completed while I was
visiting the Research Department at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston; I would like to thank the Bank and
its staff for their hospitality and support. This material is also based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. SES-0213461. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommedations expressed herein are my own and do not reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, the Federal Reserve System, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the National Science
Foundation.
©2006 by Peter N. Ireland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Changes in the Federal Reserve’s Inflation Target: Causes and Consequences
Peter N. Ireland
NBER Working Paper No. 12492
August 2006
JEL No. E31, E32, E52
ABSTRACT
This paper estimates a New Keynesian model to draw inferences about the behavior of the Federal
Reserve's unobserved inflation target. The results indicate that the target rose from 1¼ percent in
1959 to over 8 percent in the mid-to-late 1970s before falling back below 2½ percent in 2004. The
results also provide some support for the hypothesis that over the entire postwar period, Federal
Reserve policy has systematically translated short-run price pressures set off by supply-side shocks
into more persistent movements in inflation itself, although considerable uncertainty remains about
the true source of shifts in the inflation target.
Peter N. Ireland
Boston College
Department of Economics
Administration Building
140 Commonwealth Ave.
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3806
and NBER
irelandp@bc.edu

1

Introduction

“Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.” Thus spoke Milton Friedman
(1968, p.39).
Once controversial, Friedman’s words now form part of conventional wisdom for academic
economists and central bankers alike, provided they are appropriately qualified as follows:
transitory movements in the measured rate of inflation can be driven by shocks of various
kinds, but large and persistent movements in inflation cannot occur without the help of
monetary policy. Indeed, Friedman himself draws this distinction when defining (p.21) the
“inflation” in his statement as a “steady and sustained rise in prices.”
An interest rate rule for monetary policy of the type proposed by Taylor (1993) highlights
exactly the same principles. Under the simplest such rule, the central bank adjusts the
short-term nominal interest rate r around its average or steady-state level r∗ in response
to deviations of output y and inflation π from their target or steady-state levels y ∗ and π ∗
according to
r = r∗ + ωy (y − y ∗ ) + ω π (π − π ∗ ),
where ωy and ω π are both positive coeﬃcients. When it adopts such a rule, the central bank
accepts responsibility for choosing the inflation target π ∗ and for choosing a policy response
coeﬃcient ω π that is large enough to stabilize the actual inflation rate π around its target
π ∗ . In the short run, movements in measured inflation π may occur for many reasons, but
in the long run, inflation remains tied down by monetary policy.
Nothing dictates that the central bank’s inflation target must remain constant over time,
however. In fact, Figure 1 shows that even in the relatively stable postwar U.S. economy,
inflation exhibits large and persistent swings, trending upwards throughout the 1960s and
1970s before reversing course and falling during the 1980s and 1990s. Friedman’s “always
and everywhere” dictum strongly suggests that movements of the size and persistence seen in
Figure 1 could not have taken place without ongoing shifts in the Federal Reserve’s inflation

1

target. But the Federal Reserve has never explicitly revealed the setting for its inflation
target. Hence, a statistical or econometric model must be used to glean information about the
Federal Reserve’s inflation target from data on observable variables–that is, to disentangle
those movements seen in Figure 1 that reflect shifts in the inflation target from those that
are attributable to other types of shocks.
This paper develops such a model, drawing on contemporary macroeconomic theory
to provide the identifying restrictions needed to shed light on the patterns, causes, and
consequences of changes in the Federal Reserve’s inflation target. The macroeconomic theory
comes from a standard New Keynesian framework like those presented by Clarida, Gali, and
Gertler (1999) and Woodford (2003) and used throughout much of the recent literature on
monetary policy and the monetary business cycle. This model oﬀers up a tight description,
not just of Federal Reserve policy, but also of the optimizing behavior of the households
and firms that populate the U.S. economy. Hence, estimates of the structural parameters
of this simultaneous-equation model not only provide a detailed interpretation of historical
movements in output, inflation, and interest rates as seen in the U.S. data, but also allow
for an equally detailed consideration of counterfactual scenarios such as: what would the
behavior of these variables have looked like if, instead, the Federal Reserve had maintained
a constant inflation target throughout the postwar period?
Blinder (1982), Hetzel (1998), and Mayer (1998) all attribute the upward secular trend in
inflation shown in Figure 1 for the period before 1980 to a systematic tendency for Federal
Reserve policy to translate the short-run price pressures set oﬀ by adverse supply shocks
into more persistent movements in the inflation rate itself–part of an eﬀort by policymakers
to avoid at least some of the contractionary impact those shocks would otherwise have had
on the real economy. Symmetrically, Bomfim and Rudebusch (2000) and Orphanides and
Wilcox (2002) suggest that at times during the post-1980 period, the Federal Reserve took
advantage of favorable supply-side disturbances to “opportunistically” work the inflation rate
back down. To capture these ideas, the model developed here includes a generalized Taylor

2

rule that allows the Federal Reserve’s inflation target to respond systematically to shocks
hitting the economy from the supply side. The estimation results provide some support for a
unified version of these stories that applies to the entire postwar period, although the same
results also indicate that considerable uncertainty remains as to exactly why the Federal
Reserve allowed inflation to move as much as it did.
Before going on to provide a more detailed description of the model and results, mention
should be made of three related sets of contributions to the recent literature. First, Kozicki
and Tinsley (2001), Rudebusch and Wu (2004), Gurkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005), and
Dewachter and Lyrio (2006) argue that the behavior of both short- and long-term interest
rates in the U.S. data becomes easier to reconcile with the expectations hypothesis of the
term structure if one allows for shifts in the long-run inflation rate. Thus, these previous
studies help motivate the analysis performed here, which focuses solely on macroeconomic
variables in an eﬀort to estimate more sharply exactly when those shifts took place and why.
Second, Erceg and Levin (2003), Smets and Wouters (2003), Roberts (2004), Cogley and
Sbordone (2005), Gavin, Keen, and Pakko (2005), and Salemi (2005) also develop macroeconomic models that allow for continual movement in the Federal Reserve’s inflation target.
However, each of these previous studies focuses on a diﬀerent set of issues: Erceg and Levin
(2003), on private agents’ inability to disentangle transitory from persistent movements in
the inflation target and the role that this incomplete information plays in accounting for the
inflationary dynamics observed during the Volcker disinflation in the United States; Smets
and Wouters (2003), on the ability of their larger-scale New Keynesian model to track the
postwar U.S. data on an expanded number of variables both in and out of sample; Roberts
(2004), on the ability of his model to capture the changing relationships between U.S. unemployment and inflation since 1980; Cogley and Sbordone (2005), on the stability of the
estimated parameters of a Phillips curve relationship in the face of changes elsewhere in the
economy; Gavin, Keen, and Pakko (2005), on the ability of their model to account for the
persistence of inflation and the relative volatilities of money growth and inflation in the post-

3

1980 U.S. data; and Salemi (2005), on the relative weights placed by the Federal Reserve on
its stabilization objectives for output, inflation, and interest rates over the postwar period.
Thus, none of these previous studies focuses as this paper does on obtaining estimates of the
Federal Reserve’s continually-changing inflation target; and none of these previous studies
attempts as this paper does to model specifically those target changes as deliberate policy
responses to other shocks that have hit the economy, in order to tie together the stories told
earlier by Blinder (1982), Hetzel (1998), and Mayer (1998) on the one hand and Bomfim and
Rudebusch (2000) and Orphanides and Wilcox (2002) on the other.
Third and finally, in work that relates most closely to the present study, Kozicki and
Tinsley (2005) develop an empirical model–a generalized vector autoregression–that allows
for changes in the Federal Reserve’s inflation target that are imperfectly perceived by private
agents and that reflect, in part, the response of the central bank to supply shocks that have
hit the U.S. economy over the postwar period. But whereas Kozicki and Tinsley focus
on the diﬀering responses of the economy to shocks of various kinds as implied by their
generalized model versus a more conventional vector autoregression that assumes a constant
inflation target and full information possessed by private agents, the focus here, again, lies
in characterizing more sharply the nature and sources of variation in the Federal Reserve’s
inflation target itself and linking the econometric results to the earlier accounts of Blinder
(1982), Hetzel (1998), Mayer (1998), Bomfim and Rudebusch (2000) and Orphanides and
Wilcox (2002). The analysis presented here also extends and complements Kozicki and
Tinsley’s earlier work by imposing more structure on the data, fully exploiting the behavioral
relationships implied by the New Keynesian model.

2

The Model

The model developed here shares its basic features with many recent New Keynesian formulations, including the benchmark models of Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999) and Woodford

4

(2003), but resembles most closely the specification used in Ireland (2004a). As noted above,
one extension to previous models that appears for the first time here is a generalized Taylor
(1993) rule for monetary policy that allows the central bank’s inflation target to adjust in
response to other shocks that hit the economy. Indeed, the use of this tightly parameterized
structural model, as opposed to a more loosely constrained vector autoregression or unobserved components model, allows for the simultaneous identification not just of movements
in the inflation target but also of the exogenous supply-side disturbances that, according to
Blinder (1982), Hetzel (1998), and Mayer (1998), prompted the Federal Reserve to accommodate higher and higher rates of inflation throughout the 1960s and 1970s. And, again, as
noted above, the use of this tightly parameterized structural model responds to the Lucas
(1976) critique, allowing for a detailed consideration of the counterfactual scenario in which,
instead, the Federal Reserve held the line on inflation in the face of those shocks.
The model economy consists of a representative household, a representative finishedgoods-producing firm, a continuum of intermediate-goods-producing firms indexed by i ∈
[0, 1], and a central bank. During each period t = 0, 1, 2, ..., each intermediate-goodsproducing firm manufactures a distinct, perishable intermediate good. Hence, intermediate
goods may also be indexed by i ∈ [0, 1], where firm i produces good i. The model retains
enough symmetry, however, to allow the analysis to focus on the activities of a representative intermediate-goods-producing firm, which produces the generic intermediate good i.
Thus, a description of the model boils down to a description of the optimizing behavior of
the three representative private agents–the household, the finished-goods-producing firm,
and the intermediate-goods-producing firm–together with a description of the generalized
Taylor rule adopted by the central bank.
The representative household enters each period t = 0, 1, 2, ... with money Mt−1 and
bonds Bt−1 . At the beginning of the period, the household receives a lump-sum nominal
transfer Tt from the central bank. Next, the household’s bonds mature, throwing oﬀ Bt−1
additional units of money. The household uses some of this money to purchase Bt new bonds

5

at the price of 1/Rt units of money per bond, where Rt denotes the gross nominal interest
rate between t and t + 1. During the period, the household supplies a total of ht units of
labor to the various intermediate-goods-producing firms and gets paid at the nominal wage
rate Wt . Also during the period, the household consumes Ct units of the finished good,
purchased at the nominal price Pt from the representative finished-goods-producing firm. At
the end the period, the household receives nominal profits Dt in the form of dividends paid
by the intermediate-goods-producing firms. The household then carries Mt units of money
into period t + 1; its budget constraint requires that

Mt−1 + Tt + Bt−1 + Wt ht + Dt ≥ Pt Ct + Mt + Bt /Rt

(1)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ....
Facing the budget constraint (1), the household chooses Ct , ht , Bt , and Mt for all t =
0, 1, 2, ... to maximize the expected utility function

E0

∞
X
t=0

β t at [ln(Ct − γCt−1 ) + ln(Mt /Pt ) − ht ],

where the discount factor β and the habit formation parameter γ both lie between zero and
one: 1 > β > 0 and 1 ≥ γ ≥ 0. The preference shock at follows the stationary autoregressive
process
ln(at ) = ρa ln(at−1 ) + σ a εat

(2)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., with 1 > ρa ≥ 0 and σ a ≥ 0, where the serially uncorrelated innovation
εat has the standard normal distribution. Utility is additively separable in consumption,
real money balances, and hours worked; as shown by Driscoll (2000) and Ireland (2004b),
this additive separability is needed to derive a conventional specification for the model’s IS
relationship that, in particular, excludes terms involving money and employment. Given this
additive separability, the logarithmic specification for utility from consumption is needed, as

6

shown by King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988), for the model to remain consistent with balanced
growth. Finally, habit formation is introduced into preferences following Fuhrer (2000), who
shows that this feature–and the partially backward-looking consumption it implies–helps
New Keynesian models like this one replicate the observed eﬀects on real spending of shocks
of various kinds.
The representative finished-goods-producing firm uses Yt (i) units of each intermediate
good i ∈ [0, 1], purchased at the nominal price Pt (i) during each period t = 0, 1, 2, ..., to
manufacture Yt units of the finished good according to the constant-returns-to-scale technology described by

∙Z

1
(θt −1)/θt

Yt (i)

di

0

¸θt /(θt −1)

≥ Yt ,

(3)

where θt follows the stationary autoregressive process

ln(θt ) = (1 − ρθ ) ln(θ) + ρθ ln(θt−1 ) + σ θ εθt

(4)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., with 1 > ρθ ≥ 0 and σ θ ≥ 0, and where the serially uncorrelated
innovation εθt has the standard normal distribution. The firm acts to maximize its profits;
the first-order conditions for this problem are

Yt (i) = [Pt (i)/Pt ]−θt Yt

for all i ∈ [0, 1] and t = 0, 1, 2, ....
These optimality conditions reveal that −θt measures the time-varying elasticity of demand for each intermediate good i ∈ [0, 1]. Hence, as in Smets and Wouters (2003), Steinsson
(2003), and Ireland (2004a), random shocks to θt translate into shocks to the intermediategoods-producing firms’ desired markups of price over marginal cost; in equilibrium, they act
like cost-push shocks of the kind introduced into the New Keynesian model by Clarida, Gali,
and Gertler (1999). Competition drives the finished-goods-producing firm’s profits to zero

7

in equilibrium, determining Pt as

Pt =

∙Z

1
1−θt

Pt (i)

0

di

¸1/(1−θt )

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ....
The representative intermediate-goods-producing firm hires ht (i) units of labor from the
representative household during each period t = 0, 1, 2, ... to manufacture Yt (i) units of
intermediate good i according to the constant-returns-to-scale technology described by

Zt ht (i) ≥ Yt (i).

(5)

The aggregate technology shock follows a random walk with drift:

ln(Zt ) = ln(z) + ln(Zt−1 ) + σ z εzt

(6)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., with z > 1 and σ z ≥ 0, where the serially uncorrelated innovation
εzt has the standard normal distribution. This random walk assumption for the technology
shock serves to distinguish its eﬀects from those of the cost-push shock: as supply-side
disturbances, both shocks tend to move output and inflation in opposite directions in the
short run, but only the technology shock has permanent eﬀects on the level of output.
Since the intermediate goods substitute imperfectly for one another in producing the
finished good, the representative intermediate-goods-producing firm sells its output in a monopolistically competitive market: during period t, the firm sets the nominal price Pt (i) for its
output, subject to the requirement that it satisfy the representative finished-goods-producing
firm’s demand at that chosen price. And, as in Rotemberg (1982), the intermediate-goodsproducing firm faces a quadratic cost of adjusting its price between periods, measured in

8

terms of the finished good and given by
∙
¸2
φ
Pt (i)
− 1 Yt ,
2 Παt−1 (Π∗t )1−α Pt−1 (i)
where φ ≥ 0 governs the magnitude of the adjustment cost, Πt = Pt /Pt−1 so that Πt−1
denotes the gross inflation rate between periods t−2 and t−1, Π∗t denotes the central bank’s
inflation target for period t, and the parameter α lies between zero and one: 1 ≥ α ≥ 0.
According to this specification, the extent to which price setting is backward instead of
forward looking depends on how close α is to one. In particular, as shown below, when
α = 0 so that firms find it costless to adjust their prices in line with the central bank’s
inflation target, the model’s Phillips curve relation becomes purely forward looking. At the
opposite extreme, when α = 1 so that firms find it costless to adjust their prices in line
with the previous period’s inflation rate, the backward-looking term in the Phillips curve
becomes approximately equal in importance to the forward-looking term, as in Fuhrer and
Moore’s (1995a, 1995b) framework. In any case, the cost of price adjustment makes the
intermediate-goods-producing firm’s problem dynamic: it chooses Pt (i) for all t = 0, 1, 2, ...
to maximize its total market value, as described below in Appendix A.
The central bank conducts monetary policy according to the generalized Taylor (1993)
rule
ln(Rt ) − ln(Rt−1 ) = ρπ ln(Πt /Π∗t ) + ρgy ln(gty /gy ) + ln(vt )

(7)

for all t = 0, 1, 2..., where the response coeﬃcients ρπ > 0 and ρgy ≥ 0 are chosen by
the central bank. Here, as in Fuhrer and Moore (1995b), the central bank increases the
short-term nominal interest rate Rt whenever the inflation rate rises above its target Π∗t ; a
strictly positive value for ρπ helps provide for the existence of a unique rational expectations
equilibrium under an interest rate rule of this type. Since the level of output Yt inherits a
unit root from the random walk process (6) for the technology shock Zt , (7) dictates that

9

the central bank respond instead to the growth rate of output
gty = Yt /Yt−1

(8)

as a stationary measure of real economic activity, increasing the short-term nominal interest
rate whenever growth output growth rises above its steady-state level g y = z. The transitory
monetary policy shock vt in (7) follows the stationary autoregressive process

ln(vt ) = ρv ln(vt−1 ) + σ v εvt

(9)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., with 1 > ρv ≥ 0 and σ v ≥ 0, where the serially uncorrelated innovation
εvt has the standard normal distribution.
As noted above, a novel feature of the generalized Taylor rule (7) incorporated into this
model is the time-varying inflation target Π∗t , which evolves according to
ln(Π∗t ) = ln(Π∗t−1 ) − δ θ εθt − δ z εzt + σ π επt

(10)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., where the response coeﬃcients δ θ ≥ 0 and δ z ≥ 0 are again chosen
by the central bank, where σ π ≥ 0, and where the serially uncorrelated innovation επt
has the standard normal distribution. This addition to the Taylor rule allows the inflation
target to vary exogenously when σπ is strictly positive and also allows the central bank to
systematically adjust its inflation target in response to either or both of the two supply
shocks: the cost-push shock θt and the technology shock Zt . Since adverse supply shocks
(negative realizations of εθt and εzt ) work to increase goods’ prices, and favorable supply
shocks (positive realizations of εθt and εzt ) work to decrease goods’ prices, strictly positive
values for δ θ and δ z help the model bring together and formalize the stories told by Blinder
(1982), Hetzel (1998), Mayer (1998), Bomfim and Rudebusch (2000), and Orphanides and
Wilcox (2002), according to which the Federal Reserve acted systematically over the postwar

10

period to translate the short-run price pressures set oﬀ by these shocks into more persistent
movements in the inflation rate itself.
Finally, the random walk specification for the inflation target that is built into (10)
represents an identifying assumption that, in very much the same spirit as the random walk
assumption (6) for technology, helps to distinguish the eﬀects of changes in the inflation
target from those generated by the model’s other four shocks. This identifying assumption,
motivated by Friedman’s (1968) “always and everywhere” dictum, can be stated more simply
as: permanent changes in measured inflation Πt cannot occur without corresponding changes
in the central bank’s inflation target Π∗t .
Preliminary econometric analysis of this New Keynesian model allowed the central bank,
through an expanded version of the Taylor rule (7), to adjust the short-term nominal interest
rate not only in response to movements in inflation and output growth, but also in response
to movements in a welfare-theoretic measure of the output gap, defined below in Appendix B
as the deviation of actual equilibrium output from its eﬃcient, or Pareto optimal, level. As
well, preliminary analysis allowed the central bank, through an expanded version of (10), to
adjust its inflation target not only in response to the cost-push and technology shocks, but
also in response to the preference shock. Inevitably, however, the estimation routine pushed
the associated response coeﬃcients towards zero, and so, for simplicity, these additional
variables were dropped from the final specification used here.
In a symmetric equilibrium, all intermediate-goods-producing firms make identical decisions, so that Yt (i) = Yt , ht (i) = ht , and Pt (i) = Pt for all i ∈ [0, 1] and t = 0, 1, 2, ....
In addition, the market-clearing conditions for money and bonds, Mt = Mt−1 + Tt and
Bt = Bt−1 = 0 must hold for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... The real variables Yt and Ct inherit unit roots
from the process (6) for technology, as does Λt , defined in Appendix A as the Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint (1) from the representative household’s problem. However,
the transformed variables yt = Yt /Zt , ct = Yt /Zt , λt = Zt Λt , and zt = Zt /Zt−1 all remain
stationary, as does the output growth rate gty . Similarly, the nominal variables Πt and Rt

11

inherit unit roots from the process (10) for the inflation target Π∗t ; however, the transformed
variables π t = Πt /Π∗t , rt = Rt /Π∗t , and π ∗t = Π∗t /Π∗t−1 remain stationary, as do the growth
rate of inflation
gtπ = Πt /Πt−1

(11)

and the ratio of the nominal interest rate to the inflation rate

rtrπ = Rt /Πt .

(12)

Appendix A lists the model’s equilibrium conditions, including the first-order conditions
describing the optimizing behavior of the representative household and intermediate-goodsproducing firm. When rewritten in terms of the model’s stationary variables, these conditions imply that in the absence of shocks, the economy converges to a steady-state growth
path, along which yt = y = [(θ −1)/θ][(z −βγ)/(z −γ)], ct = c = [(θ −1)/θ][(z −βγ)/(z −γ)],
π t = 1, rt = r = z/β, gty = g y = z, gtπ = 1, rtrπ = rrπ = z/β, λt = λ = θ/(θ − 1), at = 1,
θt = θ, zt = z, vt = 1, and π ∗t = 1 for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... The stationary system can
therefore be log-linearized around its steady state to describe how the economy responds
to shocks. Let ŷt = ln(yt /y), ĉt = ln(ct /c), π̂ t = ln(π t ), r̂t = ln(rt /r), ĝty = ln(gty /gy ),
ĝtπ = ln(gtπ ), r̂trπ = ln(rtrπ /rrπ ), λ̂t = ln(λt /λ), ât = ln(at ), θ̂t = ln(θt /θ), ẑt = ln(zt /z),
v̂t = ln(vt ), and π̂∗t = ln(π ∗t ) measure the percentage deviation of each stationary variable
from its steady-state level. A first-order Taylor approximation to the economy’s aggregate
resource constraint implies that ĉt = ŷt : price adjustment costs are of second-order importance around the steady state growth path. First-order approximations to the remaining
equilibrium conditions equations then imply

(z − γ)(z − βγ)λ̂t = γz ŷt−1 − (z 2 + βγ 2 )ŷt + βγzEt ŷt+1 + (z − γ)(z − βγρa )ât − γzẑt , (13)
λ̂t = Et λ̂t+1 + r̂t − Et π̂ t+1 ,
12

(14)

(1 + βα)π̂ t = απ̂ t−1 + βEt π̂ t+1 + ψ(ât − λ̂t ) − êt − απ̂ ∗t ,

(15)

r̂t − r̂t−1 = ρπ π̂ t + ρgy ĝty − π̂ ∗t + v̂t ,

(16)

π̂ ∗t = σ π επt − δ e εet − δ z εzt ,

(17)

ĝty = ŷt − ŷt−1 + ẑt ,

(18)

ĝtπ = π̂ t − π̂t−1 + π̂ ∗t ,

(19)

r̂trπ = r̂t − π̂ t ,

(20)

ât = ρa ât−1 + σ a εat ,

(21)

êt = ρe êt−1 + σ e εet ,

(22)

ẑt = σ z εzt ,

(23)

v̂t = ρv v̂t−1 + σ v εvt

(24)

and

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., where, in (15), (17), and (22), the cost-push shock θ̂t has been renormalized as êt = (1/φ)θ̂t , and the new parameters ψ, δ e , ρe , and σ e have been defined as
ψ = (θ − 1)/φ, δ e = δ θ , ρe = ρθ , and σ e = σ θ /φ, so that, like εθt , εet has the standard normal
distribution.
Since (18)-(20) simply restate the definitions of the output growth rate ĝty , the inflation
growth rate ĝtπ , and the ratio of the nominal interest rate to the inflation rate r̂trπ and since
(21)-(24) simply describe the processes for the exogenous preference, cost-push, technology,
and monetary policy shocks, the model’s economic content is concentrated in (13)-(17). In
particular, (14) takes the form of a New Keynesian IS curve linking the marginal utility of
consumption during period t to its own expected future value and to the value of the ex
ante real interest rate, while (13) measures the marginal utility of consumption and includes
both forward- and backward-looking terms based on the habit formation specification for
13

preferences. Equation (15) takes the form of a hybrid forward- and backward-looking New
Keynesian Phillips curve, with the parameter α from the price adjustment cost formulation
indexing the degree of backward-looking behavior, the parameter ψ multiplying the real
marginal cost term ât − λ̂t , and the cost-push shock êt entering additively. In particular
and as noted above, (15) reveals that when α = 0, the model’s Phillips curve relationship
becomes purely forward looking, in the sense that the term involving lagged inflation π̂t−1
drops out of the specification; when α = 1, on the other hand, the model’s Phillips curve
resembles Fuhrer and Moore’s (1995a, 1995b), in the sense that the forward- and backwardlooking terms Et π̂ t+1 and π̂t−1 receive approximately equal weights. Finally, (16) and (17)
describe the conduct of monetary policy, including the possibly endogenous evolution of the
central bank’s inflation target as well as the Taylor-type adjustment of the nominal interest
rate taken to stabilize actual inflation around its target.

3

Empirical Strategy and Results

Blanchard and Kahn (1980) and Klein (2000) describe methods for solving systems of linearized expectational diﬀerence equations such as (13)-(24). These methods provide solutions
that quite conveniently take the same form as a state-space econometric model: in this case,
the solution links the behavior of the stationary model’s three observable variables–the
growth rate of output ĝty , the growth rate of inflation ĝtπ , and the ratio of the nominal interest rate to the inflation rate r̂trπ –to the remaining, unobservable variables. Hence, the
Kalman filtering algorithms outlined by Hamilton (1994, Ch.13) can be applied to obtain
maximum likelihood estimates of the model’s structural parameters and to optimally exploit
information contained in the observable data to draw inferences about the behavior of the
unobservables including, most importantly, the unobservable inflation target π̂ ∗t .
Here, this econometric exercise uses quarterly U.S. data running from 1959:1 through
2004:2. In these data, readings on seasonally-adjusted real gross domestic product in chained

14

2000 dollars, expressed in per-capita terms by dividing by the civilian noninstitutional population, age 16 and over, provide the measure of output Yt . Readings on the seasonallyadjusted GDP implicit price deflator provide the measure of the nominal price level Pt ,
and readings on the three-month U.S. Treasury bill provide the measure of the short-term
nominal interest rate Rt . Prior to their use in the estimation exercise, these raw series get
passed through the same stationary-inducing transformations required to solve the theoretical model. Hence, the empirical model assumes that all three series contain unit roots but
that the inflation and interest rates are cointegrated so that, again, the growth rate of output, the growth rate of inflation, and the ratio of the nominal interest rate to the inflation
rate are the most relevant stationary variables.
Under the additional assumption that the innovations εat , εet , εzt , εvt , and επt are mutually as well as serially uncorrelated, the model has 17 parameters: z, β, ψ, γ, α, ρπ , ρgy ,
ρa , ρe , ρv , σ a , σ e , σ z , σ v , σ π , δ e , and δ z . Values z = 1.0047 and β = 0.9995 for the first two
parameters on this list of fixed prior to estimation in order to insure that the steady-state
rate of output growth g y = z and the steady-state ratio of the nominal interest rate to the
inflation rate rrπ = z/β as implied by the theoretical model match the average values of the
same two variables as measured in the data. The model implies that along the steady-state
growth path, the growth rate of inflation is zero and, indeed, in the U.S. data, the sample
average of the growth rate of inflation is quite small: Figure 1 reveals that, in levels, the
inflation rate ends the 45-year sample period at approximately the same point at which it
begins, so that the average quarterly rate of change in inflation over four-and-a-half decades
is only 0.000016, that is, 0.0016 of one percent or 0.16 basis points. Hence, all variables are
accurately de-meaned prior to estimation, again in a manner consistent with the implications
of the theoretical model.
Preliminary attempts to estimate the model’s remaining 15 parameters consistently led
to very small values of ψ, the coeﬃcient on real marginal cost in the Phillips curve (15);
since ψ = (θ − 1)/φ, these small values for ψ correspond to very large values for the price
15

adjustment cost parameter φ. Hence, in deriving the results described below, the same
setting ψ = 0.10 used in Ireland (2004a, 2004b) is also imposed prior to estimation. The
formulas displayed by Gali and Gertler (1999, p.211) provide a convenient way of interpreting
this setting for ψ: in a model in which firms set prices in a staggered fashion according to
Calvo’s (1983) formulation instead of facing an explicit cost of price adjustment as they
do here, a value of ψ = 0.10 for the coeﬃcient on the real marginal cost term in a purely
forward-looking New Keynesian Phillips curve implies that individual goods prices remain
fixed, on average, for 3.7 quarters–or just under one year.
With these three parameter values fixed in advance, Table 1 presents maximum likelihood
estimates of the model’s remaining parameters. The standard errors, also shown in Table
1, come from a parametric bootstrapping procedure similar to those used by Malley, Philippopoulos, and Woitek (2005) and Cho and Moreno (2006) and described in more detail by
Efron and Tibshirani (1993, Ch.6). This procedure simulates the estimated model in order
to generate 1,000 samples of artificial data for the growth rate of output, the growth rate of
inflation, and the ratio of the nominal interest rate to the inflation rate, each containing the
same number of observations as the original sample of actual U.S. data, then re-estimates
the model 1,000 times using these artificial data sets. The standard errors shown in Table
1 correspond to the standard deviations of the individual parameter estimates taken across
these 1,000 replications.
To assist in interpreting many of the results presented below, the table reports three
sets of estimates: the first obtained from an unconstrained version of the model with an
“endogenous inflation target” in which all 14 parameters are estimated freely, the second
obtained from a constrained version of the model with an “exogenous inflation target” in
which δ e and δ z remain fixed at zero while the remaining 12 parameters are estimated freely,
and the third obtained from another constrained version of the model with “backwardlooking price setting” in which α remains fixed at one while the remaining 13 parameters
are estimated freely. For all three versions of the model, the estimates imply a degree of

16

backward-looking behavior of consumption, as measured by a habit-formation parameter γ
around 0.25, that is significant both economically and statistically. For all three versions
of the model, the estimates reveal that both inflation and output growth enter significantly
into the Taylor rule for the nominal interest rate; the policy response to inflation, however,
appears considerably more vigorous than the associated response to output growth. And
for all three versions of the model, the estimates suggest that the preference shock is highly
persistent while the cost-push and monetary policy shocks are much less so. The estimates
of the volatility parameters σ a , σ e , σ z , and σ v for the innovations also remain of roughly the
same order of magnitude looking across the three specifications.
For the unconstrained, “endogenous target” model, the estimates σ π = 0.0000, δ e =
0.0010, and δ z = 0.0002 attribute all movements in the inflation target to the Federal Reserve’s deliberate response to the two supply shocks: the exogenous shock to the inflation
target plays no role in explaining the data. A clear interpretation of these parameter estimates emerges from Figure 2, which plots impulse responses generated from this version of
the model. In particular, the figure shows that under the estimated policy rule, the inflation target falls by 41 basis points following a favorable one-standard-deviation cost-push
shock; the model’s linearity then implies that, symmetrically, the inflation target rises by
the same amount following a similarly-sized adverse cost-push disturbance. The figure also
reveals that by adjusting the inflation target in this manner, the Federal Reserve’s policy
works to completely insulate output from the eﬀects of those cost-push shocks: under the
estimated policy, a favorable cost-push shock causes output to fall very slightly, by 4 basis
points, before returning to its steady-state level. The smaller estimated value for δ z implies a correspondingly smaller 6.4-basis-point adjustment of the inflation target following a
one-standard-deviation technology shock.
Comparing the point estimates of δe and δ z with their standard errors suggests that
the policy response to the cost-push shock is more important, not just economically, as
shown in Figure 2, but statistically as well. However, Table 1 also reports the maximized

17

value L∗ of the log-likelihood function for each version of the model. Since the “exogenous
target” model is a constrained version of the endogenous target model, the likelihood ratio
statistic of 1.62, formed by doubling the diﬀerence between L∗ for the two models, suggests
that, in fact, the null hypothesis that δ e = 0 and δ z = 0 cannot be rejected with any
reasonable degree of confidence. Thus, while the estimates of the best-fitting, endogenous
target model do provide some support for a combined version of the stories told by Blinder
(1982), Hetzel (1998), Mayer (1998), Bomfim and Rudebusch (2000), and Orphanides and
Wilcox (2002), according to which the Federal Reserve acted consistently over the postwar
period to translate the purely transitory price pressures brought about by supply shocks–
particularly cost-push shocks–into more persistent movements in inflation, considerable
uncertainty remains about the true source of movements in the Federal Reserve’s inflation
target, so that one cannot statistically reject the exogenous target model that depicts those
movements as purely random.
On the other hand, for both the endogenous and exogenous target models, the estimate
of the Phillips curve parameter α measuring the degree of backward-looking behavior in
price setting lies up against its lower bound of zero and has a small standard error. What’s
more, the maximized value of the log-likelihood function falls considerably when the constrained α = 1 is imposed in estimating the model with backward-looking price setting: a
likelihood ratio test firmly rejects the null hypothesis that this constraint is true. Why is
backward-looking behavior in price setting found to be unimportant here, contrasting with
the earlier results of Fuhrer and Moore (1995a, 1995b) and many others? Two features of the
model estimated here that are often absent from those that suggest a more prominent role
for backward-looking price setting help account for this finding. First, Rotemberg (1997)
argues that the inflation persistence explained by the backward-looking terms in Fuhrer and
Moore’s Phillips curve can also be accounted for in a purely forward-looking model with serially correlated behavioral disturbances and here, indeed, both the preference and technology
shocks follow highly persistent autoregressive processes. Second and perhaps more impor-

18

tant, Kozicki and Tinsley (2003) suggest that shifts in the central bank’s inflation target
can also substitute for backward-looking terms in the Phillips curve in explaining inflation
persistence. In fact, Cogley and Sbordone (2005) obtain this same result: an estimated coeﬃcient of zero on the backward-looking term in a New Keynesian Phillips curve that also
allows for drift in the Federal Reserve’s inflation target. Hence, the results from Table 1
indicate that here, the introduction of a backward-looking term in the Phillips curve not
only turns out to be unnecessary for explaining the postwar U.S. data, but actually leads to
a significant deterioration in the model’s statistical fit.
The basic workings of the better-fitting and statistically indistinguishable endogenous
and exogenous target models are most conveniently illustrated by tracing out the impulse
responses generated by the exogenous target variant, since in that case, the eﬀects of the
cost-push and technology shocks are not distorted by the coincident changes in the inflation
target. Hence, Figure 3 displays these impulse responses. The graphs confirm that the
preference shock acts as an exogenous demand-side disturbance, moving output, inflation,
and the short-term nominal interest rate in the same direction. The cost-push and technology
shocks, by contrast, act as supply-side disturbances, moving output and inflation in opposite
directions. As noted above, the random walk specification for technology serves to distinguish
between the eﬀects of these two supply-side shocks: a favorable cost-push shock leads to a
purely transitory increase in output, whereas a favorable technology shock permanently raises
the level of output. In addition, the larger and more persistent increase in output growth
that follows the technology shock implies that under the estimated Taylor rule, the nominal
interest rate rises after the technology shock but falls after the cost-push shock.
A one-standard-deviation innovation to the transitory monetary policy shock works to
increase the annualized short-term nominal interest rate by about 36 basis points and keeps
the interest rate above its steady-state level for two years. This exogenous monetary tightening generates a decline in output of about 30 basis points and a fall in inflation of about
50 basis points; these movements in output and inflation, like that of the interest rate itself,

19

persist over a period of two years. Meanwhile, a one-standard-deviation shock to the inflation
target leads to a permanent 40-basis-point increase in both the inflation and nominal interest
rates. As inflation overshoots in the short run, while the nominal interest rate adjusts only
gradually, the real interest rate falls, generating an 11-basis point rise in output that persists
for more than two years.
The last column of Figure 3 shows the how the welfare-theoretic measure of the output
gap, defined in Appendix B as the percentage deviation of output in equilibrium from its
eﬃcient or Pareto optimal level, responds to each of the model’s five shocks. The cost-push,
monetary policy, and inflation target shocks do not influence the eﬃcient level of output in
this model; hence, the output gap moves in lockstep with output itself after each of these
shocks. On the other hand, the preference and technology shocks do impact on the eﬃcient
level of output, generating impulse responses in the output gap that diﬀer from those in
output. Most notably, the eﬃcient level of output rises more strongly than equilibrium
output, so that the output gap declines even as output rises, after a positive technology
shock. Gali (2003) emphasizes this result: that the behavior of output and the output gap
can diﬀer quite markedly in New Keynesian models such as the one used here.
Tables 2 and 3 present forecast error variance decompositions performed with the endogenous and exogenous target models. According to both model variants, technology shocks
represent the dominant source of movements in output, although preference and monetary
policy shocks do play a supporting role in driving short-run output fluctuations. Preference
shocks become more important in accounting for movements in the nominal interest rate.
And both model variants attribute low-frequency movements in inflation to changes in the
inflation target, although the unconstrained model interprets these movements as reflecting
the Federal Reserve’s deliberate policy response to cost-push shocks, whereas the constrained
model views them instead as purely exogenous.
Figures 4 and 5 superimpose estimates of the Federal Reserve’s inflation target on the
graph of actual U.S. inflation shown originally as Figure 1. These estimates reflect informa-

20

tion contained in the full sample, that is, they are generated using the smoothing algorithms
described by Hamilton (1994, pp.394-397) and generalized by Kohn and Ansley (1983) to
handle cases like the one that arises here, where the state covariance matrix turns out to
be singular. Consistent with all of the previous results, the two model variants have very
similar implications for the evolving path of the inflation target, although the sources of
the inferred movements diﬀer: those in Figure 4 are interpreted as reflections of the Federal
Reserve’s deliberate response to supply-side disturbances–mainly cost-push shocks–while
those in Figure 5 are taken as purely exogenous. For the endogenous target model, Figure 4
shows that the estimated inflation target rises from 1.24 percent in 1959:1 to twin peaks of
8.52 percent in 1974:4 and 8.12 percent in 1980:4. The estimated target hits its post-1980
low of 1.80 percent in both 1998:2 and 2002:1 before rising to 2.48 percent in 2004:2. Meanwhile, for the exogenous target model, Figure 5 indicates that the estimated target starts
at 1.18 percent in 1959:1, peaks at 7.98 percent in 1974:4 and 8.02 percent in 1980:4, falls
to its post-1980 low of 1.70 percent in both 1998:2 and 2002:1, and stands at 2.14 percent
in 2004:2. The estimates of the Federal Reserve’s inflation target shown here in Figures 4
and 5 appear slightly more volatile and hit higher peaks than those obtained and displayed
by Kozicki and Tinsley (2001, Figure 6, p.643) and Cogley and Sbordone (2005, Figure 2,
p.14), but bear a closer resemblance to those derived by Kozicki and Tinsley (2003, Figure
2, p.19), which have the target rising to about 7 percent in the mid-1970s and remaining
high until the early 1980s.
As noted above, the structural model developed and estimated here responds positively
to the Lucas (1976) critique by cleanly separating out the parameters describing the central bank’s policy rule–parameters that will change when the conduct of monetary policy
changes–from those describing private tastes and technologies–which ought to remain invariant to shifts in the policy rule. Hence, the estimated model provides a detailed answer to
questions such as: how would the U.S. economy have behaved if, instead of allowing inflation
to rise and fall, the Federal Reserve had maintained a constant inflation target throughout

21

the postwar period? Along those lines, Figures 6 and 7 compare the actual paths for inflation, the short-term nominal interest rate, and output growth as observed in the historical
data to those that, according to the endogenous and exogenous target versions of the model,
would have been realized under a constant inflation target, that is, in the counterfactual case
where instead of equalling their estimated values, the parameters σ π , δ e , and δ z all equal
zero. Each figure also compares the model’s implications for the evolution of the output gap
under the historical (estimated) and counterfactual policy rules.
Of course, inflation becomes much more stable under the counterfactual scenario. In
particular, estimates from the endogenous target model indicate that without changes in
the inflation target, U.S. inflation would have peaked at only 3.92 percent in 1975:1, while
estimates from the exogenous target model imply that inflation would have hit a postwar high
of 4.56 percent, also in 1975:1. Through the Fisher eﬀect, the nominal interest rate follows
the inflation rate by becoming lower and more stable under the counterfactual scenario.
However, the two stationary measures of real economic activity, output growth and the
output gap, look much the same under the counterfactual scenario as they do historically.
This last finding echoes those shown previously in Tables 2 and 3, which attribute virtually
all of the observed movements in output to a combination of preference, technology, and
monetary policy shocks in the short run and to technology shocks in the long run, but also
raises the question of how sensitive the results are to changes in the parameter α, measuring
the degree of backward-looking behavior in price setting.
Hence, Figures 8-10 display impulse responses, smoothed estimates of the Federal Reserve’s inflation target, and the results of the counterfactual simulation derived using the
constrained model with backward-looking price setting described previously in Table 1. As
noted above, this model variant sets α = 1, so that the Phillips curve specification contains
forward- and backward-looking elements of roughly equal importance, similar to those used
by Fuhrer and Moore (1995a, 1995b). Naturally, some of the implications of this constrained,
“backward-looking” model diﬀer from those of the two better-fitting endogenous and exoge-

22

nous target model variants for which the estimated value of α equals zero. The impulse
responses shown in Figure 8, for example, reveal that for the backward-looking model, an
exogenous shock that increases the inflation target by 24 basis points causes output to rise
by 14 basis points on impact. Since, Figure 3 indicates that in the exogenous target model a
shock that increases the inflation target by 40 basis points causes output to rise by 11 basis
points on impact, the output eﬀects of changes in the inflation become more than twice as
large with α = 1 as they are with α = 0.
Figure 9 plots a series for the estimated inflation target derived using the backwardlooking model that is smoother than those shown in Figures 4 and 5. The inflation target in
Figure 9 also peaks at lower rates–7.14 percent in both 1974:4 and 1980:4–than those in
Figures 4 and 5. According to Figure 10, therefore, even in the counterfactual scenario with
a constant inflation target, U.S. inflation would have risen above 5 percent, to a peak of 5.72
percent in 1974:4. But while, as shown in Figure 8, the output eﬀects of any given shift in the
inflation target are larger in the backward-looking model, the estimated movements in the
inflation target shown in Figure 9 are smaller. Hence, using a much diﬀerent Phillips curve
specification, Figure 10 actually confirms the robustness of the general conclusion suggested
earlier by Figures 6 and 7: that by maintaining a constant inflation target throughout the
postwar period, the Federal Reserve could have lowered both the level and volatility of
inflation without adding much instability to the real economy.

4

Conclusions, Interpretations, Directions for Future
Work

The estimates of the Federal Reserve’s inflation target shown in Figures 4 and 5, together
with the counterfactual histories traced out in Figures 6 and 7, bring the analysis full circle,
back to Friedman’s (1968) “always and everywhere” quote shown at the outset. These
figures, derived from an estimated New Keynesian model, suggest that the Federal Reserve’s
23

inflation target rose from about 1 1/4 percent in 1959 to hit twin peaks at or above 8 percent
in 1974 and 1980 before falling back below 2 1/2 percent by the end of the sample period
in 2004. These figures also suggest that absent those target changes, U.S. inflation would
never have exceeded 4 or 4 1/2 percent. Thus, by attributing the bulk of inflation’s rise and
fall to Federal Reserve policy, the results confirm that to a large extent indeed, postwar U.S.
inflation is a “monetary phenomenon.”
What’s more, estimates from the best-fitting, endogenous target version of the model provide some support for stories told previously by Blinder (1982), Hetzel (1998), and Mayer
(1998), which attribute the rise in U.S. inflation during the 1960s and 1970s to a systematic
tendency for Federal Reserve policy to translate short-run price pressures set oﬀ by adverse
supply-side shocks–particularly cost-push shocks–into more persistent movements in the
inflation rate itself. And, symmetrically, those same estimates confirm Bomfim and Rudebusch (2000) and Orphanides and Wilcox’s (2002) suggestion that, since 1980, the Federal
Reserve has acted “opportunistically” to bring inflation back down in the aftermath of more
favorable supply-side disturbances. But while the results bring together these two sets of
stories to provide a unified explanation of inflation’s long-run rise and fall, they also indicate
that considerable uncertainty remains about the true source of movements in the Federal
Reserve’s inflation target: the best-fitting version of the model, which interprets those movements as part of a deliberate policy response to exogenous supply-side shocks hitting the
economy, turns out to be statistically indistinguishable from the alternative, exogenous target
variant that depicts movements in the inflation target as purely random.
Stepping back from these literal interpretations of the two model variants and looking
more broadly at the results, some links to other recent contributions to the literature on
postwar U.S. monetary history begin to appear. The results from the endogenous target
model, for instance, also provide some support for Ireland (1999) and Chappell and McGregor’s (2004) interpretation of the data, according to which Kydland and Prescott (1977)
and Barro and Gordon’s (1983) time-consistency problem accounts for the Federal Reserve’s

24

unwillingness to prevent inflation from rising in the face of adverse supply-side shocks as well
as its ability to bring inflation back down following more favorable supply-side disturbances.
Alternatively, to the extent that the adverse supply shocks that hit the U.S. economy during
the 1970s can be blamed for inaccuracies in oﬃcial estimates of the output gap, the results
obtained here can be squared with Orphanides’ (2002) account of how mismeasurement of
the output gap led Federal Reserve oﬃcials to mistakenly adopt an overly accommodative
monetary policy throughout that decade, fueling the coincident rise in inflation. Finally,
the results from the exogenous target model might be reinterpreted in line with Sargent’s
(1999) hypothesis that Federal Reserve oﬃcials actively pushed inflation higher during the
1960s and 1970s in a futile eﬀort to exploit a misperceived Phillips curve trade-oﬀ. Clearly,
further extensions to and refinements of the empirical New Keynesian model developed here
are called for, in an eﬀort to discriminate more sharply between these competing views of the
data, to understand more fully the policy mistakes of the past, and to guard more reliably
against similar mistakes in the future.

5

Appendix A: Equilibrium Conditions

This Appendix derives the model’s equilibrium conditions, which take the form of (13)-(24)
after they are log-linearized.
The representative household chooses Ct , ht , Bt , and Mt for all t = 0, 1, 2, ... to maximize
its expected utility subject to the budget constraint (1) for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... The first-order
conditions for this problem can be written as
at
− βγEt
Λt =
Ct − γCt−1

µ

at+1
Ct+1 − γCt

¶

,

(25)

at = Λt (Wt /Pt ),

(26)

Λt = βRt Et (Λt+1 /Πt+1 ),

(27)

25

Mt /Pt = (at /Λt )[Rt /(Rt − 1)],

(28)

and (1) with equality for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., where Λt denotes the nonnegative Lagrange
multiplier on the budget constraint expressed in real terms for period t. Equation (25)
identifies the multiplier Λt with the marginal utility of consumption during period t, adjusted
to account for the habit-persistence eﬀects that carry over into t + 1. Since utility is linear
in hours worked, (26) equates the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and
leisure to the real wage. The Euler equation (27) relates the intertemporal marginal rate
of substitution to the real interest rate, while (28) takes the form of a money demand
relationship, implying that real balances rise as consumption rises and the nominal interest
rate falls.
The representative intermediate-goods-producing firm chooses Pt (i) for all t = 0, 1, 2, ...
to maximize its real market value, given by

E0

∞
X

β t Λt [Dt (i)/Pt ],

t=0

where β t Λt measures the marginal utility value to the representative household of an additional unit of real profits received in the form of dividends during period t and where
¸1−θt
¸−θt µ ¶ µ ¶
∙
∙
∙
¸2
Dt (i)
Wt
Yt
φ
Pt (i)
Pt (i)
Pt (i)
−
=
Yt −
− 1 Yt (29)
Pt
Pt
Pt
Pt
Zt
2 Παt−1 (Π∗t )1−α Pt−1 (i)
measures the firm’s real profits during period t in light of the requirement that it sell its
output on demand at price Pt (i). The first-order conditions for this problem are
¸−θt
∙
¸−θt −1 µ ¶ µ ¶
Pt (i)
Wt
1
Pt (i)
(30)
+ θt
0 = (1 − θt )
Pt
Pt
Pt
Zt
¸∙
¸
∙
Pt
Pt (i)
−1
−φ
Παt−1 (Π∗t )1−α Pt−1 (i)
Παt−1 (Π∗t )1−α Pt−1 (i)
½µ
¶∙
¶¾
¸∙
¸∙
¸µ
Λt+1
Pt+1 (i)
Pt+1 (i)
Pt
Yt+1
−1
+βφEt
Λt
Παt (Π∗t+1 )1−α Pt (i)
Παt (Π∗t+1 )1−α Pt (i) Pt (i)
Yt
∙

26

and (5) with equality for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... In the absence of price adjustment costs, when
φ = 0, (30) simply implies that the firm sets its price Pt (i) as a markup θt /(θt − 1) over
marginal cost Wt /Zt . Hence, as suggested above, θt /(θt − 1) can be interpreted as the firm’s
desired markup, and random fluctuations in θt act as shocks to the firm’s desired markup.
Costly price adjustment (φ > 0) then implies that actual markups deviate from, but tend to
gravitate towards, their desired level as firms respond optimally to the shocks that hit the
economy.
After imposing the symmetry conditions Yt (i) = Yt , ht (i) = ht , Dt (i) = Dt , and Pt (i) = Pt
for all i ∈ [0, 1] and t = 0, 1, 2, ... and the market-clearing conditions Mt = Mt−1 + Tt and
Bt = Bt−1 = 0 for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., and using (5), (26), (28), and (29) to solve for ht , Wt , Mt ,
and Dt , the household’s budget constraint (1) can be rewritten as the economy’s aggregate
resource constraint

¸2
∙
φ
Πt
− 1 Yt ,
Yt = Ct +
2 Παt−1 (Π∗t )1−α

(31)

and the intermediate-goods-producing firm’s optimal price adjustment rule (30) simplifies to
µ

¶
∙
¸
¸∙
at
Πt
Πt
θt − 1 = θt
−φ
−1
Λt Zt
Παt−1 (Π∗t )1−α
Πα (Π∗ )1−α
½µ
¶∙
¸µ
¶¾
¸ ∙t−1 t
Λt+1
Πt+1
Yt+1
Πt+1
+βφEt
−1
Λt
Παt (Π∗t+1 )1−α
Παt (Π∗t+1 )1−α
Yt

(32)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... Equations (31) and (32), together with (2), (4), (6)-(12), (25), and
(27), form a system of equilibrium conditions that completely determines the behavior of
the thirteen variables Yt , Ct , Πt , Rt , gty , gtπ , rtrπ , Λt , at , θt , Zt , vt , and Π∗t . When rewritten
in terms of the model’s stationary variables and log-linearized, this system takes the form of
(13)-(24).

27

6

Appendix B: The Eﬃcient Level of Output and the
Output Gap

This appendix derives conditions that define the economy’s eﬃcient, or Pareto optimal, level
of output and a corresponding welfare-theoretic notion of the output gap.
Consider a social planner who can circumvent the frictions that make markets for the
intermediate goods monopolistically competitive in equilibrium, that give rise to the explicit
costs of nominal price adjustment, and that imply that real money balances appear in representative household’s utility function. This social planner chooses an amount Qt of the
finished good to allocate to the household’s consumption and an amount nt (i) of the household’s time to allocate to production of each intermediate good i ∈ [0, 1] for all t = 0, 1, 2, ...
in order to maximize the household’s expected utility, now measured by

E0

∞
X
t=0

∙
¸
Z 1
β at ln(Qt − γQt−1 ) −
nt (i)di
t

0

subject only to the aggregate feasibility constraint

Zt

∙Z

1
(θt −1)/θt

nt (i)

0

di

¸θt /(θt −1)

≥ Qt

(33)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., reflecting the use of the same constant-returns-to-scale technologies
described by (3) and (5). The first-order conditions for this social planner’s problem can be
written as
at
− βγEt
Ξt =
Qt − γQt−1

µ

at+1
Qt+1 − γQt

at = Ξt Zt (Qt /Zt )1/θt nt (i)−1/θt

¶

,

(34)
(35)

for all i ∈ [0, 1], and (33) with equality for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., where Ξt denotes the nonnegative
Lagrange multiplier on (33) for period t.
Equation (35) implies that it is optimal for the social planner to choose nt (i) = nt for all
28

i ∈ [0, 1] and t = 0, 1, 2, ..., where
nt = (Ξt /at )θt Ztθt (Qt /Zt ).

Substituting this last relationship into (33) yields

Ξt = at /Zt .

Hence, (34) implies that the eﬃcient level of output Qt must satisfy
1
1
=
− βγEt
Zt
Qt − γQt−1

∙µ

at+1
at

¶µ

1
Qt+1 − γQt

¶¸

(36)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... Equation (36) implies that, like the equilibrium level of output Yt , the
eﬃcient level of output Qt inherits a unit root from the process (6) for technology. However,
the transformed variable qt = Qt /Zt remains stationary, as does the output gap

xt = Qt /Yt ,

(37)

defined as the ratio of the eﬃcient and equilibrium levels of output. Log-linearized versions
of (36) and (37) can be added to the system consisting of (13)-(24) to determine how this
welfare-theoretic output gap responds to the model’s exogenous shocks.

7

References

Barro, Robert J. and David B. Gordon. “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural
Rate Model.” Journal of Political Economy 91 (August 1983): 589-610.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Charles M. Kahn. “The Solution of Linear Diﬀerence Models
Under Rational Expectations.” Econometrica 48 (July 1980): 1305-1311.

29

Blinder, Alan S. “The Anatomy of Double-Digit Inflation in the 1970s.” In Robert E. Hall,
ed. Inflation: Causes and Eﬀects. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982.
Bomfim, Antulio N. and Glenn D. Rudebusch. “Opportunistic and Deliberate Disinflation
Under Imperfect Credibility.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32 (November
2000, Part 1): 707-721.
Calvo, Guillermo A. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 12 (September 1983): 383-398.
Chappell, Henry W., Jr. and Rob Roy McGregor. “Did Time Inconsistency Contribute to
the Great Inflation? Evidence from the FOMC Transcripts.” Economics and Politics
16 (November 2004): 233-251.
Cho, Seonghoon and Antonio Moreno. “A Small-Sample Study of the New Keynesian Macro
Model.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38 (September 2006): 1461-1481.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler. “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New
Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature 37 (December 1999): 16611707.
Cogley, Timothy and Argia M. Sbordone. “A Search for a Structural Phillips Curve.” Staﬀ
Report 203. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March 2005.
Dewachter, Hans and Marco Lyrio. “Macro Factors and the Term Structure of Interest
Rates.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38 (February 2006): 119-140.
Driscoll, John C. “On the Microfoundations of Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply.”
Manuscript. Providence: Brown University, October 2000.
Efron, Bradley and Robert J. Tibshirani. An Introduction to the Bootstrap. Boca Raton:
Chapman and Hall/CRC Press, 1993.

30

Erceg, Christopher J. and Andrew T. Levin. “Imperfect Credibility and Inflation Persistence.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (May 2003): 915-944.
Friedman, Milton. “Inflation: Causes and Consequences.” In Dollars and Deficits: Living
With America’s Economic Problems. Englewood Cliﬀs: Prentice-Hall, 1968.
Fuhrer, Jeﬀrey C. “Habit Formation in Consumption and Its Implications for MonetaryPolicy Models.” American Economic Review 90 (June 2000): 367-390.
Fuhrer, Jeﬀrey C. and George R. Moore. “Inflation Persistence.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 110 (February 1995a): 127-159.
Fuhrer, Jeﬀrey C. and George R. Moore. “Monetary Policy Trade-oﬀs and the Correlation
between Nominal Interest Rates and Real Output.” American Economic Review 85
(March 1995b): 219-239.
Gali, Jordi. “New Perspectives on Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle.” In
Mathias Dewatripont, Lars Peter Hansen, and Stephen J. Turnovsky, eds. Advances
in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Eighth World Congress,
Volume III. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Gali, Jordi and Mark Gertler. “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 44 (October 1999): 195-222.
Gavin, William T., Benjamin D. Keen, and Michael R. Pakko. “The Monetary Instrument
Matters.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 87 (September/October 2005):
633-658.
Gurkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson. “The Sensitivity of Long-Term Interest
Rates to Economic News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic Models.”
American Economic Review 95 (March 2005): 425-436.
Hamilton, James D. Time Series Analysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994.
31

Hetzel, Robert L. “Arthur Burns and Inflation.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 84 (Winter 1998): 21-44.
Ireland, Peter N. “Does the Time-Consistency Problem Explain the Behavior of Inflation
in the United States?” Journal of Monetary Economics 44 (October 1999): 279-291.
Ireland, Peter N. “Technology Shocks in the New Keynesian Model.” Review of Economics
and Statistics 86 (November 2004a): 923-936.
Ireland, Peter N. “Money’s Role in the Monetary Business Cycle.” Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking 36 (December 2004b): 969-983.
King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, and Sergio T. Rebelo. “Production, Growth, and
Business Cycles: I. The Basic Neoclassical Model.” Journal of Monetary Economics
21 (March/May 1988): 195-232.
Klein, Paul. “Using the Generalized Schur Form to Solve a Multivariate Linear Rational Expectations Model.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24 (September
2000): 1405-1423.
Kohn, Robert and Craig F. Ansley. “Fixed Interval Estimation in State Space Models
when Some of the Data are Missing or Aggregated.” Biometrika 70 (December 1983):
683-688.
Kozicki, Sharon and Peter A. Tinsley. “Shifting Endpoints in the Term Structure of Interest
Rates.” Journal of Monetary Economics 47 (June 2001): 613-652.
Kozicki, Sharon and Peter A. Tinsley. “Alternative Sources of the Lag Dynamics of Inflation.” In Price Adjustment and Monetary Policy: Proceedings of a Conference Held By
the bank of Canada, November 2002. Ottawa: Bank of Canada, 2003.
Kozicki, Sharon and Peter A. Tinsley. “Permanent and Transitory Policy Shocks in an Empirical Macro Model with Asymmetric Information.” Journal of Economic Dynamics
32

and Control 29 (November 2005): 1985-2015.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott. “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans.” Journal of Political Economy 85 (June 1977): 473-491.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. ”Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique.” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 1 (1976): 19-46.
Malley, Jim, Apostolis Philippopoulos, and Ulrich Woitek. “Electoral Uncertainty, Fiscal Policy and Macroeconomic Fluctuations.” Working Paper 1593. Munich: CESifo,
November 2005.
Mayer, Thomas. Monetary Policy and the Great Inflation in the United States: The Federal
Reserve and the Failure of Macroeconomic Policy, 1965-79. Cheltenham: Edward
Elgar, 1998.
Orphanides, Athanasios. “Monetary Policy Rules and the Great Inflation.” American Economic Review 92 (May 2002): 115-120.
Orphanides, Athanasios and David W. Wilcox. “The Opportunistic Approach to Disinflation.” International Finance 5 (Spring 2002): 47-71.
Roberts, John M. “Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics.” Finance and Economics
Discussion Series 2004-62. Washington: Federal Reserve Board, October 2004.
Rotemberg, Julio J. “Sticky Prices in the United States.” Journal of Political Economy 90
(December 1982): 1187-1211.
Rotemberg, Julio J. “Towards a Compact, Empirically-Verified Rational Expectations Model
for Monetary Policy Analysis: A Comment.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 47 (December 1997): 231-241.

33

Rudebusch, Glenn D. and Tao Wu. “A Macro-Finance Model of the Term Structure,
Monetary Policy, and the Economy.” Manuscript. San Francisco: Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, December 2004.
Salemi, Michael K. “Econometric Policy Evaluation and Inverse Control.” Manuscript.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, July 2005.
Sargent, Thomas J. The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1999.
Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
DSGE Approach.” Manuscript. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, May 2003.
Steinsson, Jon. “Optimal Monetary Policy in an Economy with Inflation Persistence.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (October 2003): 1425-1456.
Taylor, John B. “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39 (December 1993): 195-214.
Woodford, Michael. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.

34

Table 1. Maximum Likelihood Estimates and Standard Errors
Unconstrained
Model with
Endogenous Target

Parameter

Estimate

Bootstrapped
Standard Error

Estimate

γ
α
ρπ
ρgy
ρa
ρe
ρv
σa
σe
σz
σv
σπ
δe
δz

0.2553
0.0000
0.9069
0.2347
0.9105
0.0060
0.0546
0.0281
0.0007
0.0134
0.0027
0.0000
0.0010
0.0002

0.0776
0.0764
0.1435
0.0465
0.0475
0.2103
0.0743
0.0091
0.0004
0.0017
0.0003
0.0004
0.0004
0.0002

0.2433
0.0000
0.8594
0.2617
0.9097
0.1310
0.0711
0.0279
0.0015
0.0128
0.0028
0.0010
0.0000
0.0000

L∗ = 2310.6812

Constrained
Model with
Backward-Looking
Price Setting

Constrained
Model with
Exogenous Target

L∗ = 2309.8728

Bootstrapped
Standard Error
0.0705
0.0855
0.1623
0.0533
0.0500
0.2503
0.0823
0.0092
0.0003
0.0023
0.0004
0.0002
−
−

Estimate

Bootstrapped
Standard Error

0.2374
1.0000
0.5798
0.2527
0.8935
0.0000
0.0132
0.0286
0.0038
0.0109
0.0024
0.0006
0.0004
0.0000

0.0709
−
0.0690
0.0433
0.0496
0.0632
0.0548
0.0070
0.0003
0.0016
0.0003
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001

L∗ = 2295.4659

Notes: Where no standard error is reported, the parameter value has been constrained as indicated. L∗ denotes the maximized value of the log
likelihood function.

Table 2. Forecast Error Variance Decompositions, Unconstrained Model with
Endogenous Inflation Target
Output
Quarters
Ahead

Technology

Monetary
Policy

Inflation
Target

Preference

Cost-Push

1
4
8
12
20
40

13.1
4.7
2.1
1.3
0.7
0.4

0.2
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

74.5
91.2
96.1
97.6
98.7
99.4

12.2
4.0
1.7
1.0
0.6
0.3

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Quarters
Ahead

Preference

Cost-Push

Technology

Monetary
Policy

Inflation
Target

1
4
8
12
20
40

7.3
5.3
4.1
3.4
2.6
1.5

47.5
51.4
61.5
68.1
76.1
84.7

28.0
28.1
22.9
19.1
14.6
9.7

17.2
15.1
11.6
9.4
6.8
4.1

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Inflation
Target
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Inflation

Interest
Rate
Quarters
Ahead

Preference

Cost-Push

Technology

Monetary
Policy

1
4
8
12
20
40

49.4
64.6
64.0
59.9
50.9
35.3

20.6
24.0
29.3
34.7
44.6
60.9

5.8
2.5
1.6
1.5
1.6
1.8

24.2
8.8
5.1
4.0
3.0
2.0

Note: Entries decompose the forecast error variance at each horizon into percentages due
to each of the model’s five shocks.

Table 3. Forecast Error Variance Decompositions, Constrained Model with
Exogenous Inflation Target
Output
Quarters
Ahead

Technology

Monetary
Policy

Inflation
Target

Preference

Cost-Push

1
4
8
12
20
40

13.5
5.1
2.3
1.4
0.8
0.4

3.9
1.5
0.7
0.4
0.2
0.1

66.7
87.7
94.6
96.7
98.1
99.1

14.3
5.1
2.2
1.3
0.8
0.4

1.6
0.6
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0

Quarters
Ahead

Preference

Cost-Push

Technology

Monetary
Policy

Inflation
Target

1
4
8
12
20
40

8.2
5.7
4.4
3.7
2.9
1.8

15.3
9.0
6.9
5.7
4.2
2.6

26.4
23.0
18.0
14.8
10.9
6.6

22.2
18.6
14.5
11.9
8.8
5.4

27.8
43.7
56.2
63.8
73.2
83.7

Inflation
Target
10.3
17.4
24.1
30.2
40.7
58.1

Inflation

Interest
Rate
Quarters
Ahead

Preference

Cost-Push

Technology

Monetary
Policy

1
4
8
12
20
40

53.8
67.4
66.8
62.7
53.9
38.1

5.9
2.4
1.4
1.1
0.8
0.6

8.5
4.7
2.9
2.2
1.7
1.2

21.6
8.1
4.8
3.8
2.9
2.0

Note: Entries decompose the forecast error variance at each horizon into percentages due
to each of the model’s five shocks.

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

Figure 1. Inflation, United States. Measured by annualized, quarter-to-quarter percentage
changes in the GDP implicit price deflator.

Jan-04

Jan-01

Jan-98

Jan-95

Jan-92

Jan-89

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-59

0

Output to Preference

Inflation to Preference

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.4

0.1

0.1

0

0

-0.1
0

4

8

12

16

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05

0.6

0.2

0.2

Output Gap to Preference

Interest Rate to Preference
0.8

0.2
0
0

Output to Cost-Push

4

8

12

16

0

4

8

12

0

16

Interest Rate to Cost-Push

Inflation to Cost-Push
0

0

0

-0.01

-0.2

-0.1

-0.01

-0.2

-0.02

-0.3

-0.03
-0.04

-0.4

-0.03
-0.04

-0.6

-0.4

-0.05

-0.8

-0.5

0

4

8

12

16

0

Output to Technology

4

8

12

16

-0.4
0.5

-0.6

0

-0.8
0

4

8

12

16

8

12

0

Output to Monetary Policy

4

8

0

16

12

16

-0.4
4

8

12

0

16

Interest Rate to Monetary Policy

-0.1

-0.1

0.4

-0.1

-0.2

0.3

-0.3

-0.3

0.2

-0.4

0.1

-0.4

-0.5

0

12

16

0

Output to Inflation Target

4

8

12

16

Inflation to Inflation Target

4

8

12

0

16

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0

0

16

0

4

8

12

16

4

8

12

16

Output Gap to Inflation Target

Interest Rate to Inflation Target
1

12

16

-0.4
0

1

8

12

-0.3

1

4

8

-0.2

1

0

4

Output Gap to Monetary Policy
0

8

16

-0.3

0.5

4

12

-0.2

0

0

8

-0.1

0

Inflation to Monetary Policy

4

Output Gap to Technology

0

-0.2

16

0

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1

-0.2

1

4

Interest Rate to Technology

0

12

-0.05
0

Inflation to Technology

1.5

8

Output Gap to Cost-Push

0
-0.02

4

0
0

4

8

12

16

0

4

8

Figure 2. Impulse responses from the unconstrained model with an endogenous inflation target. Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model's variables to a
one-standard-deviation shock. The inflation and interest rates are expressed in annualized terms.

12

16

Output to Preference

Inflation to Preference
0.4

0.8

0.3

0.3

0.6

0.2

0.2

0

0

-0.1
0

4

8

12

16

0.2
0
0

Output to Cost-Push

4

8

12

16

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
8

12

16

4

8

12

0
4

8

12

16

-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
12

16

8

12

8

12

12

4

8

12

0.2

-0.1

8

12

0

0.3

-0.1

0.2

-0.2

0.1

-0.3

16

4

8

12

16

-0.4
0

4

8

12

0

16

4

8

12

16

Output Gap to Inflation Target

Interest Rate to Inflation Target
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

0.1
0
16

12

Output Gap to Monetary Policy

0.4

0.2

12

0

16

0.3

8

8

-0.4
4

0.4

4

4

-0.3

0.5

0

16

-0.2

0

16

12

Output Gap to Technology

0
0

0

16

0

Inflation to Inflation Target

16

8

Interest Rate to Monetary Policy

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
4

4

0.25

16

8

0
0

0

Output to Inflation Target
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
0

0.05

Inflation to Monetary Policy

-0.1

8

0.1

-0.15

Interest Rate to Technology

0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6
4

0.15

-0.1

0.05

Output to Monetary Policy
0

0

-0.05

0.1

4

4

Output Gap to Cost-Push

0.15

0

0

16

0.2

Inflation to Technology

0.5

12

0

16

0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6

1

8

-0.2
0

Output to Technology
1.5

0

4

Interest Rate to Cost-Push

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
4

0

Inflation to Cost-Push

0.2

0

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05

0.4

0.1

0.1

Output Gap to Preference

Interest Rate to Preference

0.4

0

4

8

12

16

0

4

Figure 3. Impulse responses from the constrained model with an exogenous inflation target. Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model's variables to a
one-standard-deviation shock. The inflation and interest rates are expressed in annualized terms.

8

12

16

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Jan-04

Jan-01

Jan-98

Jan-95

Jan-92

Jan-89

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-59

0

Figure 4. Actual inflation (thin black line) and the Federal Reserve's target (thick red line),
as implied by the unconstrained model with an endogenous inflation target.

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Jan-04

Jan-01

Jan-98

Jan-95

Jan-92

Jan-89

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-59

0

Figure 5. Actual inflation (thin black line) and the Federal Reserve's target (thick red line),
as implied by the constrained model with an exogenous inflation target.

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
Jan-89
Jan-92
Jan-95
Jan-98
Jan-01
Jan-04

Jan-92
Jan-95
Jan-98
Jan-01
Jan-04

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-89

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5

Jan-86

output gap

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

output growth

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-59

Jan-04

Jan-01

Jan-98

Jan-95

Jan-92

Jan-89

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-59

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Jan-59

Jan-04

Jan-01

Jan-98

Jan-95

Jan-92

Jan-89

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-59

inflation
interest rate

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Figure 6. Actual US data (thin black lines) and counterfactual paths (thick red lines) generated under a constant inflation target
using the unconstrained model with an endogenous inflation target.

Jan-92
Jan-95
Jan-98
Jan-01
Jan-04

Jan-95
Jan-98
Jan-01
Jan-04

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-92

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5

Jan-89

output gap

Jan-89

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

output growth

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
Jan-59

Jan-04

Jan-01

Jan-98

Jan-95

Jan-92

Jan-89

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-59

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Jan-59

Jan-04

Jan-01

Jan-98

Jan-95

Jan-92

Jan-89

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-59

inflation
interest rate

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Figure 7. Actual US data (thin black lines) and counterfactual paths (thick red lines) generated under a constant inflation target
using the constrained model with an exogenous inflation target.

Output to Preference

Inflation to Preference

0

4

8

12

16

0

4

8

12

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
8

12

16

0.5
0
12

0

16

4

8

12

0
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
12

16

8

0.3
0.2

0

0.1

-0.05

0
8

-0.1

0.3

0

-0.4

-0.1
0

16

12

8

12

16

4

8

12

4

8

0

16

12

8

12

16

0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
4

8

12

0

16

Interest Rate to Monetary Policy

4

8

12

16

Output Gap to Monetary Policy
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4

0

4

8

12

16

0

4

8

12

16

Output Gap to Inflation Target

Interest Rate to Inflation Target

16

4

Output Gap to Technology

0.15

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

16

0.1

0

16

12

0.1

-0.3

Interest Rate to Technology

12

8

0.2

Inflation to Inflation Target

0.1

4

0.4

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
4

4

Output Gap to Cost-Push

0

-0.1
4

0

16

0

Output to Inflation Target

0.05

12

0.1

0

0.4

8

0.2

0

0.15

0

4

Inflation to Monetary Policy

-0.1

8

0

16

0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
4

-0.1

0.3

Output to Monetary Policy
0.1

0

0

0

Inflation to Technology

1

8

0.1

0.2

Interest Rate to Cost-Push

0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
4

0.2

-0.2

Output to Technology
1.5

0

0.6

0.3

Inflation to Cost-Push

0.3

4

0.4

16

0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1
-1.2
0

0.8

0.4

Output to Cost-Push
0.4

Output Gap to Preference

Interest Rate to Preference

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1

0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
0

4

8

12

16

0

4

Figure 8. Impulse responses from the constrained model with backward-looking price setting. Each panel shows the percentage-point response of one of the model's variables to a
one-standard-deviation shock. The inflation and interest rates are expressed in annualized terms.

8

12

16

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Jan-04

Jan-01

Jan-98

Jan-95

Jan-92

Jan-89

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-59

0

Figure 9. Actual inflation (thin black line) and the Federal Reserve's target (thick red line),
as implied by the constrained model with backward-looking price setting.

Jan-92
Jan-95
Jan-98
Jan-01
Jan-04

Jan-95
Jan-98
Jan-01
Jan-04

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-92

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2

Jan-89

output gap

Jan-89

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

output growth

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
Jan-59

Jan-04

Jan-01

Jan-98

Jan-95

Jan-92

Jan-89

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-59

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Jan-59

Jan-04

Jan-01

Jan-98

Jan-95

Jan-92

Jan-89

Jan-86

Jan-83

Jan-80

Jan-77

Jan-74

Jan-71

Jan-68

Jan-65

Jan-62

Jan-59

inflation
interest rate

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

Figure 10. Actual US data (thin black lines) and counterfactual paths (thick red lines) generated under a constant inflation target
using the constrained model with backward-looking price setting.

