NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRANSFER PRICING BY U.S.-BASED MULTINATIONAL FIRMS
Andrew B. Bernard
J. Bradford Jensen
Peter K. Schott
Working Paper 12493
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12493
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006

The authors would like to thank Gary Hufbauer and Richard Sansing for helpful comments as well as seminar
participants at IIE, FIEF, NBER, Princeton, Toronto, Wisconsin and Yale. Special thanks to Jim Davis for
timely help when it counted and to Evan Gill for research assistance. Bernard and Schott (SES-0241474) and
Jensen (SES-0552029) thank the National Science Foundation for research support. The research in this
paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau
at the Boston Census Research Data Center and the Center for Economic Studies Research. Results and
conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper has been screened to insure that no confidential
data are revealed.
©2006 by Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Transfer Pricing by U.S.-Based Multinational Firms
Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 12493
August 2006
JEL No. F14, F23, H25, H26, H32
ABSTRACT
This paper examines how prices set by multinational firms vary across arm's-length and related-party
customers. Comparing prices within firms, products, destination countries, modes of transport and
month, we find that the prices U.S. exporters set for their arm's-length customers are substantially
larger than the prices recorded for related-parties. This price wedge is smaller for commodities than
for differentiated goods, is increasing in firm size and firm export share, and is greater for goods sent
to countries with lower corporate tax rates and higher tariffs. We also find that changes in exchange
rates have differential effects on arm's-length and related-party prices; an appreciation of the dollar
reduces the difference between the prices.
Andrew B. Bernard
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
andrew.b.bernard@dartmouth.edu
J. Bradford Jensen
Institute for International Economics
1750 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20036-1903
jbjensen@iie.com
Peter K. Schott
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
peter.schott@yale.edu

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

1.

2

Introduction

This paper examines how prices set by multinational firms vary across arm’s-length and
related-party customers. It takes advantage of a unique new dataset that tracks the population
of U.S. export transactions during the 1990s. Consistent with a model of transfer pricing
developed below, these data show that there is a large positive gap between firms’ internal and
external prices. The size of this price wedge varies systematically with product diﬀerentiation,
firms’ market power and destination-countries’ corporate tax rates and import tariﬀs.
U.S. exports are highly concentrated among a relatively small number of firms. The top 1
percent of exporters represent 0.03 percent of the total number of firms in the United States but
account for more than 80 percent of the value of exports and employ more than 11 percent of
all private-sector workers. Among large exporters, U.S.-based multinationals, i.e., U.S.-owned
multinationals or local aﬃliates of foreign-owned multinationals, are dominant, controlling more
than 90 percent of total U.S. exports.1 A substantial fraction of these exports — one third —
occur within the firm, i.e., between the U.S.-based multinational and a related party in a foreign
country.2
The prominence of multinational firms in international trade has stimulated a large body
of research attempting to explain what goods they produce, where they locate production and
how they respond to incentives and policies enacted by national and sub-national governments.
Their potential use of “transfer” pricing for related-party transactions has, in particular, drawn
widespread attention from practitioners as well as academics.3 Given the large volume of U.S.
and global trade that takes place within multinationals, the potential impact of transfer pricing is
substantial, having the ability to influence oﬃcial trade statistics, national accounts aggregates
and estimates of inflation and productivity growth via its eﬀect on import and export price
indexes.4
Multinational firms have both managerial and financial motives for setting diﬀerent prices for
arm’s-length and related-party transactions. Managerial motives include establishing the proper
incentives for disparate divisions within a decentralized firm and avoiding “double marginalization” in the presence of market power.5 Financial motivations encompass the minimization
of corporate tax and tariﬀ payments as well as the avoidance of foreign exchange controls or
other restrictions on cross-border capital movements. Because obtaining direct evidence on the
pricing behavior of multinationals is extremely diﬃcult, existing empirical studies generally rely
1

U.S.-based multinationals that export account for 0.90 percent of all firms, 13 percent of exporting firms, and
employ 27 percent of U.S. workers. See Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2005) for these and other facts about U.S.
trading firms.
2
As discussed below, “related-party” trade refers to trade between U.S. companies and their foreign subsidiaries
as well as trade between U.S. subsidiaries of foreign companies and their foreign aﬃliates. For exports, firms are
“related” if either party owns, directly or indirectly, 10 percent or more of the other party (see Section 30.7(v) of
The Foreign Trade Statistics Regulations).
3
Transfer pricing concerns have traditionally been a cross-border issue; however recent court cases in the U.K.
are threatening to impose the same restrictions on within-country intra-firm pricing as exist for cross-border
transactions. See the Economist (2005).
4
U.S. import and export price indexes are currently constructed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics using prices
reported by firms in voluntary monthly surveys. To the extent that these prices reflect an unknown mixture of
arm’s-length and related-party transactions, they may fail to capture true movements in the U.S. terms of trade.
See, for example, Diewert et al. (2005) and Rangan and Lawrence (1993).
5
“Double marginalization” is a variant of the vertical externality where the downstream firm does not take the
upstream firm’s profit into account when setting prices. See Tirole (1988).

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

3

upon indirect evidence or responses in a narrowly defined industry.6
The data employed in this paper are derived from point-of-export customs documents tracking every U.S. international export transaction occurring between 1993 and 2000 inclusive. For
each export shipment that leaves the United States, these documents record the identity of the
exporter, the Harmonized System product classification and date of shipment, the value and
quantity shipped, the destination country, the transport mode, and whether the transaction
takes place at “arm’s length” or between “related parties”. These data provide researchers the
first opportunity to observe key features of multinational-firm activity. Our focus in this paper
is on the wedge between multinational firms’ arm’s-length and related-party prices (i.e., unit
values) and the extent to which this wedge varies with product and firm characteristics, market
structure and government policy.
We find that export prices for intrafirm transactions are significantly lower than prices for
the same good sent to an arm’s-length customer. After matching related-party sales by a firm
to arm’s-length sales by the same firm for the same product to the same country in the same
month using the same mode of transport, we find that the average arm’s-length price is 43 percent
higher than the related-party price. Product characteristics are influential in determining this
gap. While the wedge for commodities (i.e., undiﬀerentiated goods) averages 8.8 percent, the
gap for diﬀerentiated goods is 66.7 percent. Firm and market attributes are also influential: the
diﬀerence between arm’s-length and related-party prices are higher for goods shipped by larger
firms, by firms with higher export shares, and by firms in product-country markets served by
fewer exporters.
Consistent with incentives to minimize taxation and import duties, we find that the wedge
between arm’s-length and related-party prices is negatively associated with destination-country
corporate tax rates and positively associated with destination-country import tariﬀs. For each
one percentage point reduction in the foreign tax rate we find an increase in the price wedge
of 0.56 to 0.66 percent. A one percentage point increase in the foreign customs duty increases
the price wedge by 0.56 to 0.60 percent. These results show that multinational firms make
substantial price adjustments to variation in country tax and tariﬀ rates. Back-of-the-envelope
calculations suggest that pricing responses to tax rate diﬀerences across countries led to $5.5
billion in lower U.S. corporate tax revenues and a $15 billion increase in the merchandise trade
deficit in 2004.
We also examine the role of exchange rates in multinational pricing. Though a large literature
is devoted to analyzing the interaction of firm market power and exchange rate movements, it
largely ignores issues of transfer pricing.7 Here, we find that the price gap between firms’ arm’slength and related-party prices varies negatively with countries’ real exchange rates, suggesting
that multinationals adjust their arm’s-length and related-party prices asymmetrically in response
to exchange rate shocks.8 Coeﬃcient estimates imply that a ten percent appreciation of the
dollar against the destination currency reduces the price gap by approximately 2 percent.
The relatively large wedge we find between firms arm’s-length and related-party prices has
intriguing implications for how multinational performance should be evaluated. Existing comparison of multinationals with purely domestic firms generally find that they are larger, more
6

For exceptions, see the discussion of Lall (1973), Swenson (2001) and Clausing (2003) in the next section.
See, for example, the survey by Goldberg and Knetter (1997).
8
Rangan and Lawrence (1993) argue that the U.S. export price index deviates insuﬃciently from the U.S.
wholesale price index in the presence of exchange rate movements because it is biased towards sampling firms’
intrafirm prices. To the extent that exchange-rate driven changes in the arm’s length price wedge are due to
relatively large adjustments in firms’ arm’s length prices, our results provide support for this argument.
7

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

4

innovative, exhibit higher productivity, pay higher wages and employ greater numbers of skilled
or educated workers.9 Few, if any, of these studies, however, contemplate the influence of transfer
pricing, a potentially important omission given that aﬃliates’ ability to purchase lower-priced
intermediate inputs from overseas parents may influence all of these measures of performance.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. We start by briefly surveying the large
existing literature on transfer pricing. In Section 3, we develop a theoretical framework to
highlight the product, firm, and country attributes that potentially influence the gap between
firms’ arm’s-length and related-party prices. Section 4 describes the dataset and Section 5
outlines how we compare arm’s-length and related-party prices empirically. We present the
main empirical results in Sections 6, 7 and 8. Section 9 concludes.
2.

Existing Research on Transfer Pricing

There are large theoretical and empirical literatures on transfer pricing by multinational
firms.10 Theoretical research considers two major topics: managerial and economic incentives in
multidivisional firms and tax minimization and compliance in cross-border transactions. Eden
(1998) develops a series of models to describe managerial as well as tax and tariﬀ eﬀects on
intrafirm prices when the firm sets a single transfer price.11 Capithorne (1971), Horst (1971),
Samuelson (1982), Halperin and Srinidhi (1987), and Harris and Sansing (1998) examine the
eﬀect of tax-rate diﬀerences on production and pricing when a single agent is responsible for intracompany transactions. A set of more recent papers analyzes decentralization of the decisionmaking process within the multinational firm. Hyde and Choe (2005) examine the eﬀects of
transfer pricing on economic incentives and tax compliance in a model where the domestic
division sets two transfer prices: one for managerial decision-making and the other for tax
compliance. Similarly, Baldenius et al. (2004) develop a model with two types of transfer prices
and consider the eﬀects of cost-based and market-based transfer pricing.12 The model we develop
below is a generalization of this two-price approach.
The empirical literature on transfer pricing focuses almost exclusively on the relationship
between corporate tax and import tariﬀ rates and multinational firms’ over- or under-invoicing in
international trade. Most of these studies address this question indirectly by examining whether
firms in relatively low-tax jurisdictions are more profitable than firms in high-tax jurisdictions13
or whether economic activity varies across locations14 . Hines (1997) provides a survey of this
literature, which typically finds a negative correlation between tax rates and firm profitability.
To our knowledge none of the empirical papers consider the role of product characteristics or
firm market power in the transfer pricing decision.
9

Doms and Jensen (1998) report significantly higher productivity at plants owned by U.S. multinationals, a
fact used by Helpman et al. (2004) to motivate a model of exporting and multinationals. Aitken et al. (1996) and
many others report higher wages at foreign-owned plants. Lipsey and Sjöholm (2004) find higher wages, higher
levels of education and more inputs per worker in foreign-owned plants in Indonesia. Criscuolo et al. (2005)
report higher innovation activity at multinational firms in the United Kingdom.
10
A search on Econlit using the keywords “transfer pricing” and “multinational” yields 66 peer-reviewed journal
articles and 10 books.
11
Eden (1998) also provides substantial coverage of non-academic evidence on the extent of transfer pricing and
tax minimization by multinationals.
12
Halperin and Srinidhi (1991) and Narayanan and Smith (2000) also allow for decentralized decision-making
in models with a single transfer price.
13
See, for example, Jenkins and Wright (1975), Bernard and Weiner (1990), Harris et al. (1993), Klassen et al.
(1993) and Collins et al. (1996).
14
See, for example, Bartelsman and Beetsma (2003), who look at income shifting among OECD countries.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

2.1.

5

Price-based studies

Very few studies of transfer pricing use actual price data. Lall (1973) investigates overinvoicing by a small sample of Colombian pharmaceutical firms with foreign aﬃliates in response
to governmental restrictions on profit repatriation. Foreign exchange and capital controls in
Colombia during the 1960s gave multinational firms an incentive to raise their intrafirm prices
above the arm’s-length level as a means of transferring profits out of the country. Comparing
intrafirm import prices to arm’s-length prices for similar goods in local, regional and world
markets during 1968 to 1970, Lall finds that related-party prices ranged 33 to 300 percent
higher than arm’s-length prices.15
Two other studies, by Swenson (2001) and Clausing (2003), are more recent and cover a
wider range of industries. Both have as their focus the relationship between country corporate
tax (and tariﬀ) rates and transfer prices. Swenson (2001), using annual U.S. import data for five
countries during the 1980s, analyzes the response of average unit values across all (unobserved)
transactions within country-product pairs to variations in U.S. import tariﬀs and foreign tax
rates. She finds evidence that changes in prices are consistent with incentives based on taxes
and tariﬀs but that the economic magnitudes are small.16
Clausing (2003) uses data on import and export product prices collected by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) from 1997 to 1999 to investigate the eﬀect of country corporate tax rates
on related-party prices. The BLS data separately identify intrafirm and arm’s-length transactions. Clausing finds price responses in the expected directions, i.e., higher taxes abroad are
associated with higher export prices and lower import prices for related-party transactions. Her
point estimates suggest that a 1 percent drop in taxes abroad reduces U.S. export prices between
related parties by 0.9 to 1.8 percent.17
2.2.

Taxes

Before introducing our theoretical framework and empirical analysis we provide a brief discussion of the international tax environment facing U.S. firms. In the United States, firms are
taxed according to their worldwide income.18 As a result, U.S. firms must pay U.S. income tax
on both their domestic profits as well as any foreign profits that are repatriated to the United
States.19 The tax liability associated with foreign earnings, however, can be oﬀset by income
taxes the firm pays to other countries. If foreign profits are taxed more lightly (heavily) than
domestic profits, the firm is said to have ‘deficit’ (‘excess’) foreign tax credits. If a firm has
deficit foreign tax credits, its U.S. tax liability on foreign profits is the diﬀerence between what
would be owed under the U.S. tax rate and what the firm actually paid to foreign government.
Excess foreign tax credits cannot be used to oﬀset firm’s tax liabilities on domestic income in
15

A more extensive study by the Colombian government found prices to be an average of 155 percent higher.
Lall (1973) notes that similar studies subsequently undertaken by neighboring Latin American countries reached
similar conclusions.
16
These results may be influenced by the fact that Swenson’s (2001) data do not separately identify arm’s-length
and related-party import transactions, nor do they allow one to control for firm-level diﬀerences in prices.
17
Prices are imputed for 42 percent of Clausing’s (2003) transactions, and firm and product identifiers are
unavailable. As a result, firm- or product-specific variation in prices cannot be examined.
18
This section draws on the discussion in Hines (1997).
19
According to Subpart F rules of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, foreign profits of certain majority-owned
foreign aﬃlitates are considered repatriated (i.e., “deemed distributed”) whether or not they are actually transferred back to the parent. The aﬀected aﬃliates are generally characterized as “passive” operations in tax haven
countries.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

6

the year they are incurred, but they can be used to some extent to oﬀset tax liabilities on foreign
income in prior or subsequent years, subject to U.S. Internal Revenue Service guidelines.
During our sample period, U.S. firms had at least two alternatives for booking export profits.
First, they could be attributed to a Foreign Sales Corporation (FSC) and U.S. tax liability would
be imposed at a reduced rate and could be oﬀset by foreign tax credits generated by other foreign
income. Second, U.S. exporters could classify up to 50 percent of their export profits as foreign
source income and U.S. tax liability could be wholly or partly oﬀset by excess foreign tax credits
from other activities. Both of these policies create a motive for firms to over- or under-invoice
exports depending upon the tax rates of the destination countries. Firms booking profits to a
FSC, for example, may have expected tax laws to change in their favor in the future. Indeed,
the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004, a corporate tax bill enacted in 2004 largely in response
to a World Trade Organization ruling against FSCs, allowed firms to repatriate their foreign
profits at a highly advantageous tax rate.20 Allowing firms to book export profits as foreign
income, on the other hand, essentially allowed firms with excess foreign tax credits to escape
U.S. tax liability on those export profits.21
As a consequence of these components of the tax law, even though the United States relies
upon a system of worldwide taxation, U.S. firms continue to face incentives to minimize their
tax burden through transfer pricing. These incentives will exist whenever U.S. marginal tax
rates diﬀer from the combined burden of foreign marginal tax and tariﬀ rates. In the next
section we develop a framework that explicitly links foreign corporate taxes and transfer prices.
3.

Theoretical Framework

The goal of our analysis is to understand the forces that shape multinationals’ arm’s-length
versus related-party prices. It is likely that the same forces that play a role in pricing also
influence multinationals more generally in terms of what they produce and where they locate.22
Here, however, we develop an explicitly partial equilibrium approach to the problem of transfer
pricing in that we take the location of firm activity as given and examine the variation in the
resulting prices.
In this section we consider the particular case of a firm exporting the same good both to a
related party and to an arm’s-length customer in the same destination country. Examination
of this case is useful for several reasons. First, it closely corresponds to the concept of arm’slength pricing used by U.S. and OECD tax authorities when evaluating transfer pricing for tax
purposes. Second, limiting our analysis to the same good sent to the same country enables us
to implicitly control for variation in both the nature of the product and in the cost structure of
the exporting firm. Finally, this framework corresponds closely to the main strands of research
in the existing theoretical literature.
While limited in scope, our focus is broader than most of the existing empirical literature on
transfer pricing in that we consider the role of product attributes, firm characteristics, exchange
rates and market structure in addition to that of taxes and tariﬀs in shaping related-party prices.
Given the high degree of concentration in U.S. exports, even this special case encompasses a
large fraction of related-party trade.
20

Estimates of profits to be repatriated at these favorable corporate tax rates (5.25% instead of 35%) range
from $320 billion (Wall Street Journal 2005) to as high as $520 billion (Business Week 2005).
21
Kemsley (1995) shows that firms with excess foreign tax credits are more likely to export from the United
States than to produce in an establishment located abroad.
22
See Hines (1997) for a survey of the literature on the location of multinational activity.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

3.1.

7

A model of transfer pricing

Our basic setup is straightforward and extends the framework developed in Hyde and Choe
(2005). The extensions include the introduction of downstream firms, tariﬀs, and exchange rates,
as well as a penalty function for tax minimization that depends upon the diﬀerence between
firms’ arm’s-length and related-party prices.23
We consider a multinational with two divisions: a home (h) oﬃce and a foreign (f ) aﬃliate.
The home division produces an intermediate good which is sold at arm’s-length (quantity Qal )
to an unrelated foreign firm and to the foreign aﬃliate (quantity Qf ). The good sold to both
customers is identical, and we assume that both customers reside in the same destination country.24 For simplicity we also assume that there are no costs of transforming the intermediate
good in the foreign country. Both the foreign arm’s-length firm and the foreign aﬃliate costlessly
transform the product and sell it to consumers in the foreign country.
The purchase of quantity Qal for price Pal by the arm’s-length foreign firm is payable in
domestic currency units subject to an ad valorem tariﬀ, τ , and an exchange rate, e, measured in
units of foreign currency per unit of home currency. The arm’s-length foreign firm in turn sells
the goods for price Sal in the foreign market in foreign currency. After-tax profit of the foreign
arm’s-length firm is given by
π al = (1 − tf ) (Sal Qal − (1 + τ )ePal Qal )

where Sal = (1 + τ ) ePal .

(1)
(2)

The multinational firm (legally) keeps two sets of books, one used to set incentives within
the firm, i.e., used by foreign managers to make quantity and price decisions and also to reward
those same foreign managers, and the other reported to tax authorities in both countries and to
customs authorities as the goods cross the border.
Pre-tax profits for the two divisions of the multinational are given by
π̃ h = Pal Qal + Pin Qf − c (Qf + Qal )

(3)

π̃ f = Sf Qf − ePin Qf − τ ePtx Qf

(4)

where Pin is the internal incentive transfer price for the intermediate good paid by the foreign
division, Ptx is the transfer price of the intermediate good reported to the tax and customs
authorities, and Sf is the price faced by the final customer of the foreign aﬃliate. The constant
marginal cost of production is given by c.25
Taxable income for each division of the multinational is given by
Ih = Pal Qal + Ptx Qf − c (Qf + Qal )

If
23

= Sf Qf − (1 + τ ) ePtx Qf .

(5)
(6)

In Hyde and Choe (2005), the government compares firm’s arm’s-length prices to an exogenous benchmark.
By intermediate good we merely mean that the good is not directly consumed by the foreign importing firm,
i.e. it is subject to further processing or handling by wholesale and/or retail establishments. We assume that
there are no sales to the domestic market and we do not model any potential competition in the downstream
market.
25
The appropriate marginal cost for tax purposes would include non-production components such as interest
and depreciation changes. For sales to the arm’s-length customer we assume that the importing firm pays the
tariﬀ. Ernst and Young (2003) report that 75 percent of U.S. multinationals consider the customs and VAT
implications of their transfer pricing policies.
24

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

8

We assume the transfer price is bounded from below by the firm’s marginal cost and from
above by an amount, B , that prevents the taxable income of the foreign aﬃliate from becoming
negative, i.e., c ≤ Ptx ≤ B where If (B) = 0, reflecting the likely objections of the tax
authorities.
After-tax profit of the two divisions is given by
π h = π̃ h − th Ih = (1 − th ) [Pal Qal − c (Qf + Qal )] + (Pin − th Ptx ) Qf

(7)

π f = π̃ f − tf If = (1 − tf ) [Sf Qf ] − (ePin + (τ − tf (1 + τ )) ePtx ) Qf

(8)

where th and tf are home and foreign tax rates respectively.
The arm’s-length foreign firm chooses the quantity to sell, Qal , given the price it faces from
the home aﬃliate of the multinational, the foreign tax rate, tariﬀ, and exchange rate as as well as
the demand it faces in the foreign market, summarized by the elasticity, μal , yielding a standard
markup over cost,
μal
Sal =
e(1 + τ )Pal .
(9)
μal + 1
The foreign aﬃliate of the multinational solves a similar problem. The price, Sf , and thus the
quantity of intrafirm sales, depends on both transfer prices, Pin and Ptx , foreign taxes, tariﬀs,
and the exchange rate. The foreign aﬃliate chooses the quantity to sell given the foreign tax,
incentive transfer prices, tariﬀs and the elasticity of demand it faces in the foreign market, μf :
¶µ
µ
¶
μf
e
Sf =
(10)
(Pin + (τ − tf − τ tf ) Ptx ) .
μf + 1
1 − tf
After-tax profits for the parent firm are given by
π p = (1 − th ) [Pal Qal − c (Qf + Qal )] + (1 − tf )

1
[Sf Qf ]
e

(11)

+ (tf (1 + τ ) − (τ + th )) Ptx Qf .
The last term in equation 11 shows clearly that the profits of the parent are decreasing in
the reported transfer price when the home tax rate is above the foreign tax rate. Without
some restriction on behavior, the firm will choose the lowest possible transfer price. Similarly, a
positive tariﬀ rate will also induce the firm to minimize the reported transfer price.26
If the transfer price reported by the firm deviates too far from the tax authority’s expectation
the firm may face a penalty, or at a minimum, an expensive audit. We consider the case where
th > tf and augment the profit function with a penalty function,
1
θ (Pal Qf − Ptx Qf )2 ,
2
that is increasing in the price diﬀerence between arm’s-length and tax-transfer prices and the
quantity shipped intrafirm. The exogenous parameter, θ ∈ (0, 1), indicates that the firm does
26
If the foreign income tax rate is higher than domestic income tax rate, then the response of the after-tax
profits of the parent to a higher tax/border transfer price depends on the level of the tariﬀ, and the two income
∂π p
< 0. Normally high (relative) foreign income tax
tax rates. If tf > th and tf − th < (1 − tf ) τ then ∂Ptx
rates would induce the firm to raise the reported transfer price to shift profits into the low-tax home country.
However, with small diﬀerences in income tax rates, high tariﬀs can induce the firm to once again reduce the
reported transfer price to reduce tariﬀ payments. See Swenson (2001) for a discussion.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

9

not expect to repay the entire diﬀerence in the revenue streams. This penalty function captures
the idea that the domestic tax authority focuses on the foregone tax revenue from intrafirm
sales.27
After-tax profits for the parent firm are now given by
π p = (1 − th ) [Pal Qal − c (Qf + Qal )] + (1 − tf )

1
[Sf Qf ]
e

(12)

1
+ (tf (1 + τ ) − (τ + th )) Ptx Qf − θ (Pal Qf − Ptx Qf )2 .
2
The firm chooses (Pal , Pin , Ptx ) yielding first-order conditions:
Pal : Pal −

θ (Pal − Ptx ) Q2f Pal
μal
c−
=0
(μal + 1)
(1 − th ) (μal + 1)Qal

Pin : Pin − c (1 − th ) − th Ptx − θQf (Pal − Ptx )2 = 0
∂Qf
[Pin − (1 − th ) c − th Ptx − θQf (Pal − Ptx )2 ]
Ptx :
∂Ptx
+ [tf (1 + τ ) − τ − th ] Qf + θ (Pal − Ptx ) Q = 0

(13)
(14)
(15)

From the first-order conditions, we obtain three equilibrium relationships. First, from equation
13, we generate the standard markup price for arm’s-length sales augmented by the eﬀect of the
penalty function,
Pal =

θ (Pal − Ptx ) Q2f Pal
μal
c+
.
(μal + 1)
(1 − th ) (μal + 1)Qal

(16)

The simple set-up for the arm’s-length price is an important component of the framework as it
explicitly introduces the market power of the firm in the pricing decision. Greater market power
increases the price to the arm’s-length customer.
Second, from equation 14, we see that the incentive transfer price consists of a weighted
average of the marginal cost of production and the tax transfer price as well as a term from the
penalty function,
Pin = (1 − th ) c + th Ptx − θQf (Pal − Ptx )2 .

(17)

Finally, from equations 15 and 14, we obtain the following relationship between taxes, tariﬀs,
and the transfer price reported to the tax authorities:
(Pal − Ptx ) θQf = th − tf + τ (1 − tf ) .

(18)

The left hand side of equation 18 gives the marginal cost to the firm of deviating from the
arm’s-length price while the right hand side represents the marginal benefit of deviating. In
equilibrium, the firm sets the transfer price reported to the tax and customs authorities to
equalize the costs and benefits. The tax transfer price, Ptx , equals the arm’s-length price, Pal ,
only when the tariﬀ-adjusted diﬀerence in tax rates is zero. When th > tf + τ (1 − tf ), e.g.
whenever the home tax rate is above the foreign rate or whenever tariﬀs are suﬃciently large,
the firm will choose to report a transfer price below the arm’s-length price. Decreases in the
foreign tax rate increase the price diﬀerence as do increases in the tariﬀ. The larger the quantity
27

Alternatively, the penalty function could be modeled as the outcome of strategic choices by both the firm and
the tax authority. See Graetz et al. 1986 and De Waegenaere et al. 2005.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

10

shipped to the foreign aﬃliate the greater the cost to the firm resulting in a smaller equilibrium
price diﬀerence.
In spite of the relative simplicity of the framework it does not yield closed-form solutions
for either linear or constant-elasticity of substitution demand. As a result, we solve the model
numerically.28 Figure 3 displays the relationship between the price wedge and underlying parameters assuming linear demand. In the Figure, the price wedge is defined as the log diﬀerence
between the arm’s-length and related-party prices, e.g., ln(Pal ) − ln(Ptx ). Appendix A describes
the parameterization of the model.
As indicated in the first two panels, the price wedge is decreasing in the foreign tax rate
and increasing in the foreign tariﬀ. The final panel reveals a positive relationship between the
price wedge and movements in the foreign exchange rate. While the multinational reduces all
three of its prices as the exchange rate increases, the transfer price falls faster than the arm’slength price. The diﬀerence between the arm’s-length price and the incentive price narrows
dramatically as the exchange rate rises.
We use the framework developed in this section as a guide for empirical analysis. As in the
existing theoretical and empirical literature, tax and tariﬀ diﬀerences across countries provide
an incentive for firms to vary their transfer prices as well as their arm’s-length prices and induce
a wedge between arm’s-length and intrafirm prices even for the same product destined for the
same country.
We note that this model does not include other relevant aspects of the pricing decision.
For example any relationship-specific components of the arm’s-length transaction have been
assumed away. Firms that repeatedly deal with the same customers, for example, may oﬀer
price discounts. Also, firms may have to oﬀer explicit or implicit guarantees for products sold at
arm’s length which would tend raise the arm’s-length price above the intrafirm price. Similarly,
intrafirm sales may act like implicit long-term contracts and thus lower the price relative to
arm’s-length sales. More generally, unmeasured aspects of the transaction will tend to push the
arm’s-length price away from the related-party price.
4.

Data Description

At the heart of our empirical analysis is the Linked/Longitudinal Firm Trade Transaction
Database (LFTTD) which links individual trade transactions to firms in the United States.29
This dataset has two components. The first, foreign trade data assembled by the U.S. Census
Bureau and the U.S. Customs Bureau, captures all U.S. international trade transactions between
1993 and 2000 inclusive. For each flow of goods across a U.S. border, this dataset records the
product classification, the value and quantity shipped, the date of the shipment, the destination
(or source) country, the transport mode, and whether the transaction takes place at “arm’s
length” or between “related parties”.30 “Related-party”, or intrafirm, trade refers to shipments
between U.S. companies and their foreign subsidiaries as well as trade between U.S. subsidiaries
of foreign companies and their aﬃliates abroad. For export transactions, firms are “related”
if either party owns, directly or indirectly, 10 percent or more of the other party (see Section
30.7(v) of the Foreign Trade Statistics Regulations). This definition of related party corresponds
28

Numerical solutions are obtained via Mathematica. The code for obtaining solutions is available from the
authors upon request.
29
See Bernard et al. (2005) for a description of the LFTTD and its construction.
30
See Appendix A for a discussion and an example of the Shipper’s Export Declaration which form the basis
for the export data in the LFTTD.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

11

exactly to that used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in their annual surveys of multinational
activity.
The second component of the LFTTD is the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) of
the U.S. Census Bureau, which records annual employment and survival information for most
U.S. establishments.31 Employment information for each establishment is collected in March of
every year and we aggregate the establishment data up to the level of the firm. Matching the
annual information in the LBD to the transaction-level trade data yields the LFTTD. Products
in the LFTTD are tracked according to ten-digit Harmonized System (HS) categories, which
break exported goods into 8572 products. These products are distributed across two-digit HS
“industries” as noted in Table 1. Table 1 also records the share of exports in the industry that
are intrafirm and the share of total U.S. exports accounted by the sector.
4.1.

Exports Across Firms

The comprehensive nature of the trade transaction data allows us to develop an intimate
picture of the firms that export from the United States. Figure 1 shows the distribution of
total U.S. exports across exporting firms where the firms have been sorted by the value of their
exports. Exports come from a remarkably small number of firms. Fewer than 4 percent of all
U.S. firms export any amount at all. Among this select group of firms, the top one percent of
U.S. exporters (1673 firms in 2000) control over 80 percent of total exports. The top ten percent
of exporters are responsible for more than 95 percent of exports.
Our focus is on the behavior of multinational firms. Figure 2 shows that the concentration of
U.S. exports is heavily influenced by the presence of multinational firms. In 2000, multinational
firms account for more than 93 percent of all U.S. exports. The figure also allows us to see the
relative importance of intrafirm versus arm’s-length activity in multinational firms. Relatedparty exports make up slightly more than one third of all multinational export shipments.
These three facts, the concentration of U.S. exports among a small number of firms, the
dominant role of multinationals in that select group, and the large role of intrafirm trade in
multinational shipments, combine to emphasize the importance of understanding the crossborder pricing behavior of multinational firms.
4.2.

The Transfer Pricing Dataset

In this paper we use the LFTTD to focus on the export transactions of U.S.-based firms (as
distinct from firms with U.S. nationality).32 From the raw LFTTD we make two adjustments
to create our estimation sample. First we eliminate firms with fewer than 10 transactions
during 1993 to 2000 inclusive. Second we eliminate all transactions with missing, imputed or
“converted” quantities to ensure that all the observations for a particular product are measured
in comparable units and are actually recorded by the transacting firm. Depending on the year,
these screens reduce the number of transactions in our sample by 12 to 20 percent relative to
the raw data. For the remaining observations, we compute the export price as the unit value
of the transaction, i.e., total value per unit quantity.33
31
This dataset excludes the U.S. Postal Service and firms in agriculture, forestry and fishing, railroads, education, public administration and several smaller sectors. See Jarmin and Miranda (2002) for an extensive
discussion of the LBD and its construction.
32
As discussed further below, the export data allow us to control for the identity of the exporting firm.
33
Units vary by HS product, e.g. dozens of shirts or pairs of shoes.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

12

In order to understand the role of product and country characteristics in shaping relatedparty prices we link several additional datasets to the LFTTD. Two datasets record time-series
variation in international corporate tax rates. The first is the World Tax Database (WTD)
compiled by the Oﬃce of Tax Policy Research at the University of Michigan.34 From the
WTD, we use the maximum statutory corporate tax rate. Table 2 reports the maximum
corporate tax rate for countries in the database for 2000. Across the 140 countries, the mean
(median) tax rate is 30.8 (32) and the rates range from zero in the tax havens of Bermuda and
the Bahamas to 54 percent in Iran. One-hundred-twelve countries (80 percent) have tax rates
at or below that of the United States. Table 2 also reports estimates of countries eﬀective tax
rates estimated from Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) data, which record foreign revenues
as well as the foreign taxes paid by foreign aﬃliates of U.S. firms.35 Following the literature,
we estimate an eﬀective corporate tax rate for country c in year t by dividing the foreign income
taxes paid by total foreign revenue less cost of goods sold and selling and administrative costs.
The ideal rate as suggested by the model is a firm-specific marginal tax rate and, as such,
neither measure of country tax rates is entirely satisfactory. Firms, especially multinationals,
may receive a variety of tax holidays or exemptions that reduce their own marginal tax rate relative to the published statutory maximum. The calculated eﬀective rate represents an average,
rather than a marginal, rate across firms in a destination country.
Two datasets provide product information: the first is from Rauch (1999) and is used to group
products into diﬀerentiated and non-diﬀerentiated categories. The second is from the UNCTAD
TRAINS database and provides tariﬀ rates for six-digit HS (HS6) categories by country for 1993
to 1998.36 Table 1 reports the average diﬀerences in maximum and minimum tariﬀ rates across
products within two digit industries. The range of tariﬀs (highest minus lowest) across countries
for the typical product is 64 percent. For example, the tariﬀ rate on handheld computers (HS
847130) ranges from 0 (Canada and others) to 22 percent (Brazil), with a mean and median of
4 percent while the tariﬀ rate on men’s dress shirts (HS 480990) ranges from 0 (Norway) to 80
percent (Mauritius).
Real exchange rates are constructed using monthly data on the end of period (line ae) nominal
exchange rate and CPI (line 64) from the IMF International Financial Statistics. Exchange
rates are given in log units of foreign currency per U.S. dollar.
5.

The “Arm’s Length Standard” and “Comparable Uncontrolled Prices”

In order to examine the transfer pricing behavior of multinational firms, we want to compare
the price associated with each of a firm’s related-party (i.e., “controlled”) transactions to some
reference, or benchmark, price. As indicated in both the U.S. Treasury regulations and OECD
tax guidelines, the preferred benchmark for determining the appropriate transfer price is the
“arm’s-length standard”.37 The reported transfer price must be “consistent with the results
34

See http://www.bus.umich.edu/OTPR/otpr/introduction.htm to view the dataset or a more detailed description of it.
35
See http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/uguide.htm#_1_24 to view the dataset or a more detailed description of
it.
36
These data are available and described in greater detail on the web at http://r0.unctad.org/trains/
37
As stated in OECD (1995), “[When] conditions are made or imposed between ... two [associated] enterprises
in their commercial or financial relations which diﬀer from those which would be made between independent
enterprises, then any profits which would, but for those conditions, have accrued to one of the enterprises, but,
by reason of those conditions, have not so accrued, may be included in the profits of that enterprise and taxed
accordingly.”

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

13

that would have been realized if uncontrolled taxpayers had engaged in the same transaction
under the same circumstances” (Treasury Regulations §1.482-1(b)(1)).
While there are several approved methods for satisfying the arm’s-length standard, the most
commonly used is the price associated with corresponding arm’s-length (i.e., “uncontrolled”)
transactions, the so-called “comparable uncontrolled price” (CUP).38 The U.S. tax code and
OECD tax guidelines indicate the desirability of a tight match between the characteristics of
the related-party and CUP transactions. Here, we make full use of the unique level of detail
available in the LFTTD dataset to define the CUPs used in our analysis very narrowly, i.e., to
match the characteristics of the transactions as closely as possible.
Denote the related-party price of product i from firm f to country c in month t by transport
mode m as rpf icmt .39 We define the comparable uncontrolled price associated with this relatedparty price to be the average of the firm’s N comparable arm’s-length prices made in the same
month,
1 X n
al
,
(19)
cupf icmt =
N n f icmt
where alfnicmt is one of the firm’s N arm’s-length export prices of product i to country c in
month t by transport mode m. Note that if N = 0, i.e., if the firm does not export to an
arm’s-length party within the product-country-mode-month bin, the CUP for a related-party
transaction does not exist. Of the more than 15 million related-party export transactions in
the LFTTD, roughly 4 million can be associated with our definition of a CUP. These matched
transactions account for roughly one third of the total value of related-party exports in 2000.
For each related-party export transaction that can be matched to a comparable uncontrolled
price, we define the arm’s-length-related-party (ALRP) price wedge to be the diﬀerence between
the log CUP and the log related-party price,
wedgef icmt = ln cupf icmt − ln rpf icmt .

(20)

As noted in the theoretical discussion in Section 3, wedgef icmt is expected to be greater than
zero. The wedge will be positive when the arm’s-length price is marked up over marginal cost
and when the U.S. tax rate is greater than the tariﬀ-adjusted foreign tax rate.
In addition to adhering to U.S. and OECD guidelines, the narrowness of the CUPs we
define aﬀord several advantages vis-a-vis the data used in previous examinations of multinational
transfer pricing behavior. In particular, within-firm comparisons of export prices to both
arm’s-length and related parties allows us to control for time-varying firm-specific marginal
costs. Unlike previous empirical studies, we are able to both more closely match the theory and
the definitions of arm’s-length prices preferred by most national tax authorities. In addition,
our comparison of prices within firms, months, products, destination countries and modes of
transport minimizes the likelihood that the ALRP price wedge captures price variation due
to product heterogeneity or varying market conditions. Firms’ chosen mode of transport, for
example, has been associated with variation in product quality, time sensitivity and other factors
that might aﬀect price (Harrigan 2005; Hummels and Skiba 2004).40
38
Ernst and Young (2003) report that CUP was the most common method used to create transfer prices for
their tangible goods, used by 35 percent of surveyed multinationals.
39
Transport mode refers to whether the product is sent by air, ship or some other method.
40
We caution that even within a relatively narrow product category, it is possible that a firm may be shipping
products with very diﬀerent attributes.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

14

Even though we are able to diﬀerence out product, time, country, mode-of-transport and
firm eﬀects, there remain unobservable attributes of the transactions that may vary across arm’slength and related-party customers. While the HS classification is highly disaggregate, we do
not have information on very detailed product characteristics or ancillary services (packaging,
marketing, etc.) embedded in products or provided by exporters that might explain the price
diﬀerential between related-party and arm’s-length prices. In addition, transactions inside the
firm may act like implicit long-term contracts and as a result be priced below similar arm’slength trades. We caution that the levels of the price wedge must be interpreted in light of these
unobservables, i.e., the mere existence of a positive price wedge does not imply inappropriate
behavior by the firm.
5.1.

The ALRP Wedge

We report the price wedge for successively stringent dimensions of the data in Table 3. In
each case, we find that U.S.-based exporters charge arm’s-length customers higher prices for
their products than related-party customers.
As indicated in the final row of the table, the mean ALRP wedge for CUPs within products,
months, countries, modes of transport and firm as defined in equation 20, is 0.43 log points.
The mean wedge in the penultimate row of the table, which pools across firms within products,
months, countries and modes of transport to define the CUP, is nearly three times larger, at 1.13
log points. For CUPs defined “just” within products, months and countries, the mean wedge is
1.92 log points, or almost five times larger.
Our theoretical framework includes an important role for product characteristics in determining the wedge between arm’s-length and related-party prices. If the exporting firm has no
market power in the product then in the absence of tax or tariﬀ incentives the arm’s-length and
related-party prices should coincide. Even with diﬀerences in taxes and tariﬀs across countries,
if the product in question is an undiﬀerentiated commodity the exporting firm may have little
opportunity to shift profits between aﬃliates without risking oﬀending one of the relevant tax
authorities.41 As a result we expect that there will be substantial diﬀerences in the price wedge
for diﬀerentiated and commodity products.
Table 4 documents that the price wedge is substantially larger for diﬀerentiated products
than for commodities. We make this comparison using three diﬀerent classifications of product
diﬀerentiation. The first classification is based upon a “naive” inspection of the HS industry
identifiers reported in Table 4: products in two-digit HS industries 01 to 21 and 25 to 29 are
designated “commodities”, products in industries 84 to 97 are denominated “diﬀerentiated”.
The second and third classifications are due to Rauch (1999), who provides conservative and
liberal identifications of commodities according to whether goods are quoted on an organized
exchange.42 The Rauch classification separates products into three categories: “commodities”,
which are traded on an exchange, “reference-priced”, which are not traded on an exchange but
whose prices can be found in catalogs, and “diﬀerentiated”, whose prices cannot be looked up.
We combine the commodity and reference-priced categories into a single group.
All three classification schemes oﬀer similar results. Wedges are positive for both commodities
and diﬀerentiated goods, but they are substantially larger for diﬀerentiated goods. The average
41

Similarly, it is plausible that firms find it easier to justify diﬀerences between arm’s-length and related-party
prices for custom-tailored, i.e., diﬀerentiated, goods than commodities.
42
The Rauch (1999) classifications are for four-digit SITC industries. To make use of it here, we concord
ten-digit HS products to these industries using the concordances available in Feenstra et al. (2002).

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

15

price wedge for commodity products ranges from 8.8 log points using the HS-based classification
to 17.6 log points using the conservative Rauch system. The price wedge for diﬀerentiated
goods, by contrast, is 66.7 log points according to the HS-based system and 52.8 log points
according to the Rauch definition. In line with the model introduced above, the gap between
commodity and diﬀerentiated-good wedges indicates that commodity product markets are less
likely to show evidence of diﬀerential pricing behavior. For the remainder of the paper, we focus
on diﬀerentiated goods by dropping all transactions designated as ‘commodity’ in the HS-based
classification system.
Though the evidence presented in this section demonstrates that ALRP wedges are sizeable,
it does not pin down the source of the price diﬀerences. If we make the strong assumption
that firms’ related-party prices are an accurate estimate of their marginal costs, and ignore all
other potential sources of price variation, it implies an average markup in the sample of 43
percent. However, we suspect that omitted characteristics of the transaction are responsible for
a substantial amount of the ALRP price wedge. In the next section we examine the relationship
between the price wedge and product, firm and country attributes.
6.

Main Results

The theoretical model in the Section 3 shows that the diﬀerence between arm’s-length and
related-party prices depends on firm, product and country characteristics. In this section we
examine the variation in arm’s-length and related-party prices by U.S. exporters from 1993 to
2000. The basic empirical specification regresses firms’ ALRP price wedges on destinationcountry tax rates and destination-country product-level import tariﬀ rates as well as proxies of
product diﬀerentiation and firm market power.
6.1.

Taxes, Tariﬀs and the Price Wedge

The role of taxes on transfer pricing has dominated the existing theoretical and empirical
literature. In this section we investigate the relationship between countries’ corporate tax rates
and their product-level import tariﬀs on transfer pricing. As discussed in Sections 2 and 3,
the expected relationship between the foreign tax rate and the ALRP price wedge is negative.
Low (high) destination-country tax rates provide firms with an incentive to report relatively
low (high) related-party prices. Firms are also expected to change their related-party prices
in response to tariﬀs. As noted in the theoretical framework, firms have an incentive to lower
their related-party prices when exporting to countries with high import tariﬀs.
The ideal dataset for examining the influence of tax rates on multinational firms’ pricing
behavior would track the nationality of ownership of each firm, the relevant (preferably firmspecific) corporate tax rates in the countries to which they export, and, for U.S. firms, their
worldwide tax exposure. While we have substantial detail on individual transactions, we do
not have any detail on either firms’ corporate structure or their foreign earnings. As a result
we estimate a simple regression of the ALRP price wedge on the destination country tax rate.
The first and second columns of Table 5 report the results using statutory maximum tax
rates from the Michigan World Tax Database. Column one reports results with no fixed eﬀects
while column two includes products fixed eﬀects. In both cases, as predicted by the model,
we find large, statistically significant and negative coeﬃcients for both specifications. Across
the two specifications, a decrease of one percentage point in the tax rate is associated with an
increase of the price wedge of 1.6 to 4.2 percent.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

16

Using eﬀective tax rates calculated from BEA data in columns three and four, we again
find the expected negative relationship. The point estimates are smaller, 0.5 to 1.7, and are
significant at the 1 and 5 percent levels, respectively.
The final two columns of Table 5 examine the role of tariﬀs on price diﬀerentials. In the
model, high tariﬀs work like low corporate income taxes as they give firms the incentive to
lower related-party prices. The availability of the tariﬀ data is more limited, cutting the sample
size substantially. Pooling all products and countries in an OLS specification, we find a negative
relationship between tariﬀs and the ALRP price wedge. However, once we look within a product,
or within a firm-product pair, we find the expected positive relationship.43 A one percentage
point increase in the tariﬀ increases the price wedge by 0.60 to 0.63 percentage points.
The results presented in this section provide evidence that taxes and tariﬀs matter for transfer
pricing by multinationals. Even for products with transactions matched very narrowly to a
CUP, we find that lower taxes and higher tariﬀs increase the gap between arm’s-length and
related-party prices.
6.2.

Market Structure, Taxes and Tariﬀs

In this section we examine the association between the ALRP wedge and market structure
controlling for cross-country diﬀerences in corporate tax and tariﬀ rates.
Firms with greater market power and those selling to less competitive product markets are
expected to have larger price wedges. Lacking direct measures of market power or productmarket competitiveness, we use three proxies: firm size as measured by log total employment;
firm’s share of U.S. exports in the product across all countries; and the number of U.S.-based
firms exporting the product to a particular destination country during each calendar year. If the
price wedge is increasing in the market power of the firm, and if our measures capture aspects
of firm pricing power and market structure, then we would expect to see a positive correlation
between firm size and the wedge. Similarly, the wedge would be increasing in the export share
of the firm and decreasing in the number of exporters in the product-destination country.
Results are reported in Table 6. Columns one to three present OLS regressions including
our proxies for market structure along with Michigan WTD tax rates and product fixed effects.44 In each case the measure of market structure has the expected sign and is statistically
significant at the 1 percent level. Firm size and firm export share are positively correlated with
the price wedge while the count of firms per product-destination country is negative. In every
specification, destination-country tax rates are negatively associated with the arms’ length price
wedge; coeﬃcients are large in magnitude and are statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
Tariﬀs enter with the expected positive sign. The coeﬃcients on tax rates and tariﬀs are of
a comparable order of magnitude as predicted by the theoretical framework; a decrease in the
corporate tax rate or an increase in the tariﬀ rate of one percentage point increases the gap
between arm’s-length and related-party prices by 0.56 to 0.66 percent.
The coeﬃcients reported here correspond to substantial price diﬀerences across firms and
countries. Using the estimated coeﬃcients, we find that a one standard deviation increase
in log employment or firm export share corresponds to an increase of the price wedge by 2
percent, while increasing the number of firms exporting in a product to a country by a standard
deviation decreases the price wedge by 0.1 percent. The diﬀerence in maximum corporate
43

These results suggest that, within a country, high-tariﬀ products are those with low wedges — possibly because
of low market power.
44
Results using the BEA eﬀective tax rate are analogous and available from the authors upon request.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

17

tax rates between Mexico (35%) and Chile (15%) corresponds to a 11.2 percent increase in the
price wedge (column 1). For handheld computers (HS 847130), the diﬀerence in import tariﬀs
between Canada (no tariﬀ) and Brazil (22 percent) corresponds to a 12.2 percent increase in
the price wedge (column 1).
To our knowledge, the results in Table 6 provide the first evidence that firm characteristics
and market structure influence transfer pricing by multinationals. Greater market power is
associated with larger wedges between arm’s-length and intrafirm prices.
6.3.

Exchange Rates and the Price Wedge

This section examines how exchange rates aﬀect prices set by multinational firms to their
arm’s-length and related-party customers. There is a large body of research on pricing-tomarket by exporters, see Knetter (1989, 1993) and the survey in Goldberg and Knetter (1997).
This literature has focused on the interaction of firm pricing (market) power and changes in the
real exchange and generally concludes that firms “price-to-market”, i.e., their prices partially
oﬀset exchange rate movements.45 For the most part the pricing-to-market literature has been
silent on whether the international structure of the firm shapes price responses to exchange
rates. An exception is Rangan and Lawrence (1993) who argue that the presence of intrafirm
exports by U.S. multinationals and their low price responsiveness explains low U.S. aggregate
export price responsiveness during the dollar decline in the late 1980s.46 We use the matched
transactions and the ALRP price wedge to test whether U.S.-based multinationals change their
prices diﬀerently for arm’s-length and related-party customers.
The basic framework in the pricing-to-market literature can be directly applied to the eﬀect
of exchange rates on arm’s-length prices in our theoretical framework. In response to a dollar
(home currency) appreciation, the home aﬃliate lowers dollar-based prices to the arm’s-length
customer. The degree of the price reduction depends on the demand elasticity in the foreign
market. In contrast, the internal transfer price set by the firm is much less sensitive to the
appreciation, as is seen in Figure 3; the foreign aﬃliate sees an increase in its marginal cost (the
foreign currency price of the intermediate rises) and responds by raising its final good price thus
lowering quantity demanded. In the absence of tax diﬀerences or tariﬀs, the ALRP wedge falls
by the amount of the change in the arm’s-length price. If there are tax diﬀerences between
the countries or in the presence of a tariﬀ, the firm has an incentive to adjust its tax transfer
price. In the case of linear final good demand, the adjustment of the tax transfer price is greater
than the arm’s-length price leading to a positive expected sign of the relationship between the
exchange rate and the price wedge.
Table 7 adds the log of real exchange rate to the specification with tax, tariﬀ, and number
of exporters in column four of Table 6. The real exchange rate is defined in units of foreign
currency per US dollar and the value for month m, ln RERm , is the rate on the last day of
the month before the trade transaction. Column two uses the WTD marginal rate as the tax
variable while column three uses the BEA average tax rate.
45

Goldberg and Knetter (1997) find that the typical response is on the order of 50 percent, i.e. half of the
exchange rate change shows up in the destination market price.
46
Clausing (2003) reports the opposite result, i.e., that prices for intrafirm exports respond much more strongly
to an exchange rate change (no pass-through of the exchange rate change to the price in the foreign currency)
than do prices of arm’s-length transactions (65 percent pass-through). Adding controls for GDP and GDP per
capita, Clausing (2003) finds an unexpected significantly positive response of arm’s-length export prices to a dollar
appreciation.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

18

In both cases we see a significant response of the price wedge to the real exchange rate. A
one percent appreciation of the dollar results in a 0.19 percent reduction in the price wedge, in
contrast to the theoretical prediction of the model. The narrowing of the price wedge in response
to a home currency appreciation suggests that incentive prices may be playing a stronger role
than suggested in the theoretical framework.
These results provide the first evidence that multinationals diﬀerentially adjust their prices
inside and outside the firm in response to exchange rate movements. Changes in the exchange
rate result in relatively larger movements of arm’s-length prices than of intrafirm prices suggesting that intrafirm trade may provide multinationals with a means to insulate themselves from
exchange rate shocks.
6.4.

Robustness

In this section we analyze the robustness of our results by allowing for two alternative
formulations of the ALRP price wedge and including an additional country characteristic, per
capita GDP. Results are reported in Table 8.
The first four columns of Table 8 examine the robustness of our results to two alternate
definitions of comparable uncontrolled prices. As noted above, tax guidelines do not specify
exactly how an arm’s-length based CUP is to be computed. Here, we consider price wedges
relying upon a value weighted average of arm’s-length prices (columns one and two) and the
median arm’s-length price (columns three and four), in both cases computing these CUPs within
firms, products, countries, modes of transport and month. As noted in the table, the qualitative
implications of our baseline results are supported. Both the weighted average price wedge and
the median price wedge increase with our proxy for firms’ market power, and both are greater
for goods sent to countries with lower corporate tax rates and higher tariﬀs.
Both tax rates and tariﬀs may be correlated with other country characteristics, in particular
GDP per capita. The final two columns of Table 8 reveal that using our preferred measure of
the ALRP price wedge, controlling for per capita GDP does not alter coeﬃcient estimates on our
variables of interest in any substantial way. The coeﬃcient on per capita GDP itself varies from
positive and statistically insignificant in the first column to negative and statistically significant
in the second column.
7.

Implications

The previous section documents substantial pricing responses by U.S.-based multinationals
to both tax and tariﬀ diﬀerences across countries. Here we calculate “back-of-the-envelope”
estimates of the lost tax revenue for the U.S. Treasury and compute “transfer-price” adjustments
to the reported value of U.S. merchandise exports and imports.
To estimate the magnitudes of these aggregate eﬀects we ask how much larger U.S. exports
would be and how much smaller U.S. imports would be if every trading partner had the same
top marginal tax rate as the United States. We note that analysis requires a number of strong
assumptions, in particular that firms would not adjust either destinations or quantities if countries altered their tax rates, and that import and export prices would respond symmetrically
to these changes. We caution that our estimates are crude and should be taken as suggestive
rather than definitive.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

19

We estimate the magnitude of trade-flow adjustments to be
Underreported export valuec = RP EXc · β̂ (U Stax − taxc )
Overreported import valuec = RP IMc · β̂ (U Stax − taxc )

where RP EXc and RP IMc are total reported values of related-party exports to and imports
from country c, respectively, U Staxc and taxc are the top marginal tax rates for the United States
and country c, respectively, and β̂ is an estimated tax elasticity from the previous section. Our
preferred estimate comes from Table 7, column 1. We compute the foregone tax revenue to the
U.S. Treasury by assuming that all under- or over-reported trade would be subject to the top
marginal U.S. corporate tax rate.
Our 2004 estimates of under-reported exports and over-reported imports for sixteen trading
partners, accounting for three quarters of U.S. trade, are reported in the top and bottom panels
of Table 9, respectively. Somewhat surprisingly, the magnitude of adjustment to exports, and
the resulting tax loss, are relatively modest. Exports are estimated to be underreported by $1.9
billion in 2004 with a corresponding tax loss of $666 million. This small size of the tax loss is
driven by the fact that the U.S. exports primarily to developed economies that have similar, or
even higher corporate tax rates. Without the large value of related-party exports to Canada,
the lost tax revenue rises to $1.2 billion.47
The import numbers, shown in the bottom panel, are substantially larger. Related party
imports are estimated to be inflated by over $13 billion with a corresponding loss to the U.S.
Treasury of $4.8 billion. The disparity between the export numbers and the import numbers
is driven by the diﬀerences in sources and destinations. Imports are more likely to come from
countries with relatively low corporate tax rates.
8.

Conclusions

Multinational firms based in the U.S. report large diﬀerences in prices for arm’s-length and
related-party exports. These diﬀerences exist even for the same product produced by the same
firm shipped to the same country in the same month by the same mode of transport. Following
the development of a simple theoretical framework we find that the price wedge between arm’slength and intrafirm prices responds to diﬀerences in market structure, taxes, and tariﬀs.
Commodity products show much smaller price wedges while those for diﬀerentiated products
are large, averaging over 67 percent. Similarly, firms with characteristics indicating greater
market power, i.e., larger firms and firms with bigger export shares, have larger price diﬀerences.
Looking across countries, we find the price wedge is larger when the number of exporting firms
is smaller.
Much of the interest in transfer pricing centers on the behavior of firms in response to taxes
and tariﬀs. We find significant diﬀerences in price wedges for the same product in countries
with diﬀerent tax and tariﬀ rates. Lower corporate taxes and higher tariﬀs are associated with
larger gaps between the arm’s-length and related-party prices.
Our results suggest that transfer pricing may be playing an important role in aggregate national accounting, potentially reducing the reported value of exports and the current account
(and thus GDP). The response of the price wedge to tax rates indicates that tax minimiza47

The estimated tax losses are substantially larger if we use the point estimates from the median wedge regression
in Table 8, column 5; $4 billion for exports and $29 billion for imports.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

20

tion may be an important part of transfer pricing decisions with consequences for the level of
corporate tax revenue and strategic responses to changes in the tax code.
This paper also provides some of the first evidence on the eﬀect of exchange rates on pricing
decisions inside and outside the firm. The price wedge responds to movements in the real
exchange rate: an appreciation of the dollar is associated with a substantial narrowing of the
wedge. This result supports the hypothesis that intrafirm trade plays a role in the determination
of aggregate export price indices. More importantly, this suggests that intrafirm trade may play
a role in insulating multinationals from exchange rate movements.
Our findings also are important for future research on the role of the multinational corporation in both advanced and developing economies. The sizable gap in prices may be playing
an unobserved role in the perceived performance advantage of multinational firms both at home
and abroad.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

21

References
Aitken, Brian, Harrison, Ann, Lipsey, Robert E., 1996. Wages and foreign ownership: a comparative study of Mexico, Venezuela, and the United States. Journal of International Economics
40, 345— 371.
Baldenius, Tim, Nahum D. Melumad, and Stefan Reichelstein. 2004 Intergating Managerial and
Tax Objectives in Transfer Pricing. The Accounting Review Vol. 79, No. 3, 591-615.
Bartelsman, Eric, J, and Roel M.W.J. Beetsma. 2003. Why pay more? Corporate tax avoidance
through transfer pricing in OECD countries. Journal of Public Economics. 87, 2225-2252.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott. 2005. Importers, Exporters and
Multinationals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods. NBER Working Paper
11404.
Bernard, Jean-Thomas and Robert J. Weiner. 1990, Multinational corporations, transfer prices,
and taxes: Evidence from the U.S. petroleum industry. in Assaf Razin and Joel Slemrod eds.
Taxation in the global economy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Business Week. 2005. Profits Head Homeward, But where are the Jobs?. Michael Arndt, August
1, p.34.
Capithorne, L.W. 1971. International corporate transfer prices and government policy. Canadian
Journal of Economics. 4 (August): 324-341.
Clausing, Kimberly A. 2003. Tax-motivated Transfer Pricing and US Intrafirm Trade Prices.
Journal of Public Economics, 87, pp. 2207-2223
Collins, Julie H., Deen Kemsley, and Mark Lang. 1998. Cross-jurisdictional income shifting and
earnings valuation. Journal of Accounting Research.
Criscuolo, Chiara, Jonathan E. Haskel and Matthew J. Slaughter, 2005. Global Engagement and
the Innovation Activities of Firms. NBER Working Paper No. 11479 July.
De Waegenaere, A., J. Wielhouwer, and R. Sansing. 2005. Who benefits from ambiguous multinational tax transfer pricing rules?. Contemporary Accounting Research, forthcoming.
Diewert, W. Edwin, William F. Alterman, and Lorraine Eden. 2005. Transfer Prices and Import
and Export Price Indices: Theory and Practice. Forthcoming in Price and Productivity
Measurement, Volumes 1 and 2, ed.s W. Erwin Diewert, Bert M. Balk, Dennis Fixler, Kevin
J. Fox, and Alice O. Nakamura, Traﬀord Press.
Doms, Mark E. , and J. Bradford Jensen. 1998. Comparing wages, skills and productivity between domestically and foreign-owned manufacturing establishments in the United States.
in R.E. Lipsey R.E. Baldwin and J.D. Richardson, ed.s. Geography and Ownership as bases
for economic accounting. University of Chicago Press, 235-258.
Economist, 2005. Taxing Times. April 8, 2005, The Economist Global Agenda.
Eden, Lorraine. 1998. Taxing Multinationals: Transfer Pricing and Corporate Income Taxation
in North America. University of Toronto Press, Toronto.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

Ernst and Young. 2003. Transfer Pricing 2003 Global
http://www.ey.com/global/content.nsf/UK/IT_-_Library

22

Survey.

available

at

Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis and Peter K. Schott. 2002. U.S. Imports, Exports and Tariﬀ
Data, 1989 to 2001. NBER Working Paper 9387.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Michael M. Knetter. 1997. Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What
Have We Learned? Journal of Economic Literature. Vol. XXXV (September), 1243-1272.
Graetz, M., J. Reinganum, and L. Wilde. 1986. The tax compliance game: Toward an interactive
theory of law enforcement. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 2 (Spring): 1-32.
Halperin, Robert M., and Bin Srinidhi. 1987. The eﬀects of U.S. income tax regulations’ transfer
pricing rules on allocative eﬃciency. The Accounting Review. 62 (October): 686-706
Halperin, Robert M., and Bin Srinidhi. 1991. U.S. income tax transfer-pricing rules and resource allocation: The case of decentralized multinational firms. The Accounting Review. 66
(January):141-157.
Harrigan, James. 2005. Airplanes and Comparative Advantage. NBER Working Paper No.
11688.
Harris, David G., Randall Morck, Joel Slemrod, and Bernard Yeung. 1993. Income Shifting
in U.S. Multinational Corporations. in Giovannini, Alberto; Hubbard, R. Glenn; Slemrod,
Joel, eds, Studies in International Taxation. National Bureau of Economic Research Project
Report. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 277-302.
Harris, David G. and Richard C. Sansing. 1998. Distortions caused by the use of arm’s-length
transfer prices. The Journal of the American Taxation Association (Spring):40-50.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple. 2004. Export Versus FDI with
Heterogeneous Firms. American Economic Review. 94(1), 300-316.
Hines, James, R. 1997. Tax Policy and the Activities of Multinational Corporations. In Auerbach,
A.J. (Ed.), Fiscal Policy: Lessons from Economic Research. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp. 401445.
Horst Thomas. 1971. The theory of the multinational firm: Optimal behavior under diﬀerent
tariﬀ and tax rates. Journal of Political Economy. 79 (September/October): 1059-1072.
Hummels, David L. and Alexander Skiba. 2004. Shipping the Good Apples Out: An Empirical
Confirmation of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture. Journal of Political Economy. 112: 1384-1402.
Hyde, Charles E. and Chongwoo Choe. 2005. Keeping Two Sets of Books: The Relationship
Between Tax and Incentive Transfer Prices. Journal of Economics, Management and Strategy,
March Vol. 14(1), pp.
Jarmin, Ron S and Javier Miranda. 2002. The Longitudinal Business Database. Economic Studies 02-17, US Census.
Jenkins, Glenn P., Jr. and Brian D. Wright. 1975. Taxation of income of multinational corporations: The case of the United States petroleum industry. Review of Economics and Statistics.
57, 1-11.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

23

Kaufman, D., A Kraay, and P Zoido-Lobaton. 2004. Governance Matters. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Kemsley, Deen, 1995, The eﬀect of taxes on the choice between exports and foreign production.
Working Paper, Columbia University Business School.
Klassen, Kenneth, Mark Lang, and Mark Wolfson, 1993, Geographic incoming shifting by multinational corporations in response to tax rate changes. Journal of Accounting Research Supplement, 31, 141-173.
Knetter, Michael. 1989. Price Discrimination by U.S. and German Exporters. American Economic Review. March 79(1), 198-210.
Knetter, Michael. 1993. International Comparisons of Pricing-to-Market Behavior. American
Economic Review. June 83(3), 473—486.
Lall, Sanjaya, 1973. Transfer-pricing by multinational manufacturing firms. Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics, 35(3):173-195.
Lipsey, Robert E., and Fredrik Sjöholm, 2004. Foreign direct investment, education and wages
in Indonesian manufacturing. Journal of Development Economics 73 415— 422.
Narayanan, V.G. and Michael Smith. 2000. Impact of Competition and Taxes on Responsibility
Center Organization and Transfer Prices. Contemporary Accounting Research, Vol. 17(3),
Fall, 497 - 529.
OECD. 1995. Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administrations. OECD, Paris.
Rangan, Subramanian and Robert Z. Lawrence. 1993. The Responses of U.S. Firms to Exchange
Rate Fluctuations: Peircing the Corporate Veil. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2.
341-379.
Rauch, James E. 1999. Networks Versus Markets in International Trade. Journal of International
Economics 48:7-35.
Samuelson, Larry. 1982. The multinational firm with arm’s length transfer pricing limits. Journal
of International Economics. 13:365-374.
Swenson, Deborah L. 2001. Tax Reforms and Evidence of Transfer Pricing. National Tax Journal,
Vol. LIV, No. 1, 7-25.
Tirole, Jean. 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Wall Street Journal. 2005. Rising Stock Buybacks Align With Repatriated Profits. Timothy
Aeppel. October 24.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

A

24

Appendix - Parameters for the Numerical Model
Parameters for the baseline model are:
• Qal = 1000 − 5Sal
• Qf = 1000 − 5Sf
• τ = 0.05
• th = 0.35
• tf = 0.20
• c = 50
• e=1
• θ = 0.0005

B

Appendix - The Export Customs Form

Figure 4 displays the Shipper’s Export Declaration (SED) form that accompanies each export
transaction in the United States. As noted in the guidelines for filling out this form posted on
the web48 :
• A separate SED is required for each shipment per U.S. Principal Party of Interest (USPPI),
including each rail car, truck, ocean vessel, airplane, or other vehicle.
• A shipment is defined as all merchandise sent from one USPPI to one foreign consignee,
to a single foreign country of ultimate destination, on a single carrier, on the same day.
• Where two or more items are classified under the same Harmonized System product code,
the product code appears only once on the SED with a single quantity, shipping weight,
and value, unless a validated license requires otherwise or the shipment consists of a combination of foreign and domestic merchandise classified under the same product code.
• Shipments involving multiple invoices or packages must be reported on the same SED.
48

See http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/regulations/forms/correct-way-to-complete-the-sed.pdf.

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms
Mean HighNumber of Related-Party Share
Share of U.S. Exports Low Tariff
Products
Rate
Two-Digit HS Category
1993
2000
1993
2000
01-05
Animal & Animal Products
340
0.121
0.087
0.017
0.013
87
06-15
Vegetable Products
495
0.152
0.167
0.055
0.032
56
16-24
Foodstuffs
402
0.312
0.226
0.038
0.030
134
25-27
Mineral Products
211
0.140
0.157
0.028
0.016
51
28-38
Chemicals & Allied Industries
1,079
0.427
0.444
0.090
0.110
45
39-40
Plastics / Rubbers
281
0.461
0.385
0.038
0.044
61
41-43
Raw Hides, Skins, Leather, & Furs
107
0.106
0.152
0.005
0.040
53
44-49
Wood & Wood Products
447
0.228
0.200
0.042
0.030
58
50-63
Textiles
1,168
0.251
0.252
0.027
0.025
66
64-67
Footwear / Headgear
91
0.247
0.249
0.002
0.001
60
68-71
Stone / Glass
261
0.317
0.161
0.039
0.021
56
72-83
Metals
804
0.284
0.265
0.034
0.035
54
84-85
Machinery / Electrical
1,983
0.465
0.336
0.346
0.409
49
86-89
Transportation
283
0.271
0.391
0.156
0.140
64
90-97
Miscellaneous
607
0.386
0.297
0.074
0.081
59
98-99
Services
13
0.345
0.273
0.009
0.008
-Notes: First column reports the number of ten-digit Harmonized System (HS) exports products in 2000 by two-digit
prefixes; they total to 8,572. Second and third columns report the share of related-party activity by two-digit categories
and the the share of that product category in total U.S. exports.exports, by year. Fourth column reports the mean high
minus low tariff rate in percentage points across products in the noted two-digit HS categories.

Table 1: Exports and Related-Party Exports by Two-Digit HS Categoryr

25

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms
Country
WTD BEA Country
WTD BEA Country
WTD BEA
Albania
30
. Germany
45
16 Pakistan
45
.
Angola
40
. Ghana
35
. Panama
30
15
Antigua
40
. Greece
40
27 Papua New Guinea
25
.
Argentina
35
30 Guatemala
30
. Paraguay
30
.
Armenia
25
. Guinea
35
. Peru
30
21
Australia
34
17 Guyana
45
. Philippines
32
13
Austria
34
17 Haiti
35
. Poland
28
29
Azerbaijan
32
. Honduras
25
22 Portugal
32
19
Bahamas
0
. Hong Kong
16
8 Qatar
35
.
Bahrain
0
. Hungary
18
10 Romania
38
.
Bangladesh
40
. Iceland
30
. Russia
35
.
Barbados
40
10 India
35
24 Saudi Arabia
45
13
Belarus
30
. Indonesia
30
37 Senegal
35
.
Belgium
39
12 Iran
54
. Sierra Leone
45
.
Belize
35
. Ireland
24
7 Singapore
26
6
Bermuda
0
3 Israel
36
10 Slovakia
40
.
Bolivia
25
. Israel
36
10 Slovenia
25
.
Botswana
25
. Italy
37
24 South Africa
30
14
Brazil
15
9 Ivory Coast
35
. South Korea
28
18
British Virgin Islands
15
. Jamaica
33
. Spain
35
14
Bulgaria
30
. Japan
30
32 Sri Lanka
35
.
Burma
30
. Jordan
35
. Sudan
40
.
Cambodia
20
. Kazakhstan
30
. Suriname
38
.
Cameroon
39
. Kenya
30
. Swaziland
38
.
Canada
38
24 Kyrgyzstan
30
. Sweden
28
10
Cayman Islands
0
. Latvia
25
. Switzerland
32
5
Chile
15
10 Lebanon
10
. Tanzania
30
.
China (Mainland)
30
14 Lesotho
35
. Thailand
30
21
China (Taiwan)
25
19 Libya
35
. The Gambia
35
.
Colombia
35
25 Liechtenstein
15
. Trinidad And Tobago
35
.
Costa Rica
30
16 Lithuania
29
. Tunisia
35
.
Croatia
35
. Luxembourg
30
2 Turkey
30
24
Cyprus
25
. Macao
15
. Uganda
30
.
Czech Republic
35
19 Malawi
38
. Ukraine
30
.
Denmark
32
5 Malaysia
28
19 United Kingdom
30
17
Dominican Republic
25
7 Malta And Gozo
35
. Uruguay
30
.
Ecuador
25
31 Mauritius
35
. Uzbekistan
33
.
Egypt
40
14 Mexico
35
19 Vanuatu
0
.
El Salvador
25
. Monaco
33
. Venezuela
34
16
Estonia
26
. Morocco
35
. Vietnam
32
.
Ethiopia
40
. Mozambique
35
. Virgin Islands
39
.
Ethiopia
40
. Namibia
35
. Western Samoa
39
.
Fiji
35
. Netherlands
35
7 Yemen Arab Republic
35
.
Finland
29
19 New Zealand
33
13 Zambia
35
.
France
33
19 Nigeria
30
58 Zimbabwe
35
.
Gabon
35
. Norway
28
59
Georgia
20
. Oman
30
.
Table reports maximum statutory corporate tax rate (WTD) from the Michigan World Tax Database and
the effective tax rate (BEA) from the Bureau of Economic Analysis for each country in 2000.

Table 2: Country Tax Rates

26

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

27

Bins Within Which Arm's Length Prices Are Averaged
Mean
Std Dev
Within product, month
1.92
2.42
Within product, month, country
1.22
2.26
Within product, month, country, transport mode
1.13
2.20
Within product, month, country, transport mode, firm
0.43
1.77
Notes: Table displays mean and standard deviation of log difference of firms
arm's length and related party unit values. Each row reports statistics for
successively more refined bins for comparing arm's length and related party
prices. The set of observations related party observations used in each row
(3,980,529) is held constant.

Table 3: Mean Log Diﬀerence (i.e., Wedge) Between Arm’s Length and Related Party Prices

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

Method for Assessing Product Differentiation
HS

Rauch
Conservative

Rauch
Liberal

Commodity Goods

0.088
0.671

0.176
1.096

0.124
0.743

Differentiated Goods

0.667
2.229

0.528
1.953

0.530
1.977

Notes: Table reports mean and standard deviation of log difference in firms'
arm's length and related party prices by product type. Standard deviations
are reported below each mean. Three methods are used to distinguish
commodities from differentiated products. The first uses two-digit
Harmonized System categories: commodies are HS categories 1 to 21 and
25 to 29 while differentiated prodducts are HS categories 84-97. The
second and third methods use the conservative and liberal definitions of
differentiated goods from Rauch(1999). Reported statistics are based on
the full sample of 3,980,529 related party observations.

Table 4: Price Wedge by Product Type

28

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

Tax Rate (WTD)

Price
Wedge

Price
Wedge

-4.178 ***
0.665

-1.638 ***
0.447

Tax Rate (BEA)

Price
Wedge

Price
Wedge

-1.679 ***
0.580

-0.548 **
0.213

Tariff Rate

-0.597 ***
0.232

Fixed Effects
R-Squared

Price
Wedge

29

Price
Wedge

0.634 ***
0.187

No

Product

No

Product

No

Product

0.00

0.15

0.00

0.17

0.00

0.16

Observations
3,585,777
3,585,777
2,601,981
2,601,981
1,673,133
1,673,133
Note: Table reports OLS regression results of the log difference in firms' arm's length and related party
prices on noted covariates. Standard errors are robust to clustering (country-year for both types of tax
rates, product-country-year in for tariff rates). Constant is suppressed. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.

Table 5: Country Characteristics and the Price Wedge

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

Price
Wedge
Ln Employment

Price
Wedge

0.010 ***
0.001

Firm Export Share (%)

0.001 ***
0.000
a

Exporters per Product-Country
Tax Rate (WTD)

Price
Wedge

-0.399 ***
0.022
-0.664 ***
0.045

-0.664 ***
0.045

-0.559 ***
0.045

Tariff

0.575 ***
0.021

0.596 ***
0.021

0.563 ***
0.021

Fixed Effects

Product

Product

Product

0.16

0.16

0.16

R-Squared

1,669,341
Observations
1,669,341
1,669,341
Notes: Table reports OLS regression results of log difference in firms'
arm's length and related party prices on noted covariates. Tax rate is the
statutory maximum rate from the Michigan World Tax Database. Robust
standard errors noted below each coefficient. Coefficients for product
fixed effects are suppressed. ***, **, and * represent statistical
a
Coefficien
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
and standard errors for exporters per product-country have been
multiplied by 1000 to increase readability.

Table 6: Firms, Countries and the Price Wedge

30

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

Price Wedge Price Wedge
Exporters per Product-Country (000)

-0.346 ***
0.022

Tax Rate (WTD)

-0.646 ***
0.048

Tax Rate (BEA)
Tariff Rate

-0.369 ***
0.022

-0.391 ***
0.030
0.662 ***
0.023

0.645 ***
0.024

Ln RERm

-0.225 ***
0.021

-0.195 ***
0.021

Fixed Effects

Product

Product

0.16

0.16

R-Squared

1,573,343
1,573,343
Observations
Notes: Table reports OLS regression results of log difference in
firms' arm's length and related party prices on noted covariates.
First tax rate is the statutory maximum rate from the Michigan
World Tax Database. Second tax rates is the effective tax rate
according to BEA data. Robust standard errors noted below each
coefficient. Coefficients for product fixed effects as well as
regression constant are suppressed. ***, **, and * represent
statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels,
respectively. Long-run real exchange rate elasticity is the
percent change in the wedge induced by a permanent onepercent appreciation of the dollar.

Table 7: Exchange Rates and the Price Wedge

31

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

32

Weighted
Weighted Median Price Median Price
Price Wedge Price Wedge
Wedge
Wedge
Price Wedge Price Wedge
Exporters per Product-Country (000)

-0.495 ***
0.022

Tax Rate (WTD)

-0.768 ***
0.044

Tax Rate (BEA)
Tariff Rate
Ln RERm

-0.524 ***
0.022

-0.234 ***
0.022

-0.429 ***
0.021

-3.962 ***
0.049
-0.433 ***
0.027

R-Squared

-0.345 ***
0.022

-0.748 ***
0.060
-1.455 ***
0.030

-0.391 ***
0.030

0.753 ***
0.022

0.742 ***
0.023

0.129 ***
0.004

0.284 ***
0.024

0.673 ***
0.024

0.604 ***
0.025

-0.088 ***
0.019

-0.058 ***
0.004

0.106 ***
0.021

0.112 ***
0.021

-0.222 ***
0.021

-0.206 ***
0.021

ln(PCGDP)
Fixed Effects

-0.324 ***
0.022

0.009
0.007

-0.018 ***
0.006

Product

Product

Product

Product

Product

Product

0.45

0.45

0.45

0.45

0.17

0.17

1,567,401
1,567,401
1,567,401
1,567,401
1,567,401
1,567,401
Observations
Notes: Table reports OLS regression results of log difference in firms' arm's length and related party prices on noted
covariates. First tax rate is the statutory maximum rate from the Michigan World Tax Database. Second tax rates is the
effective tax rate according to BEA data. Columns one through four use alternate price wedges as defined in the text.
Robust standard errors noted below each coefficient. Coefficients for product fixed effects as well as regression constant
are suppressed. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Long-run real
exchange rate elasticity is the percent change in the wedge induced by a permanent one-percent appreciation of the
dollar.

Table 8: Robustness

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

33

Exports

Selected Countries
a
Total Exports
Argentina
Brazil
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
France
Germany
Hong Kong
Ireland
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Netherlands
Singapore
Taiwan
United Kingdom

Total Exports
Value
Percent
728,362
89
3,022
0.4
12,462
1.5
164,347
20.1
3,236
0.4
32,606
4
4,145
0.5
19,626
2.4
27,223
3.3
11,984
1.5
7,615
0.9
50,493
6.2
24,994
3.1
93,018
11.4
22,462
2.7
17,850
2.2
20,343
2.5
31,734
3.9

RP Imports
Value
Percent
218,688
30
621
20.5
2,483
19.9
69,029
42
365
11.3
4,616
14.2
528
12.7
6,246
31.8
8,778
32.2
1,692
14.1
2,361
31
16,200
32.1
3,538
14.2
38,602
41.5
8,064
35.9
5,332
29.9
3,333
16.4
8,803
27.7

AL Imports
Value
Percent
478,301
65.7
2,263
74.9
9,688
77.7
82,665
50.3
2,735
84.5
27,693
84.9
3,415
82.4
12,837
65.4
17,692
65
9,953
83.1
5,047
66.3
33,513
66.4
21,142
84.6
48,996
52.7
13,988
62.3
12,046
67.5
16,597
81.6
21,859
68.9

Total - Selected Countries

547,160

180,591

342,129

75

83

Estimate of
Estimate of
Under-reported Tax Receipt
WTD
Exports
Loss
Tax Rate (%)
35
15
38
16
30
35
33.3
25
16
16
30
27
35
34.5
24.5
25
30

72

0
321
(1,338)
45
149
0
69
567
208
290
523
183
0
26
362
215
284

0
112
(468)
16
52
0
24
198
73
101
183
64
0
9
127
75
100

1,904

666

Imports

Selected Countries
Total Imports
Argentina
Brazil
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
France
Germany
Hong Kong
Ireland
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Netherlands
Singapore
Taiwan
United Kingdom

Total Imports
Value
Percent
1,460,160
100
3,772
0.3
21,098
1.4
255,660
17.5
5,007
0.3
196,160
13.4
7,361
0.5
31,505
2.2
75,622
5.2
9,241
0.6
27,401
1.9
129,535
8.9
45,064
3.1
154,959
10.6
12,471
0.9
14,848
1
34,462
2.4
45,920
3.1

RP Imports
Value
Percent
697,561
47.8
1,103
29.2
7,026
33.3
116,261
45.5
982
19.6
53,172
27.1
997
13.5
15,394
48.9
46,959
62.1
1,244
13.5
24,480
89.3
102,207
78.9
28,091
62.3
94,716
61.1
6,652
53.3
11,082
74.6
8,254
24
26,863
58.5

AL Imports
Value
Percent
724,028
49.6
2,656
70.4
14,012
66.4
113,429
44.4
4,004
80
141,288
72
6,052
82.2
15,652
49.7
27,103
35.8
7,901
85.5
2,696
9.8
25,803
19.9
16,748
37.2
58,408
37.7
5,589
44.8
3,637
24.5
25,779
74.8
18,161
39.6

Estimate of
Estimate of
WTD
Over-reported Tax Receipt
Tax Rate (%)
Imports
Loss
35
15
38
16
30
35
33.3
25
16
16
30
27
35
34.5
24.5
25
30

0
908
(2,253)
121
1,717
0
169
3,034
153
3,005
3,301
1,452
0
21
752
533
868

0
318
(789)
42
601
0
59
1,062
53
1,052
1,155
508
0
8
263
187
304

Total - Selected Countries 1,070,086
73
545,483
78
488,918
68
13,780
4,823
Note: Values in millions of U.S. dollars. AL=arm's length and RP=related party. Trade Data Sources: http://www.census.gov/foreigntrade/Press-Release/2004pr/aip/rp04-exh-2.pdf (exports); http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/2004pr/aip/rp04-exh-1.pdf
(imports); http://www.bus.umich.edu/OTPR/otpr/introduction.htm (tax rates). Related-party and arms-length exports (imports) do not sum to
total exports (imports) as 4.3 percent of exports (2.3 percent of imports) do not have a record of the related-party status. Estimates of trade
a
changes and tax losses are calculated using the point estimate from Table 7, column1. Total exports excluding reexports.

Table 9: Estimated Aggregate Eﬀects on U.S. Trade and Tax Receipts

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

34

9 0 .0

8 0 .0

7 0 .0

6 0 .0

Percent of total U.S. exports

5 0 .0

4 0 .0

3 0 .0

2 0 .0

1 0 .0

0 .0
To p 1 %

N e x t 4 %
(9 5 - 9 9 )

N e x t 5 %
(9 0 - 9 5 )

N e x t 1 5 %
(7 5 - 9 0 )

T h ir d q u a r t il e
(5 0 - 7 5 )

B o tto m 5 0 %

Figure 1: Distribution of U.S. Exports Across Firms in 2000

100.0%
90.0%

Percent of U.S. exports

80.0%

Intrafirm

70.0%
60.0%
50.0%
40.0%

Arm's-Length

30.0%
20.0%
10.0%
0.0%

Arm's-Length
Arms-Length Exporters

Multinationals

Figure 2: U.S. Exports by Multinationals and Arms-Length Exporters in 2000

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
0.00

0.04

0.03

0.02

Wedge

Prices

Prices vs Foreign Tax Rate
(Prices on Left Axis, Wedge on Right Axis)

0.01

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.00
0.30

Foreign Tax Rate
Pin

Pal

Ptx

Wedge

Prices vs Import Tariff
(Prices on Left Axis, Wedge on Right Axis)
0.04

80
75

0.03

0.02

65

Wedge

Prices

70

60
0.01
55
50
0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.00
0.20

Foreign Import Tariff
Pin

Pal

Ptx

Wedge

Prices vs Exchange Rate
(Prices on Left Axis, Wedge on Right Axis)
75

0.08

70

0.07

Prices

0.05

60

0.04
55

0.03

50

Wedge

0.06

65

0.02

45

0.01

40
1.00

1.50

0.00
2.50

2.00

Foreign Exchange Rate (Foreign/Home)
Pin

Pal

Ptx

Wedge

Figure 3: Numerical Solution of the Price Wedge as a Function of Model Parameters

35

Transfer Pricing by Multinational Firms

Figure 4: Shipper’s Export Declaration Form

36

