                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                RETHINKING THE EFFECTS OF IMMIGRATION ON WAGES

                                       Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano
                                            Giovanni Peri

                                         Working Paper 12497
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12497


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2006




We thank John Kennan and one anonymous referee for their useful suggestions in revising the paper.
Joshua Aizenman, Christian Broda, David Card, Kenneth Chay, Robert Feenstra, Gordon Hanson,
Hilary Hoynes, Larry Katz, Robert A. Moffitt, Francesc Ortega, Michele Tertilt, Giorgio Topa, participants
to seminars at UC Berkeley, UC Davis, Stanford University, UC Santa Cruz, University of Munich,
the Philadelphia Fed, the New York Fed, University of Tuebingen, the Bank of England and the NBER-ITI
group provided very helpful comments and suggestions. Peri gratefully acknowledges funding from
the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. Errors are ours.

© 2006 by Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Rethinking the Effects of Immigration on Wages
Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 12497
August 2006, Revised May 2008
JEL No. F22,J31,J61

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper asks the following question: what was the effect of surging immigration on average and
individual wages of U.S.-born workers during the period 1990-2004? We emphasize the need for a
general equilibrium approach to analyze this problem. The impact of immigrants on wages of U.S.-born
workers can be evaluated only by accounting carefully for labor market and capital market interactions
in production. Using such a general equilibrium approach we estimate that immigrants are imperfect
substitutes for U.S.- born workers within the same education-experience-gender group (because they
choose different occupations and have different skills). Moreover, accounting for a reasonable speed
of adjustment of physical capital we show that most of the wage effects of immigration accrue to native
workers within a decade. These two facts imply a positive and significant effect of the 1990-2004
immigration on the average wage of U.S.-born workers overall, both in the short run and in the long
run. This positive effect results from averaging a positive effect on wages of U.S.-born workers with
at least a high school degree and a small negative effect on wages of U.S.-born workers with no high
school degree.


Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano
University of Bologna
Dip Scienze Economiche
Strada Maggiore 45, 40125 Bologna
ITALY
ottavian@economia.unibo.it

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1     Introduction

During the last three and a half decades the United States has experienced a remarkable surge in immigration.
The share of foreign-born workers in the labor force has steadily grown from 5.3% in 1970 to 14.7% in 20051 ,
progressively accelerating; in the period between 1990 and 2005, almost one million immigrants entered the
country each year. In parallel to this surge, the debate about the economic eﬀects of immigrants on U.S. natives,
and particularly on their wages, has gained momentum both inside academia and in the policy and media arenas.
Two facts have contributed to feeding the debate. On the one hand, the proportion of uneducated workers
(without a high school degree) has become increasingly large among recent immigrants and it is estimated that
an increasing share of these workers is comprised of undocumented immigrants, mainly from Mexico and Central
America2 . On the other hand, the real wage of uneducated U.S.-born workers has performed very poorly: it even
declined in real terms during recent decades (see, for example, Autor, Katz and Kearney, 2005). However, when
scrutinizing the poor wage performance of uneducated U.S. workers in the context of labor market competition
from immigrants the recent empirical literature has provided a mixed set of results.
    Ten years ago an influential survey by Friedberg and Hunt (1995) summarized the literature, concluding
that, “the eﬀect of immigration on the labor market outcomes of natives is small.” Since then, a number of
studies have re-examined the issue, refining the estimates by accounting for important problems related to the
endogeneity of immigrant inflow and the internal migration of U.S. workers. Even with more accurate and
sophisticated estimates at hand, a consensus has yet to be reached: some economists identified only small
eﬀects of immigration on wages (Card, 2001) while others found larger negative eﬀects (Borjas, Friedman and
Katz, 1997)3 . Recently, the latter view of a significant negative impact of immigration on wages, particularly of
uneducated workers, seems to have gained momentum. An influential article by George Borjas (2003), followed
by Borjas and Katz (2007) and Borjas (2006) who use a similar empirical method, argues using national data
from five decennial U.S. Censuses (1960-2000) that U.S. workers lost, on average, about 3% of the real value
of their wages due to immigration over the period 1980-2000 and that this loss reached almost 9% for native
workers without a high school degree (Borjas, 2003, Table IX, page 1369), at least in the short run.
    Our paper builds on the model presented in Borjas (2003), and takes a fresh look at some critical issues
which imply significant revisions of several results. The key idea is that the eﬀects of immigration on wages
can only be measured within a general equilibrium framework. More specifically, a study on the eﬀects of
immigration on wages of workers who diﬀer by education, experience, nativity and gender should build on
a production function that describes how these diﬀerent types of workers interact with each other and with
   1 Authors’ calculations using 1 percent Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) data for the year 1970 and Current

Population Survey March Supplement, Ruggles et al (2006), for the year 2005.
   2 See for instance Passel (2006).
   3 We are aware of only one previous paper, Friedberg (2001), that finds a positive partial eﬀect of immigration on native wages.

In most cases, however, that eﬀect is not significant.



                                                                2
physical capital to produce output. Then, one can derive the demand for each type of labor, which depends
on the productivity and employment of the other labor types as well as on physical capital. Finally, market
clearing conditions can be used to obtain wage equations from the labor demands and supplies, and these
can be used to estimate empirically the elasticities of substitution (relative wage elasticities) between workers.
Going back to the production function, these estimates can then be used to assess the eﬀect of immigration
(a change in the supply of diﬀerent types of workers) on wages (the marginal productivity of diﬀerent types
of workers). In contrast, several existing empirical studies directly estimate a reduced-form wage equation for
native workers with certain characteristics (such as educational or occupational groups) obtaining the elasticity
of wages with respect to new immigrants in the same group. Such an approach only provides the “partial” eﬀect
of immigration on wages (as it omits all cross-interactions with other types of workers and with capital) and as
such is uninformative on the overall eﬀect of immigrants on wages.
   The general equilibrium approach is accompanied by two novel features of our analysis. First, we remove
the usual assumption that foreign- and U.S.-born workers are perfect substitutes within the same education-
experience-gender group. Whether it is because immigrants tend to choose a diﬀerent set of occupations, because
they are a selected group, or because they have some culture-specific skills, it seems reasonable to allow them
to be imperfect substitutes for natives even within an education-experience-gender group and to let the data
estimate the corresponding elasticities of substitution. While acknowledging that in principle “[im]migrants may
complement some native factors in production... and overall welfare may rise” (Friedberg and Hunt, 1995, page
23), most studies thus far have focused on the partial eﬀects of immigrants on the wages of those native workers
who are their closest substitutes (i.e., within the same occupation, education-experience or skill groups). By
modeling labor as a diﬀerentiated input in general equilibrium, we enlarge the picture to better capture the
eﬀects of immigration within and between diﬀerent groups.
   The second novel feature of our analysis is a more careful consideration of the response of physical capital
to immigration. Since physical capital complements labor it is important to account for its adjustment in the
short and in the long run. In particular, when evaluating the “short run” response of wages to immigration
it seems rather artificial to maintain a fixed stock of capital, while accumulating immigration flows occurring
over ten or twenty years, as is currently done in the literature. Immigration happens gradually over time (not
at the beginning of the decade) and investors respond continuously, although with sluggishness, to increased
marginal productivity of capital caused by immigration. As for the long run response of capital, any model of
growth (Solow, 1956; Ramsey, 1928), and the empirical evidence as well, implies that capital adjusts in order to
maintain a constant real return (and capital output ratio). For the short run, we use estimates of the speed of
adjustment of capital taken from the growth and the real business cycle literature to evaluate the average wage
impact of immigration. We are also able to assess how long it takes for full adjustment to take place. Rather



                                                        3
than reporting the eﬀects of fourteen years of immigration for fixed capital and for fully adjusted capital, we
are able to estimate the eﬀect of immigration during the 1990-2004 period as of 2004, and then we show that
within the following 5 years the largest part of “the long run eﬀect” has set in.
   Once we account for the aforementioned eﬀects, we significantly revise several commonly estimated eﬀects
of immigrants on the wages of U.S. natives. First, in the long run the average wage of U.S.-born workers
experienced a significant increase (+1.8%) as a consequence of immigration during the 1990-2004 period. Even
in the short run (as of 2004) the average wage of U.S. native workers increased moderately (+0.7%) because
of immigration. This result stems from the imperfect substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born workers
so that immigration increases the wages of U.S.-born workers at the expense of a decrease in wages of foreign-
born workers (namely, previous immigrants). Second, the group of least educated U.S.-born workers suﬀers a
smaller wage loss than previously calculated. In the long run native workers only lost 1.1% of their real wage
due to the 1990-2004 immigration. Even in the short run (as of 2004) the negative impact was a moderate
2.2% real wage loss. The methodology used in the previous literature would estimate larger losses, around -8%
in the short run and -4.2% in the long run. The fact that uneducated foreign-born do not fully and directly
substitute for (i.e., compete with) uneducated natives is the reason for this attenuation. Third, all other groups
of U.S.-born workers (with at least a high school degree), accounting for 90% of the U.S.-born labor force in
2004, gained from immigration. Their real wage gains in the long run range between 0.7% and 3.4% while even
in the short run they either gain (high school graduates) or have essentially no wage change (college graduates).
Finally, considering only the relative eﬀect of immigration on real wages of natives, namely its contribution to
the widening of the college graduates-high school dropouts wage gap and of the college graduates-high school
graduates wage gap, we find only a small contribution of immigration to the first and a negative contribution
(i.e., reduction of the gap) to the second for the 1990-2004 period. The group whose wage was most negatively
aﬀected by immigration is, in our analysis, the group of previous immigrants; however, it is they who probably
receive the largest non-economic benefits from the immigration of spouses, relatives or friends, making them
more willing to sustain those losses.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the relevant literature. Section
3 introduces the aggregate production function, derives the demand for each type of labor and identifies the
key parameters for calculating the elasticity of wages to the inflow of immigrants. Section 5 presents the data,
illustrates some preliminary evidence of diﬀerences between native and foreign-born workers in the labor market
and produces the key estimates of the relevant elasticities. Using those estimates, Section 6.1 evaluates the
eﬀect of immigration on the wages of U.S. natives for the period 1990-2004. We revisit, in Section 6.2, the
distinction between short and long run analysis and consider the short run eﬀects (as of year 2004) and the
long run eﬀects (during the following five years and with full capital adjustment) and we compare our results to



                                                        4
previous findings on the eﬀects of immigration. Finally, in Section 6.4, we analyze by how much immigration
contributed to the increased wage dispersion during the period 1990-2004. Section 7 concludes the paper.



2     Review of the Literature

There is a long list of contributions in the literature dealing with the impact of immigrants on the wages of
natives4 . Some of these studies explicitly consider the contribution of immigration to increased wage dispersion
and to the poor performance of real wages of the least educated since 1980. Two questions are typically analyzed
by the existing literature. The first is imbued with a “macro” flavor: Does the inflow of foreign-born workers
have a positive or negative net eﬀect on the average productivity and wages of U.S.-born workers? This question
requires that we aggregate the wages of heterogeneous workers. The second question is more “micro” in focus:
How are the gains and losses from immigration distributed across U.S.-born workers with diﬀerent levels of
education? The consensus emerging from the literature is that the first (macro) eﬀect on average U.S. wages
is negligible in the long run, as capital accumulates to restore the pre-migration capital-labor ratio. However,
for fixed capital in the short run there can be a large depressing eﬀect of immigration on wages. Most of the
literature represents immigration as an increase in labor supply for a given capital stock (Borjas, 1995, 2003),
and consequently finds a negative impact of immigration on average wages (in the short run) and a positive
impact of immigration on the return to capital due to complementarities between the two factors. The recent
debate, however, has focused on the eﬀects of immigration on the relative wages of more and less educated
U.S.-born workers. Some economists argue for a large, adverse impact on less educated workers (Borjas, 1994,
1999, 2003, 2006; Borjas, Freeman and Katz, 1997), while others favor a smaller, possibly insignificant, eﬀect
(Butcher and Card, 1991; Card, 1990; Card, 2001; Friedberg 2001; Lewis, 2005; National Research Council,
1997). The size and significance of the estimated relative wage eﬀects from immigration remain controversial,
and possibly depend at least in part on the use of local versus national data.
    The present article uses a framework from which both the “macro” (average) and the distributional (relative)
eﬀects of immigration can be derived. We argue that only within such a framework, based on the aggregate
production function and general equilibrium outcomes, can one measure and discuss either of these eﬀects. Our
approach builds on the model employed in Section VII of Borjas (2003) and uses national data in performing
estimations. This approach avoids the problems arising from internal migration of natives and from endogenous
location choice and attenuation bias when using metropolitan or state data5 .
    The modern analysis of the eﬀects of immigrant inflows on the wages of natives began with studies that
treated foreign-born as a single homogeneous group of workers (Grossman, 1982; Altonji and Card, 1991),
   4 This review does not intend to be exhaustive. For a recent and articulate overview of the estimates of the eﬀect of immigration

on wages see Longhi, Nijkamp and Poot (2005).
   5 See Borjas (2006) and Borjas, Freeman and Katz (1997) for a discussion of these issues.




                                                                 5
imperfectly substitutable with U.S.-born workers. A number of studies on the relative supply of skills and
relative wages of U.S.-born workers made clear, however, that workers with diﬀerent levels of schooling and
experience are better considered as imperfectly substitutable factors (Katz and Murphy, 1992; Welch, 1979; Card
and Lemieux, 2001). As a consequence, more recent analysis has been carried out partitioning workers among
imperfectly substitutable groups (by education and experience) while assuming perfect substitution of native-
and foreign-born workers within each group (Borjas, 2003). The present article combines the two approaches in
the sense that both can be seen as special cases nested in our more general framework. Specifically, we assume the
existence of an aggregate production function that combines workers and physical capital, while using education,
experience, gender and place of origin (U.S. versus elsewhere) to categorize imperfectly substitutable groups.
Following Borjas (2003), we choose a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) technology but, diﬀerently from
that article, we treat the two groups of U.S.- and foreign-born workers as not perfectly substitutable and we
partition them across eight experience levels and four educational attainment classes. We also allow males and
females to be imperfectly substitutable in order to check whether within education-experience cells the gender
composition of immigrants aﬀected the gender-specific wage of natives. Within this framework we estimate three
sets of elasticities: (i) between U.S.- and foreign-born workers within education-experience groups, separately for
males and females as well as together; (ii) between experience levels within education groups; and (iii) between
education groups. There is scant literature estimating the first set of elasticity parameters. Often, however,
imperfect substitution between natives and immigrants has been cited as the reason for finding small wage eﬀects
of immigration on natives and larger negative eﬀects on wages of previous immigrants (see Longhi, Nijkamp and
Poot, 2005, page 468-469 for a discussion of this issue). We are only aware of two studies that explicitly estimate
the elasticity of substitution between natives and immigrants, namely Jaeger (1996) which only used 1980-1990
metropolitan data and whose estimates may be susceptible to attenuation bias and endogeneity problems related
to the use of local data6 , and Cortes (2006) who considers low-skilled workers and uses metropolitan area data
to find a rather low elasticity of substitution between U.S.- and foreign-born workers7 . The other two sets of
elasticities (between experience and between education groups) have been estimated in several studies (Card
and Lemieux, 2001; Katz and Murphy, 1992; Angrist, 1995; Ciccone and Peri, 2005) and are found to be around
2 (across education groups) and around 4 (across experience groups).
    As for physical capital, we explicitly consider its contribution to production and treat its accumulation
as driven by market forces that equalize its real returns in the long run. In particular, we revise the usual
approach that considers capital as fixed in short run simulations. The growth literature (Islam, 1995; Caselli,
et al. 1996) and real business cycle literature (e.g. Romer, 2006, Chapter 4) has estimated, using yearly data
  6 Jaeger   (1996) is also the only previous work we know of that considers male and female workers separately when analyzing the
substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born.
   7 A recent paper by Manacorda, et al. (2006) applies a similar framework as this paper to British data and finds values of the

elasticity of substitution between natives and immigrants similar to those found in the present paper.



                                                                6
on capital accumulation and diﬀerent types of shocks, the speed of adjustment of capital to deviations from its
long run growth path. Adopting 10% per year as a reasonable estimate of the speed of adjustment of physical
capital in the U.S. (confirmed by our own estimates for the 1960-2004 period) we analyze the impact of yearly
immigration on average wages as capital adjusts. We can evaluate the eﬀect of immigration that occurred in the
period 1990-2004 on average wages as of 2004, and we can evaluate its eﬀects after five or ten more years. This
is an important departure from the literature, which has not paid much attention to the response of physical
capital to immigration. When evaluating the wage eﬀects of immigration, the prevalent assumption has been
that of a fixed capital stock in the short run (Borjas, 1995; Borjas, 2003, Borjas, Freeman and Katz, 1997;
Borjas and Katz, 2007).
   Some studies on the eﬀects of immigration on wages have specifically focussed on immigration (along with
trade) as a proposed explanation for the worsening of income distribution in the U.S. during the years following
1980. In particular, Borjas, Friedman and Katz (1997) found that immigration contributed to the widening
of the wage gap between high school dropouts and high school graduates during the 1980-1995 period but did
not contribute to the widening of the college graduate-high school graduate wage gap. In light of new studies
(notably Autor, Katz and Kearney, 2005, 2006) that further document the evolution of college graduate-high
school graduate and high school graduate-high school dropout wage gaps during the 1990-2005 period, and in
light of our new results that reduce the adverse impact of immigration on wage distribution, we revisit this arm
of the literature by calculating the contribution of immigration to wage dispersion for the 1990-2004 period.
   Finally, as mentioned earlier, several studies on the relative wage eﬀects of immigrants have analyzed local
data (e.g., for metropolitan areas) accounting for the internal migration response of U.S. natives (Card, 2001;
Card and Di Nardo, 2000; Lewis, 2005) and correcting for the endogeneity of immigrant location choice (both
factors would cause an attenuation bias in the estimates). These studies find a small negative partial eﬀect of
immigrants on wages. On the other hand, our recent work (Ottaviano and Peri, 2005, 2006, 2007) and recent
work by David Card (Card 2007) points out a positive and significant eﬀect of immigration on the average
wage of U.S. natives across U.S. states and metropolitan areas. This positive and significant eﬀect survives
2SLS estimation, using instruments that should be exogenous to city-specific unobservable productivity shocks.
The complementarities in production illustrated in this paper are able to reconcile the negative partial eﬀects
of immigrants on wages estimated in previous studies (such as Borjas 2003) with the positive average eﬀect of
immigration on native wages at the local level8 .
  8 The   city model is developed in greater detail in Ottaviano and Peri (2007).




                                                                 7
3     Theoretical Framework

In order to evaluate the eﬀects of immigrants on the wages of natives and other foreign-born workers when each
group diﬀers by education, experience and gender we need a model of how the marginal productivity of a given
type of worker changes in response to changes in the supply of other types. At the same time, it is important to
account for the response of physical capital to immigration. A simple and popular way of doing this is to assume
an aggregate production function in which aggregate output (the final good) is produced using a combination
of physical capital and diﬀerent types of labor.


3.1    Production Function

Following Borjas (2003) who builds on Card and Lemieux (2001), we choose a nested CES production function, in
which physical capital and diﬀerent types of labor are combined to produce output. Labor types are first grouped
according to education and experience characteristics; experience groups are nested within educational groups,
that are in turn nested into a labor composite. U.S.-born and foreign-born workers and, within each of those
groups, men and women are allowed a further degree of imperfect substitutability within the same education and
experience cell. While the nested CES function imposes restrictions on the elasticities of substitution across skill
groups it has the advantage of being parsimonious in parameters and widely used. Moreover, it yields results
easily comparable with a large body of articles in the labor and macro literature. The aggregate production
function we use is given by the following expression:


                                                               1−α
                                                   Yt = At Lα
                                                            t Kt                                                (1)

where Yt is aggregate output , At is total factor productivity (TFP), Kt is physical capital, Lt is a CES
aggregate of diﬀerent types of labor (described below), and α ∈ (0, 1) is the income share of labor. All variables,
as indicated by the subscripts, are relative to year t. The production function is a constant returns to scale
(CRS) Cobb-Douglas combination of capital Kt and labor Lt . Such a functional form has been widely used
in the macro-growth literature (recently, for instance, by Jones, 2005 and Caselli and Coleman, 2006) and is
supported by the empirical observation that the share of income going to labor, α, is reasonably constant in the
long run and across countries (Kaldor, 1961; Gollin, 2002). The labor aggregate Lt is defined as:

                                                   " 4          # δ−1
                                                                   δ
                                                    X       δ−1
                                              Lt =     θkt Lkt
                                                             δ
                                                                                                                (2)
                                                      k=1

   where Lkt is an aggregate measure of workers with educational level k in year t; θkt are education-specific
                                         P
productivity levels (standardized so that k θkt = 1 and any common multiplying factor can be absorbed in the



                                                            8
TFP term At ). As is standard in the labor literature, we group educational achievements into four categories
so that k = 1 denotes high school dropouts (HSD) , k = 2 denotes high school graduates (HSG), k = 3
college dropouts (COD) and k = 4 college graduates (COG). The parameter δ > 0 measures the elasticity
of substitution between workers with diﬀerent educational achievements. Within each educational group we
assume that workers with diﬀerent experience levels are also imperfect substitutes. In particular, following the
specification used in Card and Lemieux (2001), we write:

                                                     ⎡          ⎤ η−1
                                                                   η

                                                      X8    η−1
                                             Lkt             η ⎦
                                                   = ⎣ θkj Lkjt                                                (3)
                                                      j=1



where j is an index spanning experience intervals of five years between 0 and 40, so that j = 1 captures workers
with 0 − 4 years of experience, j = 2 those with 5 − 9 years, and so on. The parameter η > 0 measures
the elasticity of substitution between workers in the same education group but with diﬀerent experience levels
                                                                                   P
and θkj are experience-education specific productivity levels (standardized so that j θkj = 1 for each k and
assumed invariant over time, as in Borjas, 2003). Since we expect workers within an education group to be
closer substitutes than workers across diﬀerent education groups, our prior (consistent with the findings of the
literature) is that η > δ. Distinct from most of the existing literature, we define Lkjt as a CES aggregate of
U.S.-born and foreign-born workers. Denoting the number of workers with education k and experience j who
are, respectively, U.S.-born and foreign-born, by Hkjt and Fkjt , and the elasticity of substitution between them
by σ > 0, our assumption is that:

                                             ∙       σ−1            σ−1
                                                                        ¸ σ−1
                                                                           σ
                                                       σ             σ
                                     Lkjt   = θHkjt Hkjt + θF kjt Fkjt                                         (4)

The terms θHkjt and θF kjt measure the specific productivity levels of foreign- and U.S.-born workers and they
may vary across groups and years (in the empirical identification we impose a systematic structure on their
time variations) . They are standardized so that (θHkjt + θF kjt ) = 1. Foreign-born workers are likely to have
diﬀerent abilities pertaining to language, quantitative skills, relational skills and so on. These characteristics,
in turn, are likely to aﬀect their choices of occupation and their abilities in the labor force, therefore foreign-
born workers are diﬀerentiated enough to be imperfect substitutes for U.S.-born workers, even within the same
education and experience group. Diﬀerent productive characteristics between men and women could also imply
imperfect substitutability between genders within the groups of native and foreign-born workers. While the
gender gap literature does not explicitly explore the possibility that men and women are imperfect substitutes
in production, recent studies emphasize the use of diﬀerent skills and diﬀerent task performances between men
and women (Bacolod and Blum, 2006; Black and Spitz-Oener, 2007). Hence in Section 5 below, we test the
degree of substitutability between U.S.-born men and women and foreign-born men and women allowing any


                                                            9
degree of substitutability between men and women within education-experience-nationality cells. In practice,
we allow each of the terms Hkjt and Fkjt to be CES aggregates of gender-specific labor units that can be
represented as:


                                   λ−1                 λ−1     λ                        λ−1                λ−1     λ
              Hkjt = (θHMkjt HMkjt
                               λ
                                   + θHW kjt HWλkjt ) λ−1 , Fkjt = (θF Mkjt FMkjt
                                                                              λ
                                                                                  + θF W kjt FWλkjt ) λ−1                       (5)

    where HMkjt and FMkjt measure male employment and HW kjt and FW kjt measure female employment
among natives and immigrants, respectively, and the terms θHMkjt , θHW kjt θF Mkjt θF W kjt capture their
respective productivity. In the empirical part we test whether the restriction 1/λ = 0, which would imply
perfect substitution between men and women, is rejected by the data or not. Ultimately, we allow the empirical
analysis to reveal whether U.S.-born workers and foreign-born workers within the same education and experience
group are perfect substitutes or not and whether their substitutability depends on their gender or only on their
foreign origin.9
    A simplification adopted here is that the elasticity of substitution between U.S.- and foreign-born, σ, is
taken to be equal across education and experience groups. Such a simplification seems empirically sound— in
fact in Ottaviano and Peri (2006) we allowed diﬀerent elasticities between diﬀerent education groups (namely
σ k , for k = HSD, HSG, COD, COG) and we could never reject the restriction of identical values across groups
(σk = σ). At the same time such a restriction allows us to estimate much more precisely the parameter σ since
we can pool observations from all education and experience groups.


3.2     Physical Capital Adjustment

Physical capital adjustment to immigration may not be immediate. However, investors respond continuously to
inflows of labor and to the consequent increase in the marginal productivity of capital; how fast they respond
is an empirical question. Further, immigration is not an unexpected and instantaneous shock. It seems odd,
therefore, to treat the short run eﬀect as the impact of immigration with a fixed capital stock, which prompts
the question: for how long is capital fixed and why? Immigration is an ongoing phenomenon, distributed
over years, predictable and rather slow. Despite the acceleration in legal and illegal immigration after 1990,
the inflow of immigrants measured less than 0.6% of the labor force each year between 1960 and 2004. It is
reasonable, therefore, to think of this issue more dynamically with investments continuously responding to the
flow of immigrant workers. In a dynamic context the relevant parameter in order to evaluate the impact of
immigration on average wages is the speed of adjustment of capital. In the long run, on the balanced growth
path, such as in the Ramsey (1928) or the Solow (1956) models, the variable ln(Kt /Lt ) follows a constant
   9 The standard assumption in the literature has been, so far, to impose that L
                                                                                  kjt = Hkjt + Fkjt , i.e., that once we control for
education and experience, foreign-born and natives of either gender are workers of identical type.




                                                                   10
positive trend growth determined only by total factor productivity (ln At ) and is not aﬀected by the size of Lt .
Therefore the average wage in the economy, which depends on Kt /Lt , does not depend on immigration in the
long run. Shocks to Lt , such as immigration, however, may temporarily aﬀect the value of Kt /Lt , causing it
to be below its long run trend. How much and for how long ln(Kt /Lt ) remains below trend as a consequence
of immigration depends on the yearly inflow of immigrants and on the yearly rate of adjustment of physical
capital. The theoretical and empirical literature on the speed of convergence of a country’s capital per worker
to its own balanced growth path (Islam, 1995; Caselli et al. 1996), as well as the business cycle literature on
capital adjustment (Romer, 2006), provide estimates for such speed of adjustment that we can use together
with data on total yearly immigration to obtain the eﬀect of immigration over 1990-2004 on average wages in
2004 and in the subsequent 5 to 10 years as capital continues to adjust. We devote the next section, 3.2.1, to
showing in detail the connection between average wages and the capital-labor ratio. In our empirical analysis
we first focus on the long run eﬀects of immigration (Section 6.1), allowing for full capital adjustment, as a
natural reference. Then in Section 6.2 we use the estimated speed of capital adjustment to show the eﬀect of
fourteen years of immigration (1990-2004) on wages as of the year 2004, and we compare those results with the
traditional way of computing “short run” eﬀects on wages.


3.2.1    Partial Adjustment, Total Adjustment and Wages

Given the production function in (1) the eﬀect of physical capital Kt on the wages of individual workers operates
through the eﬀect on the marginal productivity of the aggregate Lt . Let us call wtL the compensation to the
composite factor Lt , which is equal to the average wage in the economy10 . In a competitive market it equals
the marginal productivity of Lt , hence:

                                                                   µ        ¶1−α
                                                       ∂Yt             Kt
                                               wtL   =     = αAt                                                          (6)
                                                       ∂Lt             Lt

   Assuming either international capital mobility or capital accumulation along the balanced growth path of
the Ramsey (1928) or Solow (1956) models, the real interest rate r and the aggregate capital-output ratio Kt /Yt
                                                                                                                   1
are both constant in the long run and the capital-labor ratio Kt /Lt grows at a constant rate equal to            1−α   times
the growth rate of technology At . This assertion is also supported in the data, as the real return to capital
and the capital-output ratio in the U.S. did not exhibit any trend in the long run while the capital-labor ratio
grew at a constant rate (Kaldor, 1961). In particular, this is true for our period of consideration 1960-2004. As
depicted in Figure 1 the capital-output ratio (Kt /Yt ) shows small deviations around a constant mean over the
44 years considered. Moreover, the de-trended log capital-labor ratio, ln(Kt /Lt ), shown in Figure 2 exhibits
  10 The “average wage” wL is obtained by averaging the wages of each group (by education, skill and nativity), weighting them
                           t
by the share of the group in total employment.




                                                             11
remarkably fast mean reversion, as evidenced by the fact that the path of the variable crosses the mean (equal
to 0) eleven times in the sample. This suggests that deviations from the trend do not take more than 4 years,
on average, to be eliminated11 . In order to show the eﬀect of diﬀerent patterns of capital adjustment on the
average wage (wtL ) it is useful to write the capital stock as Kt =κt Lt , where κt is the capital-labor ratio. Hence
wtL (from equation 6) can be expressed in the following form:


                                                                          1−α
                                                       wtL = αAt (κt )                                           (7)

    Calculating the marginal productivity of capital and equating it to the interest rate, r augmented by capital
                                                                                                ³     ´ α1 1
depreciation δ, we obtain the expression for the balanced growth path capital-labor ratio, κ∗t = 1−α
                                                                                                  r+δ     Atα . Sub-
                                                                                        ¡ ¢∗        ³     ´ 1−α
                                                                                                             α     1
stituting it into equation (7) implies that the average wage in balanced growth path, wtL = α 1−α     r+δ        Atα
does not depend on the total supply of workers Lt . Hence, in the short run, the change in labor supply due to
immigration aﬀects average wages only if (and by the amount that) it aﬀects the capital-labor ratio. Assuming
that the technological progress (∆At /At ) is exogenous to the immigration process, the percentage change in av-
erage wages due to immigration can be expressed as a function of the percentage response of κt to immigration.
Taking partial log changes of (7) relative to immigration we have:

                                                                µ         ¶
                                             ∆wtL                   ∆κt
                                                  = (1 − α)                                                      (8)
                                              wtL                   κt     immigration

   where (∆κt /κt )immigration is the percentage deviation of the capital-labor ratio from kt∗ due to immigration.
With full capital adjustment and the economy in balanced growth path, (∆κt /κt )immigration equals 0. At the
same time, if one assumes fixed total capital, Kt = K, then (∆κt /κt )immigration equals the negative percentage
change of employment due to immigration: − ∆F
                                           Lt , where ∆Ft is the increase in foreign-born workers in the
                                              t



period considered and Lt is the labor aggregate at the beginning of the period. In the extreme case in which
we keep capital unchanged over fourteen years of immigration, 1990-2004, the inflow of immigrants, equal to
roughly 11% of the initial labor force, combined with a capital share (1 − α) equal to 0.34, implies a negative
eﬀect on average wages of 3.5 percentage points.
   Accounting for the sluggish yearly response of capital and for yearly immigration flows, however, we can
estimate the actual response of the capital-labor ratio to immigration flows in the 1990-2004 period without
the extreme assumption that capital be fixed for 14 years. We do this in Section 6.2 when we revisit the short
run/long run analysis.
 11 We   analyze the capital data and their dynamic behavior empirically in section 6.2.




                                                                12
3.3       Eﬀects of Immigration on Wages

We use the production function (1) to calculate the demand functions and wages for each type of labor at a given
point in time. Choosing output as the numeraire good, in a competitive equilibrium the (natural logarithm of)
the marginal productivity of U.S.-born workers (H) in group k, j, equals (the natural logarithm of) their wage:



                                                   µ     ¶                   µ       ¶
                 ¡              ¢ 1                  1 1                       1   1                       1
ln wHkjt = ln        αAt κ1−α
                          t      + ln(Lt )+ln θkt −   −    ln(Lkt )+ln θkjt −    −     ln(Lkjt )+ln θHkjt − ln(Hkjt )
                                  δ                  δ η                       η σk                        σk
                                                                                                                (9)
To keep notation less cumbersome and because men-women diﬀerences are not the focus of this paper, in the
current section we maintain the aggregate male-female notation within education-experience-nativity groups.
Hence Hkjt (Fkjt ) represents the total input of male and female U.S.-born (foreign-born) workers of education
k and experience j and wHkjt (wF kjt ) represents the average wage of the group. In general Hkjt and Fkjt are
the aggregates described by (5). However if men and women of the same education, experience and place of
birth are perfectly substitutable the aggregates Hkjt and Fkjt are simply the sum of male and female U.S.-born
(foreign-born) workers in the group12 . We assume that the relative eﬃciency parameters, as well as total factor
productivity At , depend on technological factors and are therefore independent from the supply of foreign-born.
   We denote the change in the supply of foreign-born due to immigration between two censuses in group k, j
as ∆Fkjt = Fkjt+10 − Fkjt . We can use the demand function (9) to derive the eﬀect of immigration on native
wages. The overall impact of immigration on natives with education k and experience j can be decomposed into
three eﬀects that operate through Lkjt , Lkt and Lt . First, a change in the supply of foreign-born workers with
education k and experience j aﬀects the wage of natives with identical education and experience by changing
each one of the terms Lkjt , Lkt and Lt in expression (9). Second, a change in the supply of foreign-born workers
with education k and experience i 6= j aﬀects the wage of natives with identical education k but diﬀerent
experience j by changing the terms Lkt and Lt . Third, a change in the supply of foreign-born workers with
education m 6= k aﬀects native workers with diﬀerent education k only through a change in Lt . Aggregating
the changes in wages resulting from immigration in each skill group, as well as the response of the capital-labor
ratio κt , yields the wage change due to immigration for each U.S.-born worker13 .
   Before expressing the formula for the total eﬀect of immigration on the wage of a U.S.-born worker of
education k and experience j, let us show the formula for a partial eﬀect of the type emphasized in the large
part of the previous literature. If we only consider the impact of immigrants with education k and experience j
on the wages of natives with identical education and experience, keeping the aggregates Lkt , Lt and κt constant,
we obtain what much of the previous literature calls the “eﬀect of immigrants on wages”. This, in fact, measures
 12 This,  in fact, seems to be the empirically relevant case as we show in section 5.1.
 13 The   exact expression for each of the eﬀects described above is provided in Appendix 1 of Ottaviano and Peri (2006).



                                                                13
a partial eﬀect, keeping supply in all other skill groups constant and keeping constant the aggregates Lkt and
Lt . Such eﬀects have been estimated in the existing literature by regressing the wage of natives ln(wHkjt ) on
the total number of immigrants in the same group k, j in a panel across groups over census years, controlling for
year-specific eﬀects (absorbing the variation of Lt ) and education-by-year specific eﬀects (absorbing the variation
of Lkt ) (e.g., Borjas 2003). The resulting partial elasticity, expressed as the percentage variation of native wages
(∆wHkjt /wHkjt ) in response to the percentage variation of foreign employment in the group (∆Fkjt /Fkjt ), is
given by the following expression:

                                                        ¯                        ∙µ           ¶µ            ¶¸
                                         ∆wHkjt /wHkjt ¯¯                             1   1        sF kjt
                           εpartial    =                                     =          −                                              (10)
                            kjt
                                          ∆Fkjt /Fkjt ¯Lkt ,Lt    constant            σ η           skjt

The variable sF kjt is the share of overall wages paid in year t to foreign workers in group k, j, namely sF kjt =
S     S    wF kjt Fkjt                                       S    wF kjt Fkjt +wHkjt Hkjt
                                                                  S
                                     . Analogously, skjt =                                           is the share of the total wage
  m   i (wF mit Fmit +wHmit Hmit )                           m     i (wF mit Fmit +wHmit Hmit )

bill in year t accounted for by all workers in group k, j.
   By construction, the elasticity εpartial
                                    kjt     captures only the eﬀect of immigration on native wages operating
                ³       ´
through the term η1 − σ1 ln(Lkjt ) in (9). According to the standard assumption in the existing literature, U.S.-
and foreign-born workers are perfect substitutes within group k, j (σ = ∞) and share the same eﬃciency (θkjHt =
θkjF t ) which implies sF kjt /skjt = κF kjt /κkjt , where κNkjt denotes the share of total employment represented by
workers of nativity N (= H, F ), education k, experience j in year t, namely κF kjt =                       S    S Fkjt           .   Given
                                                                                                             m    i (Fmit +Hmit )

these assumptions, expression (10) simplifies to εpartial
                                                  kjt     = − η1 : the harder it is to substitute between workers
with diﬀerent levels of experience (i.e., the lower η), the stronger is the negative impact that immigrants have on
the wages of natives with similar education and experience. In the general case that we consider (0 < σ < ∞),
εpartial
 kjt     is still negative but smaller in absolute value than         1
                                                                      η,   the reason being that the negative wage eﬀect of
immigrants on natives is partly attenuated by their imperfect substitutability.
    Using estimates of the parameters σ and η, as well as data on wages and employment, the partial elasticity
εpartial
 kjt     can be easily calculated (see Section 5.3 below). The problem is that this elasticity does not provide any
indication of the total eﬀect of immigration on the wages of natives in group k, j. The reason is that in order to
calculate the total eﬀect we also need to account for the changes in Lkt and Lt produced by immigration, as well
as for the fact that immigration alters the supply of foreign-born workers in all other education and experience
groups and, finally, for the response of κt to immigration. Once we do so, and aggregate all the eﬀects, the total
eﬀect of immigration on the wages of native workers in group k, j is given by the following expression:




                                                                 14
            µ              ¶T otal                 µ              ¶ µ           ¶µ ¶Xµ                      ¶
                ∆wHkjt                     1 XX             ∆Fmit         1 1        1                ∆Fkit
                                      =              sF mit          +      −                  sF kit         +       (11)
                 wHkjt                     δ m i             Fmit         η δ       skt   i
                                                                                                      Fkit
                                             µ       ¶µ      ¶µ               ¶           µ     ¶
                                               1   1      1             ∆Fkjt               ∆κt
                                           +     −               sF kjt         + (1 − α)
                                               σ η      skjt             Fkjt                κt immigration

    It is easy to provide intuition for each term in expression (11) by referring to the labor demand equation
                   XX³                    ´
(9). The term 1δ            sF mit ∆F mit
                                    Fmit    is the positive, total eﬀect on the productivity of workers in group
                       m      i
k, j due to the increase in supply of all types of labor; that is, home labor benefits from the increase in
aggregate labor caused by imperfectly substitutable workers. This eﬀect operates through 1δ ln(Lt ) in (9) which
                               ³        ´³ ´X³                 ´
                                                         ∆Fkit
is positive for δ > 0. The term η1 − 1δ    1
                                          skt      sF kit Fkit   is the additional negative eﬀect on productivity
                                                            i
generated by the supply of immigrants within the same education group. Since those immigrants are closer
substitutes for natives in group k, j than workers in other education groups, they have an additional depressing
                                                                 ³      ´
eﬀect on their wage. This eﬀect operates through the term 1δ − η1 ln(Lkt ) in (9) which is negative if η > δ.
          ³       ´³       ´³             ´
                                    ∆Fkjt
The term σ1 − η1       1
                      skjt   sF kjt Fkjt    is the additional negative eﬀect due to the supply of immigrants with
                                                                                                 ³      ´
the same education and experience as natives in group k, j. This eﬀect operates through η1 − σ1 ln(Lkjt )
                                                                                                      ∆Fkjt
in (9) and it is exactly the partial eﬀect εpartial
                                            kjt     multiplied by the percentage change               Fkjt .   Finally, the
term (1 − α) (∆κt /κt )immigration is the wage change due to imperfect capital adjustment and operates through
  ¡         ¢
ln αAt κ1−α
        t     in (9). Clearly, since the total eﬀect aggregates the partial eﬀect plus 40 other cross-eﬀects (32
in the double summation and 8 in the single summation) and a capital-adjustment term, it will typically be
                                      ∆Fkjt
very diﬀerent from εpartial
                    kjt     ∗          Fkjt .
                                 In fact, when immigration is large in groups with education and experience
                                ³        ´T otal
                                  ∆wHkjt
diﬀerent from k and j, the eﬀect wHkjt           tends to be positive, while when immigration is large in the
                                                                      ³        ´T otal
                                                                        ∆wHkjt
group with the same education and experience as k and j, the eﬀect wHkjt               tends to be negative. In
                                      ∆Fkjt
contrast, the eﬀect εpartial
                     kjt     ∗        Fkjt      would always be negative for reasonable parameters values.
   As they are not perfect substitutes for U.S.-born workers, the impact of immigrants on wages of foreign-
born workers would be somewhat diﬀerent. The percentage change in wages of foreign-born of education k and
experience j as a consequence of total immigration is:



      µ             ¶T otal                   µ              ¶ µ          ¶µ ¶Xµ                      ¶
          ∆wF kjt                     1 XX             ∆Fmit        1 1        1                ∆Fkit
                                  =             sF mit         +      −                  sF kit         +             (12)
          wF kjt                      δ m i            Fmit         η δ       skt   i
                                                                                                Fkit
                                        µ       ¶µ      ¶µ              ¶           µ     ¶
                                          1   1      1            ∆Fkjt               ∆κt                  1 ∆Fkjt
                                      +     −              sF kjt         + (1 − α)                      −
                                          σ η      skjt            Fkjt                κt immigration σ Fkjt

   The first four terms of expression (12) are identical to those in (11). Immigration in all other skill groups
(and capital adjustment) has the same eﬀect on the wages of U.S.- and foreign-born workers in group k, j.


                                                                  15
However, immigrants in the k, j group itself have an extra negative impact on the wages of foreign-born in the
                                                      ∆Fkjt
same group, represented by the final term − σ1        Fkjt .   This term is negative for σ > 0 . Immigrants compete in
occupations, sectors and jobs with previous immigrants more than natives and this causes an additional negative
eﬀect on the wage of foreign-born workers. For σ = ∞, the eﬀects of immigration on the wages of workers in
group k, j would be identical, independent of their nativity.
      Using the percentage change in wages for each skill group, we can then aggregate and find the eﬀect of immi-
gration on several representative wages. The average wage for the whole economy in year t, inclusive of U.S.- and
                                                                  P P
foreign-born workers, is given by the following expression: wt = k j (wF kjt κF kjt + wHkjt κHkjt ). Similarly,
the average wage of U.S.-born and foreign-born workers can only be expressed as weighted averages of individ-
                          P P                  P P                       P P                  P P
ual group wages: wHt = k j (wHkjt κHkjt )/ k j κHkjt and wF t = k j (wF kjt κF kjt )/ k j κF kjt ,
respectively (recall that the variables κN kjt represent shares in total employment). The percentage change in
the average wage of native workers as a consequence of changes in each group’s wage due to immigration is
given by the following expressions:

                                         P P      ∆wHkjt wHkjt                P P            ∆wHkjt
                               ∆wHt        k   j ( wHkjt wHt κHkjt )              k       j ( wHkjt )sHkjt
                                    =          P P                        =           P P                                                 (13)
                               wHt                k   j   κHkjt                           k       j   sHkjt

              ∆wHkjt
      where   wHkjt    represents the percentage change in the wage of U.S.-born in group k, j due to immigration,
and its expression is given in (11). Similarly, the percentage change in the average wage of foreign-born workers
is:

                                         P P      ∆wF kjt wF kjt              P P            ∆wF kjt
                               ∆wF t       k   j ( wF kjt wF t κF kjt )           k       j ( wF kjt )sF kjt
                                     =         P P                        =           P P                                                 (14)
                                wF t              k   j   κF kjt                          k       j   sF kjt

      Finally, by aggregating the total eﬀect of immigration on the wages of all groups, native and foreign, we can
obtain the eﬀect of immigration on average wages:



                       µ                                                  ¶       X X µ ∆wF kjt                                           ¶
      ∆wt X X              ∆wF kjt wF kjt          ∆wHkjt wHkjt                                                            ∆wHkjt
          =                               κF kjt +              κHkjt         =                                 sF kjt +          sHkjt
       wt   j
                            wF kjt wF t            wHkjt wHt                                  j
                                                                                                       wF kjt              wHkjt
               k                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                          (15)


      Recall that the variables sN kjt represent the share in total wages and notice that the correct weighting to
obtain the percentage change on average wages is the share in the wage bill and not the share in employment.
Due to constant returns to scale of the aggregate production function (1), while some of the wage changes are
positive and others negative, when weighted by their wage shares the summation of these changes equals 0
once capital has adjusted fully (i.e., in the long run); hence, the change in the overall average wage in (15) is
approximately 0 in the long run. However, if U.S.- and foreign-born workers are not perfectly substitutable,


                                                                   16
the overall eﬀect on the wage of U.S.-born workers (13) need not be 0 but will be positive instead and the
eﬀect on the average wage of foreign-born workers (14) will be negative. We also adopt the same averaging
procedure (weighting percentage changes by wage shares) in calculating the eﬀect of immigration on specific
groups of U.S.-born and foreign-born workers. For instance, the changes in average wages of college educated,
                                   P ³ ∆wHCOGjt           ´ P
U.S.-born workers is calculated as j wHCOGjt       sHCOGjt / j sHCOGjt and the change in average wages of
                                                    P ³ ∆w HSDjt         ´ P
foreign-born, high school dropouts is calculated as: j wFFHSDjt  sF HSDjt / j sF HSDjt , and so on.



4     Data Description and Preliminary Evidence

The data we use are from the integrated public use microdata samples (IPUMS) of the U.S. Decennial Census
and of the American Community Survey (Ruggles et al, 2005). In particular, we use the general (1%) sample
for Census 1960, the 1% State Sample, Form 1, for Census 1970, the 5% State sample for the Censuses 1980
and 1990, the 5% Census Sample for year 2000 and the 1/239 American Community Survey (ACS) Sample for
the year 2004. Since those are all weighted samples we use the variable “personal weight” to construct all the
average and aggregate statistics below. We consider people aged 17 to 65 not living in group quarters, who
worked at least one week in the previous year and earned a positive amount in salary income. We convert
the current wages to constant wages (in 2000 U.S. $) using the C.P.I.-based deflator across years. We define
the four schooling groups using the variable that identifies the highest grade attended (called “HIGRADEG”
in IPUMS) for Censuses 1960 to 1980, while we use the categorical variable (called “edu99” in IPUMS) for
Censuses 1990 and 2000 and ACS 2004. Years of experience are eﬀectively years of potential experience. They
are calculated using the variable “age” and assuming that people without a high school degree enter the labor
force at age 17, people with high school degree enter at 19, people with some college enter at 21 and people
with a college degree enter at 23. Finally, yearly wages are based on the variable salary and income wage (called
“INCWAGE” in IPUMS). Weekly wages are obtained by dividing that value by the number of weeks worked14 .
The status of “foreign-born” is given to those workers whose place of birth (variable “BPL”) is not within the
USA (or its territories overseas) and did not have U.S. citizenship at birth (variable “CITIZEN”)15 . Gender
is indicated as M (male) and W (female). The average wage for workers in a cell, (the variable wN Gkjt for
G = {M, W }, N = {H, F }, k = {HSD, HSG, COD, COG} and j = {1, 2..., 8}) is calculated as the weighted
average of individual wages in the cell using the personal weight (“PERWT”) assigned by the U.S. Census.
The total number of workers in each cell (HMkjt FMkjt , HW kjt and FW kjt ) is calculated as the weighted sum
of workers belonging to that cell. These data also allow us to construct the variables κN kjt and sNkjt , the
  14 For the Census 1960 and Census 1970 only a categorical variable that measures weeks worked exists and is called ”WKSWRK2”.

Individuals are assigned the middle value of the variable in the interval.
  15 The variable CITIZEN is not available in Census 1960. For that year we consider all people born outside the U.S. as foreign-

born.




                                                               17
share of each group in the total wage bill and in total employment for each represented year t. These data are
used to estimate the parameters δ, η, σ and λ needed to calculate the eﬀects of immigration on the wage of
each type of worker. When estimating the structural parameters δ, η, σ and λ we always use the whole panel
of data, 1960-2004. When we simulate the eﬀects of immigration on real wages we focus on the most recent
period, 1990-2004. Before proceeding with the econometric analysis, let us present some salient features of the
immigration and wage data as well as some simple statistics suggesting the plausibility of the hypothesis of
imperfect substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born workers with similar education and experience.
   Table A1 in the Appendix reports the share of foreign-born workers in each education-experience group for
each of the years considered, pooling men and women together. In the rows marked as “All Experience Levels”
we report the share of foreign-born for the whole educational group. One fact emerges even from a cursory
look at the table. The distribution of foreign-born across educational groups has been uneven (and increasingly
so) over the period considered. In 2004, almost 35% of the workers with no degree were foreign-born, with
some experience sub-groups counting more than 40% foreign-born. Following this group, college graduates
represent the second highest concentration of foreign-born: almost 15% in the overall group, reaching 18% in
some experience sub-groups. In contrast, the group of college dropouts contained only 9.5% of foreign-born
workers and, in some experience sub-groups, they were less than 8% of the total. Foreign-born were, and
increasingly are, over-represented among the groups of workers with the lowest and highest education levels and
are under-represented among the two intermediate groups.
   Table A2 in the Appendix reports the real weekly wages (in 2000 U.S. $) for U.S. native workers in each
education and experience group in each of the years considered. The wages for each group are calculated as
described above. The fact that emerges from Table 2 is the poor performance of real weekly wages of U.S.-
born workers without a high school degree, especially during the last two and a half decades. In contrast, the
performance of real wages of college educated workers has been very strong, particularly during the last two
and a half decades, with the two intermediate schooling groups performing in between.
   A synthetic and eﬀective representation of the two facts described above, focussing on the most recent 14
years, is presented in two figures. Figure 3 illustrates the percentage growth of immigrant employment for each
of the four educational groups. The lightly shaded columns represent immigrants for the 1990-2000 period as
a percentage of 1990 employment in each education group. The darkly shaded columns represent immigration
flows during the 1990-2004 period as a percentage of initial employment. The graph confirms the U-shaped
distribution of immigrants along the educational spectrum, with a more pronounced U-shape when we consider
the longer period 1990-2004. Figure 4, on the other hand, shows the growth rate of real wages of native workers
by education group. The lightly shaded columns represent the real percentage change of yearly wages in the
1990-2000 period and the darkly shaded columns represent the 1990-2004 change. One sees very clearly the



                                                      18
negative performance of real wages for the least educated (almost one percentage point loss in real wage each
year) and the exceptional performance of real wages of college graduates (more than one percentage point gain
each year). The natural questions stemming from these facts are: (i) How much of the negative performance in
the wage of native dropouts is due to the large immigration flow in that group? (ii) How much of the college-high
school dropout wage gap widening is due to immigration? (iii) Given that the average wages of U.S. natives
grew by around 12.5% in the 1990-2004 period, and overall immigration increased employment by almost 12%,
would overall wage growth have been larger without the increase in labor supply due to immigration? We will
address these questions in Section 6.
   Before presenting the estimates of the structural parameters of our model, let us put forward some obser-
vations and facts that seem to suggest imperfect substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born workers in
production. Even considering workers who have identical measurable human capital (education and experience)
and gender, foreign- and U.S.-born workers diﬀer in several respects that are relevant to the labor market. First,
immigrants are a selected group from their original populations and have skills, motivations and tastes that
may set them apart from natives. Second, in manual and intellectual work they have culture-specific skills (e.g.,
cooking, crafting, opera singing, soccer playing) as well as limits (knowledge of English language or American
culture), creating comparative advantages in some jobs and comparative disadvantages in other jobs16 . Third,
due to comparative advantages, migration networks or historical accidents, foreign-born tend to choose diﬀerent
occupations than natives, even for given education and experience levels. In particular, new immigrants tend
to work disproportionately in those occupations where foreign-born are already over-represented. This should
imply stronger wage competition (substitution) in those jobs compared to other jobs primarily held by natives.
Since services of diﬀerent occupations are imperfectly substitutable, this would imply imperfect substitutability
between natives and foreign-born even in the same education-experience group17 .
   Diﬀerences in the occupational choices of natives and foreign-born with the same education are illustrated
in Table 1. Following Welch (1990) and Borjas (2003) we calculate the “index of congruence” in the choice
of 180 occupations (from the variable “occupation 1950” homogenized across Census definitions), between the
group of native workers and the group of foreign-born workers that share the same education group. The index
of congruence is calculated by constructing a vector of shares in each occupation for each group and computing
the centered correlation coeﬃcient between these vectors for the two groups. A value of the index equal to 1
implies an identical distribution of workers among occupations for the two groups, a value equal to -1 implies an
exactly “complementary” distribution. The first column in the table reports the U.S.-foreign-born occupational
congruence within each education group. By way of comparison, the remaining columns report the indices of
  16 Peri and Sparber (2007) develops and tests this story of diﬀerent comparative advantages in production tasks between U.S.-

and foreign-born workers.
  17 Evidence in support of this fact is presented in Ottaviano and Peri (2006). There we find a positive and very significant

correlation between the initial share of immigrants in an occupation and the inflow of new immigrants in that occupation over the
subsequent decade.


                                                               19
congruence between natives in diﬀerent education groups. The index of congruence between U.S.- and foreign-
born with identical education is between 0.6 and 0.7, a value comparable to the congruence between native high
school dropouts and native high school graduates (a value of 0.68 reported in the second column of Table 3).
Also (see Welch, 1979), these index values are comparable to the congruence between U.S.-born workers with
diﬀerent experience levels. Hence, given that an extensive literature shows imperfect substitutability between
U.S. workers with diﬀerent education and experience (Welch, 1979; Card and Lemieux, 2001), if part of imperfect
substitutability is due to occupational choice we would also expect it to hold for natives and foreign-born with
similar education.



5     Parameter Estimates

5.1    Estimates of λ and σ

The model developed in Section (3.1) provides us with the framework to estimate the parameters λ and σ.
Calculating the natural logarithm of the ratio of the wages of male and female workers within the same nativity
(N = H, F ) and skill (k, j) group we obtain the following relation:



                                         1
              ln(wN M kjt /wN W kjt ) = − ln(NMkjt /NW kjt ) + ln(θN M kjt /θN W kjt ) for N = H, F                (16)
                                         λ

    Similarly, the natural logarithm of the ratio of wages of U.S. to foreign-born workers within the same skill
(k, j) group for men (M ) is:


                                            1                  1
               ln(wHMkjt /wF Mkjt ) = −       ln(Hkjt /Fkjt ) − ln(HMkjt /FMkjt ) + ln(θHkjt /θF kjt )             (17)
                                            σ                  λ

    while for women (W ) it is:


                                            1                  1
               ln(wHW kjt /wF W kjt ) = −     ln(Hkjt /Fkjt ) − ln(HW kjt /FW kjt ) + ln(θHkjt /θF kjt )           (18)
                                            σ                  λ

    Equation (16) defines the relative male-female labor demand within each N, k, j group, while equations (17)
and (18) define the relative labor demand for male and female (respectively) foreign- and U.S.-born workers
                                                                                 1
in group k, j. The first equation can be used to estimate the coeﬃcient          λ   which can then be substituted into
                                                                1
(17) and (18), and those can then be used to estimate           σ.   In each case the estimates are consistent as long
as we identify a source of variation in the relative supply of ln(NMkjt /NW kjt ) and of ln(Hkjt /Fkjt ) that is
independent of the variation of relative male-female productivity ln(θN M kjt /θN W kjt ) and of the U.S.-foreign-
born productivity levels ln(θHkjt /θF kjt ).


                                                           20
     Our estimation strategy proceeds as follows. Due to technological reasons such as skill-biased technical
change, sector-biased technical change, increased international competition, and other reasons over the period
1960-2004, the profiles of the returns to education and to experience have changed diﬀerently across occupations.
Accordingly, we allow the relative male-female and U.S.-foreign-born eﬃciencies to have a systematic component
that may vary by education and experience over time. We control for education-year fixed eﬀects (Dkt ),
and experience-year fixed eﬀects (Djt ). At the same time, diﬀerent education-experience groups may include
male-female and U.S.- and foreign-born workers of systematically heterogeneous quality; hence, we control for
experience-education fixed eﬀects (Dkj ). Conditional on these controls, we assume that the residual decennial
changes in relative male-female and U.S.-foreign-born employment within each education-experience cell over
time are due to random supply shocks such as demographic factors in the U.S. and in the immigrants’ home
countries. Using the IPUMS data from 1960 through 2004 we first estimate the following regression:


                                                                      1
                        ln(wN M kjt /wN W kjt ) = Dkj + Dkt + Djt −     ln(NM kjt /NW kjt ) + ukjt                      (19)
                                                                      λ

where ukjt is a residual, random, zero-mean disturbance. We estimate the regression separately for U.S.-born
(N = H) and foreign-born (N = F ) workers using 192 observations in each case (8 experience by 4 education
groups over 6 years: 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2004) and then pooling U.S.- and foreign-born for a total
of 384 observations. The variables wHMkjt , wF Mkjt , wHW kjt , wF W kjt , HMkjt , FMkjt , HW kjt and FW kjt are
                                                                                                           1
constructed as described in Section 4 above. Table 2 reports the estimates of the parameter                λ.   The first row
is estimated by pooling cells of U.S.- and foreign-born workers, the second is estimated on cells of U.S.-born
workers only and the third on cells of foreign-born workers only. All specifications use weighted least squares
as the estimation method (weighting each observation by the total employment in the cell). Specifications in
Column 2 omit year 2004 (not a census year) and specifications in Column 3 omit year 1960, since immigration
was extremely low before 1960. Robust standard errors are clustered by education-experience groups. Two
                                                                            1
results emerge clearly from all specifications. First, the estimates of     λ   are always negative and small in absolute
                                                                        1                     1
value. Second, they are never statistically significant. A test of      λ       = 0 against   λ   > 0 never rejects the null
at any confidence level. While the estimates using foreign-born only are quite imprecise, those on U.S. natives
and on all individuals are rather precise. Considering the pooled sample, not only are we unable to rule out
1                                                                                       1
λ    = 0, but we can reject at a standard confidence level the hypothesis that          λ   = 0.04 against the alternative
     1
of   λ   < 0.04. These results imply that even rather small degrees of imperfect substitutability between men and
women are ruled out by the data. Essentially, men and women in the same education-experience-nativity cell
                                                  1
are close-to-perfect substitutes. Hence, using    λ   = 0, equations (17) and (18) can be simplified into a single
estimating equation:




                                                          21
                                                                             1
                             ln(wHkjt /wF kjt ) = Dkj + Dkt + Djt −            ln(Hkjt /Fkjt ) + ukjt                             (20)
                                                                             σ

     where Hkjt = HMkjt +HW kjt and Fkjt = FMkjt +FW kjt and the fixed eﬀects and the error terms are defined
                                                                       1
as in (19). Table 3 reports the estimates of the parameter             σ   obtained using weighted least squares on (20). To
confirm the results of Table 2 and check that gender composition does not aﬀect the elasticity of substitution
between U.S.- and foreign-born workers, σ, we implement regression (20) alternatively on all workers (first row
of Table 3) or, separately, on men workers only (second row) and on women workers only (third row). We
also regress relative U.S.-foreign male wages on relative U.S.-foreign female employment (fourth row) or relative
U.S.-foreign female wages on relative U.S.-foreign male employment (fifth row).
     The basic specifications in Column 1 of Table 3 use yearly wages, are estimated using weighted least squares
(weighting each observation by the total employment in the cell) and include observations from years 1960,
1970, 1980, 2000 and 2004. Specifications in Column 2 use weekly wages. In Column 3 we do not weight the
observations and simply use OLS, in column 4 we omit the observations from 2004 (not a census year) and
in Column 5 we omit the observations from 1960, a year with very few foreign-born workers. The estimates
     1
of   σ   are significantly diﬀerent from zero in each estimate. They are quite stable across specifications and,
except for two cases, they are always between 0.09 and 0.21. The specifications using weekly wages tend to
produce somewhat smaller estimates (between 0.05 and 0.14), while those using yearly wages give estimates
between 0.13 and 0.21. Interestingly, this implies that a portion of U.S.-born workers’ adjustment in response
to the complementarities of foreign-born workers is reflected in an increase in their weeks worked, which is
consistent with higher relative productivity of natives in cells with higher relative supply of immigrants. The
standard errors are generally around 0.04.             There are no systematic diﬀerences in the estimates across rows
so that the gender dimension does not seem to play a relevant role in estimating the elasticity of substitution
between natives and foreign-born workers. This is consistent with the previous literature that did not, in
general, find diﬀerences in the impact of immigrants across genders, once skill level is controlled for (see the
discussion on page 468 of the meta-study by Longhi, Nijkamp and Poot, 2005). Let us also emphasize that
there is an extremely high correlation across education-experience groups between relative U.S.-foreign- born
employment calculated for both genders, Hkjt /Fkjt , and the relative U.S.-foreign-born employment for males
only (HMkjt /FM kjt ) or females only (HW kjt /FW kjt )18 . Hence the relative U.S.-foreign-born supply faced by
natives in each education-experience group is similar whether they are men or women.
     Table 4 is devoted to performing some further robustness checks in estimating σ1 . First, by grouping U.S.- and
foreign-born individuals according to their years of working experience, one could be classifying incorrectly the
  18 The partial R2 of the regression of ln(H
                                                 Mkjt /FMkjt ) on ln(Hkjt /Fkjt ) after controlling for all the dummies is 0.95 and for
ln(HW kjt /FW kjt ) on ln(Hkjt /Fkjt ) it is 0.93.




                                                                  22
eﬀective skills of foreign-born, assigning them to a group that is not their most natural category for comparison.
Employers may value diﬀerently work experience accrued in the U.S. market from that accrued abroad. Hence
we re-classify foreign-born workers by splitting the years of working experience between experience in the U.S.
and experience abroad and then we use the “conversion” factors between foreign and U.S. experience calculated
in Borjas (2003)19 . Once we have calculated the eﬀective experience we group foreign workers in the usual 8
                                                                                                  1
groups (0 to 40 years by 5-years cells) using this new variable. The estimates of                 σ   using foreign-born workers
grouped by eﬀective experience are reported in the first row of Table 4. Specification 1 through 5 mirror the
corresponding specifications in Table 3. The estimates range between 0.12 and 0.18 with standard errors around
0.05. Specifications in the second row of Table 4 consider total weeks worked in each cell (rather than total
employment) as the measure of labor supply. This measure accounts for possible changes in the individual labor
supply decisions. The estimates are still in the 0.14 − 0.20 range and very significant. Finally, in the last row
                              1
of Table 4 we estimate        σ,   restricting the data to only the groups of workers with no high school diploma or
with just a high school diploma. These are the groups with the least education and are certainly those with
the largest number of undocumented immigrants. One might be concerned that mismeasurement due to low
coverage of undocumented immigrants could bias our estimates. Alternatively, complementarities between U.S.
and foreign-born workers in these groups could be weaker than within other groups. These issues would result
                                            1
in significantly diﬀerent estimates of      σ   when we restrict our sample to these groups. The estimates in the third
row of Table 4 are never significantly diﬀerent from those obtained using all workers, and the point-estimates are
slightly above those. This seems to indicate that the Census data do not suﬀer from significant mismeasurement
of undocumented workers and that the degree of U.S.-foreign-born complementarity is not very diﬀerent within
diﬀerent education groups.
                          1
    The estimates of      σ   as a whole strongly support the idea of imperfect substitutability between U.S.- and
foreign-born workers. Moreover, in general, the estimates imply a value of σ between 5 and 10. Hence, we observe
imperfect substitutability but, reasonably, not to the extent observed between educational groups (usually
credited with a 1.5 − 2.5 elasticity of substitution) and only slightly above that observed between experience
groups for U.S. natives (estimated between 3 and 5)20 .


5.2     Estimates of η and δ

We can use equation (20) to infer the systematic component of the eﬃciency terms θHkjt and θF kjt . In particular,
                                                                    b kj , D
those terms can be obtained using the estimates of the fixed eﬀects D      b kt and D
                                                                                    b jt from equation (20) as
  19 Those factors are based on a wage regression that calculates (pooling 1980-1990 data) the wage growth associated with one

year of work experience abroad, relative to the growth of wages associated with one year of work experience in the U.S. Specifically,
for immigrants who worked abroad, the years of experience abroad are multiplied by a factor of 0.4 while the years of experience
in the U.S. are multiplied by a factor of 1.6 (Borjas, 2003, page 1356). This implies an “under-accumulation” of useful skills per
year when working abroad and an over-accumulation (catching up) during the years of U.S. work experience.
  20 See section 5.2 below for those estimates in our paper and in the literature.




                                                                 23
follows:
                            exp(Db kj ) exp(D b kt ) exp(D b jt )                               1
                b
                θHkjt =                                              ,b
                                                                      θF kjt =                                                 (21)
                          1 + exp(D b kj ) exp(D b kt ) exp(D b jt )                   b kj ) exp(D
                                                                               1 + exp(D          b kt ) exp(D
                                                                                                             b jt )

where we have imposed the standardization that the two eﬃciency terms add up to one. Using the values of
b
θHkjt and b
          θF kjt from above and the estimate σ    b we can construct the aggregate labor input, following (4), as
       ∙         e −1
                 σ              e
                                σ−1
                                     ¸ σ−1
                                       e
                                         e
                                         σ

b kjt = b
L       θHkjt Hkjtσe + b
                       θF kjt Fkjtσe       . Indeed, the production function (1) and marginal pricing imply the
following relationship between the compensation going to the composite labor input Lkjt and its supply:

                            ³                               µ     ¶
                                1  1−α ´ 1                    1 1                      1
             ln(W kjt ) = ln αAtα κt α + ln(Lt ) + ln θkt −    −    ln(Lkt ) + ln θkj − ln(Lkjt )                              (22)
                                         δ                    δ η                      η

where W kjt = wF kjt (Fkjt /Lkjt ) + wHkjt (Hkjt /Lkjt ) is the average wage paid to workers in the education-
experience group k, j and can be considered as the compensation to one unit of the composite input Lkjt 21 .
Equation (22) provides the basis for estimating the parameter η1 , which measures the elasticity of relative demand
for workers with identical education and diﬀerent experience levels. Empirical implementation is achieved by
rewriting it as:
                                                                1    b kjt ) + ekjt
                                    ln(W kjt ) = Dt + Dkt + Dkj − ln(L                                         (23)
                                                                η
                                                                    ³      1  1−α ´
where five-period fixed eﬀects Dt control for the variation of ln αAtα κt α         + 1δ ln(Lt ), time by education
                                                      ³       ´
fixed eﬀects Dkt control for the variation of ln θkt − 1δ − η1 ln(Lkt ) and education by experience fixed eﬀects
Dkj capture the terms ln θkj that we assume are constant over time. Once we control for these systematic
shifts in demand our identifying assumption, closely tracking Borjas (2003), is that the remaining variation in
employment of foreign-born workers is due to supply shifts. Under this assumption, we consistently estimate
the coeﬃcient − η1 in regression (23) by 2SLS, using ln(Fkjt ), the supply of foreign-born workers in each group,
                                     b kjt ). Table 5 reports the estimated values of
as an instrument for the variable ln(L                                                              1
                                                                                                    η.   The first row of Table 5
reports the estimates based on yearly wages, while the second row uses weekly wages. Specification 1 and 2 use
the value σ = 1/(0.16) = 6.25 and b
                                  θHkjt , b
                                          θF kjt estimated from the basic specification in the first row of column
                                    b kjt . To check whether the gender of workers interacts with the elasticity
1 of Table 3 to construct W kjt and L
of substitution across experience groups, specification 1 of Table 5 includes all workers in the calculation of
          b kjt while specification 2 uses male workers only. Finally, in specifications 3 and 4, in order to check
W kjt and L
how sensitive the estimate of η is to imperfect substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born workers, we also
                                                                  b kjt . All the estimated values of
re-estimate the parameter η assuming σ = ∞ in the construction of L                                                        1
                                                                                                                               are
                                                                                                                           η

significantly diﬀerent from zero and between 0.25 and 0.3, with standard errors below 0.10. This implies a point
estimate of η between 3.3 and 4. These values are very similar to those previously estimated in the literature;
  21 The wage W
                kjt is an average of the wages paid to U.S.- and foreign-born workers in group k, j. The averaging weights are
equal to the employment of each group relative to the composite Lkjt , which are very close to their share of the employment of
group k, j.


                                                               24
the parameter η was first estimated in Card and Lemieux (2001). Their preferred estimates of 1/η for the United
States over the period 1970-1995 (as reported in their Table III, columns 1 and 2) are between 0.2 and 0.26,
thus implying a value of η between 4 and 5. Borjas (2003) also produces an estimate of 1/η using immigration
as a supply shifter and assuming perfect substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born workers. His estimate
is equal to 0.288 (with standard error 0.11), implying a value of η equal to 3.5.
   Aggregating one level further, we can construct the CES composite L     b kt . We obtain the estimates b θkj from
                                                                                              X
the experience by education fixed eﬀects in regression (23), as follows: b
                                                                         θkj = exp(D  b kj )/       b kj ). Then we
                                                                                                exp(D
                                                                                                               j
                                                                                           ⎡             ⎤ ηe−1
                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                             η

                                                                                            X8      e −1
                                                                                                    η
                                                                      b kt
use the estimated values of η to construct, according to formula (3), L                   =⎣ b        e ⎦
                                                                                                      η
                                                                                               θkj Lkjt         . The production
                                                                                               j=1
function chosen, together with marginal cost pricing, implies that the compensation going to the labor input
Lkt and its supply satisfies the following expression:

                                               ³   1  1−α ´ 1                 1
                                 ln(W kt ) = ln αAtα κt α + ln(Lt ) + ln θkt − ln(Lkt )                                             (24)
                                                            δ                 δ
                 P ³ Lkjt ´
where W kt =        j   Lkt    W kjt is the average wage in education group k22 . Following the same strategy that we
                                                                                               1
used before, we use the above expression as the basis for the estimation of                    δ.   In so doing, we rewrite (24) as
follows:
                                                              1    b kt ) + ekt
                                      ln(W kt ) = Dt + (T ime T rend)k −
                                                                ln(L                                                                (25)
                                                              δ
                                                              ³    1  1−α ´
                                                                                                     1
where the time dummies Dt absorb the variation of the terms ln αAtα κt α +                           δ   ln(Lt ) and the terms (T ime
T rend)k are education-specific time trends. These trends control for the systematic component of the eﬃciency
terms ln θkt that are assumed to follow a time trend specific to each educational group. Conditional on these
controls, our identifying assumption is that any other change in employment of foreign-born within a group is
                                                                                             P
a supply shift. Hence, we can estimate equation (25) by 2SLS using ln(Fkt ) ( where Fkt = j Fkjt is used
                                                                                   1
as an instrument for ln(Lkt )). Table 6 reports the estimates of                   δ   . The first row uses yearly wages in the
calculations, while the second uses weekly wages. Specifications 1 and 2 of Table 6 use the estimated values
   η and of b
of b                                                                b kt and W kt . Specifications 3 and 4
            θkj from specifications 1 and 2 of Table 5 to construct L
                                                 b kt and W kt . Independently of specification and workers’
use η = ∞ and symmetric weights θkj to construct L
gender, the estimated values are between 0.4 and 0.52 (with standard errors generally below 0.15), consistent
with an elasticity of substitution across education groups around 2. The parameter δ is certainly the most
analyzed in the literature. Its key role in identifying the impact of increased educational attainment (as well
as of skill-biased technological change) on wages made it the object of analysis in Katz and Murphy (1992),
  22 The weight for the wage of each group equals the size of the composite input for that education-experience cell, L
                                                                                                                         kjt , relative to
the size of the composite input for the whole education group Lkt . This is very similar to the share of group k, j in the employment
of educational group k.




                                                                   25
through Angrist (1995), Murphy et al. (1998), Krusell et al. (2000) and Ciccone and Peri (2005). The estimates
for the parameter range between 1.4 and 2.5. Our estimates of 1/δ fall between 0.4 and 0.5 and imply a δ in
the vicinity of 2, which is consistent with previous estimates.


5.3        Partial Eﬀects of Immigration on Wages

Before using the estimated values of the parameters λ, δ, η and σ and the formulas derived in Section 3.3 to
calculate the eﬀects of immigration on wages, let us use those estimates to point out an important corollary to
our analysis. Most existing empirical studies on the eﬀect of immigration on wages, (including Borjas, Freeman
and Katz, 1997; Card, 2001; Friedberg, 2001; Section IV—but not Section VII—of Borjas, 2003; and Borjas, 2006)
carefully estimate the partial elasticity of native wages to immigration within the same skill group (expressed in
our equation (10)) and treat it as “the eﬀect of immigration on wages”23 . As we illustrated in Section 3.3, this is
simply a partial eﬀect uninformative of the actual overall eﬀect of immigration on wages unless we consider the
whole distribution of immigrant skills, the cross eﬀects among groups and the eﬀect of capital adjustment. More
importantly, the partial elasticity (10) is likely to be negative in any reasonable model as long as immigrants
are closer substitutes to natives in the same group (education-experience) than they are to natives in other
skill groups. Considering men and women within groups as perfectly substitutable and using estimates from
                          ³     ´
Tables 3 and 5, the term σ1 − η1 is calculated to be negative and between −0.05 and −0.20. This implies,
for instance, that the percentage change in the wage of native workers in group k, j, ∆wHkjt /wHkjt , would be
between -0.5% and -2.2% in response to an inflow of immigrants equal to 11% of the initial employment in
the group24 . We use 11% since this equals the inflow of immigrants over the 1990-2004 period as a percentage
of total initial employment. If one fails to notice the partial nature of the elasticity used in the calculations
above, one could be tempted to generalize these findings, interpreting them as saying that immigration caused a
negative 0.5 to 2.2 percent change (1990-2004) in average wages of natives and that groups such as high school
dropouts, for which the inflow of immigrants was as high as 20% of initial employment, lost as much as 4.4%
of their wage. No such generalization is possible, however, as expression (10) only accounts for the eﬀect on
wages of immigrants in the same skill group and omits all the cross-group eﬀects from immigrants in other skill
                                                                                                    ³       ´
groups. In fact (as we see in Section 6.1 below), while sharing the same negative partial elasticity σ1 − η1 , the
wages of natives across groups have very diﬀerent responses to immigration, some positive and others negative,
due to the relative sizes of skill groups and the relative strength of cross-group eﬀects. Limiting our attention
  23 Even the recent meta-study by Longhi, Nijcamp and Poot (2005) considers this partial eﬀect as the relevant estimate across

studies. They find a representative value of -0.11 that is in our range of -0.05 to -0.20.
  24
k This value
            is calculated
                   
               sF kjt
                           l using formula (10) and multiplying
                        ∆Fkjt
                                                                 the two sides by ∆Fkjt /Fkjt so that we obtain: ∆wHkjt /wHkjt =
                                                               sF kjt    ∆Fkjt                                 ∆Fkjt
   1       1
  σk
       −   η    skjt     Fkjt
                                . Then, notice that the term    skjt      Fkjt
                                                                                 is approximately equal to           if the share of wages of
                                                                                                             Hkjt +Fkjt
                                                                                             ∆Fkjt
                                                                                                                                  
foreign-born in group k, j is similar to its share of employment in that group. Using      Hkjt +Fkjt
                                                                                                        = 11% and −0.2 < σ1 − η1 < −0.1
                                                                                                                             k
we obtain a real wage change of −2.2% < ∆wHkjt /wHkjt < −1.1%.




                                                                        26
to the elasticity εpartial
                   kjt     , or emphasizing this eﬀect too much would be misleading in evaluating the eﬀect of
immigration on wages.



6     Immigration and Wages: 1990-2004

We are now ready for the third and final step in calculating the eﬀects of immigration on wages of U.S.- and
foreign-born workers. The first step of the procedure (Section 3) required specifying a production function and
deriving labor demand curves and the elasticity of wages to immigration of workers with diﬀerent skills. The
second step (Section 5) required estimation of the relevant structural parameters (elasticities of substitution).
The third step (this section) uses these estimates and the actual flow of immigrants by group during the 1990-
2004 period in the formulas previously derived to calculate the eﬀects of immigrants on wages of U.S.- and
foreign-born workers in individual groups as well as overall.


6.1    The Long Run Eﬀects of Immigration on Wages

Table 7 contains the relevant simulation results, relative to the impact of immigration for the 1990-2004 period
on wages of U.S.- and foreign-born workers in the long run. We focus on the 1990-2004 period as it is the most
recent covered by available Census and ACS data and it is the period of largest immigration in recent U.S. history.
To obtain the simulated eﬀects we proceed in five steps. First, in light of the result of perfect substitutability
between men and women within cells ( λ1 = 0), we aggregate across genders as follows: Hkjt = HM kjt + HW kjt
and Fkjt = FMkjt + FW kjt . Second, using formulas (11) and (12), the estimated parameters δ, η and σ as
well as the percentage change in foreign-born workers by skill group (∆Fkj,1990−2004 / Fkj,1990 ), we calculate the
percentage change in real wages for U.S.-born and foreign-born workers in each skill group (k, j). Third, we
obtain the average wage change in each education group for foreign- and U.S.-born by weighting the percentage
change of each experience sub-group by its wage share in the education group. This provides the entries in rows
1 to 4 and 6 to 9 in Table 7. Fourth, we average the changes across education groups for U.S.- and foreign-born
separately, again weighting them by their wage shares as described in formulas (13) and (14). Those values are
reported in rows 5 and 10 (those in bold fonts). Finally, we average the changes for the two groups ( U.S.-
and foreign-born workers), still using wage-share weights (as described in formula (15)), to obtain the overall
wage change reported in the last row, number 11, also in bold fonts. Rows 1 to 5 of Table 7 can be compared
to the results obtained in the previous literature that mostly focuses on the eﬀect of immigration on wages of
U.S.-born workers. The lower part of Table 7 reports the eﬀects of immigration on the wages of foreign-born,
rarely considered in the previous literature. The table reports the “long run” eﬀects, namely the wage eﬀects
once capital has fully adjusted, (∆κt /κt )immigration = 0. In Section 6.2 below we focus on the eﬀects as of



                                                        27
year 2004 and on how long it will take for full adjustment to set in. The four columns of Table 7 are reported
in order to better understand the diﬀerences with the traditional estimates implied by our new findings of
imperfect substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born workers. Specification 4 calculates the eﬀects under
the traditional assumptions of perfect substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born workers in each group k, j.
Proceeding leftward, Columns 3, 2 and 1 introduce imperfect substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born
workers, where column 3 uses the highest estimate of σ = 10, Column 2 uses the median estimate σ = 6.6, and
column 1 uses the lowest estimate σ = 5.
   Let us begin focussing on the eﬀect of immigration on the wages of natives (upper part of Table 7). The
introduction of our novel feature (imperfect substitutability) has two important eﬀects: first, it modifies the
eﬀect of immigration on average wages of natives from null (0.1%) to positive (between 1.2% and 2.3%), and
second, it reduces the adverse distributional eﬀect of immigrants on wages of U.S.-born workers. Both eﬀects
are stronger the lower the substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born workers. Considering the median
estimate of σ = 6.6, our estimates imply a positive long run eﬀect of immigration on wages of workers with at
least a high school degree. In particular, college graduates benefit from immigration (+0.7% in wages), while
under perfect substitutability they were hurt by it (as shown by the -1.5% in Column 4 ) and high school
graduates benefit up to 3.5% point in their real wage growth. Considering native workers with no high school
degree, their long run real wage loss due to immigration was evaluated by Borjas and Katz (2007), Table 11
at -4.8%25 . Column 4 of Table 7 reproduces that negative result obtaining a 4.2% loss in real wages for high
school dropouts when we impose perfect substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born workers. Our preferred
estimates, however, shown in column 2 of Table 7, report only a small negative eﬀect (-1.1%) on wages of native
dropouts. Overall our results show in the long run a significant positive eﬀect of immigration on average U.S.
wages, and on each group of workers with at least a high school degree, and only a small negative eﬀect on
wages of workers without a high school degree.
   In our preferred specification 2 of Table 7, the group whose wages are hurt most by immigration are foreign-
born workers, i.e., previous immigrants. On average they lost 19% of their real wages while some groups (i.e.,
college graduates) lost up to 24% of their wage. Recall that, due to the assumption of constant returns to
scale in the aggregate production function, once capital fully adjusts to immigration the average overall wage
(last row) does not change. Hence, our hypothesis of imperfect substitutability simply shifts the distributional
eﬀects of immigration by increasing the wage competition eﬀect of immigrants on other foreign-born workers
and decreasing it for U.S.-born workers. If the negative eﬀect on wages of foreign-born workers seems large, this
is due to the massive inflow of immigrants over 1990-2004 relative to the initial size of foreign-born employment.
Immigrants in the labor force have more than doubled in the period 1990-2004; in particular, foreign-born
 25 The   Borjas and Katz (2007) estimates refer to the eﬀects of immigration between 1980 and 2000.




                                                               28
workers have increased by 140% (∆F1990−2004 /F1990 = 1.4) during that period. Hence, even with a wage
elasticity for that group relative to the U.S.-born group equal to 0.10 (in column 3, σ = 10, hence the relative
                  1
wage elasticity   σ   = 0.1), one obtains a relative wage change of around 14%, split, as we see in column 3, into
an increase of native wages of 1.2% and a decrease in wages of foreign-born of 13.3%. Notice that if σ = ∞
the eﬀects of immigration on wages are identical for U.S.- and foreign-born in the same education-experience
group. The small diﬀerences reported in column 4 between the eﬀects on U.S.- and foreign-born wages are due
to the diﬀerent composition in employment distribution by experience and education between the two groups.
   Are the eﬀects of foreign-born workers on wages reasonable? First of all, simply considering the relative
U.S.- to foreign-born wages, reported in table A3, there are some skill groups that experienced large immigrant
inflows and a substantial deterioration of their wage relative to natives. For instance, among high school dropouts
between 20 and 24 years of experience, until 1970 wages of U.S.- and foreign-born workers were almost identical,
while in 2004 U.S.-born were earning 12-16% more than foreign-born workers. At the same time, among workers
with no high school degree, those with 0 to 4 years of experience did not experience a large increase in the share
of foreign-born and the relative U.S.- to foreign-born wages in this group did not deteriorate. The worsening of
wages of foreign-born relative to U.S.-born (see for instance Borjas 1999, page 27), which is usually attributed
to worsening in the quality of immigrants, is interpretable in light of our results as an eﬀect of increased wage
competition between foreign-born in those occupations that overwhelmingly employ immigrants. Moreover,
the reason that we do not observe larger native-foreign wage diﬀerentials in all skill groups is probably that
immigrants choose sectors/occupations/jobs with booming demand so that the systematic components of θF kjt
by year and skill (which we controlled for in equation (20)) partly oﬀset the negative eﬀect of increased supply.
Another reason why the eﬃciency term θF kjt may vary, in its systematic part, to oﬀset the increase in supply
of foreign-born, ∆Fkj,1990−2004 , has been proposed by Lewis (2005) and Card and Lewis (2007): sectors/jobs
where immigrants’ skills (in terms of education and experience) are more abundant induce technological choices
“biased” towards those skills and use them more eﬀectively, which increases the relative eﬃciency θF kjt . The
negative eﬀects on wages of other foreign-born are, therefore, in part oﬀset by systematic improvements in
relative eﬃciency. Finally, the simulation in Table 7 is done for a given level of employment of native workers.
The actual relative wages observed in Table A3 result from changes in employment of foreign-born as well as
changes in employment of natives. Due to the estimated complementarities, this second change mitigates the
negative wage impact on immigrants.
   Finally, let us provide an explanation for an apparent puzzle raised by our results. In light of our analysis,
previous immigrants are the group whose wages suﬀer most due to the arrival of new immigrants. Why, then,
are they consistently among the strongest supporters of more open immigration policies (see e.g., Hatton and
Williamson, 2005 and Mayda, 2006)? Obviously, while they may forego as much as 1% wage growth per



                                                          29
year due to new immigrants, they are also the group that gains most from a non-economic point of view.
Since immigration (legal and illegal) in the U.S. works mostly through family reunions, network connections
and personal ties, new immigrants are likely to be spouses, siblings, friends and acquaintances of foreign-born
residents in the U.S. and hence are likely to have huge personal, aﬀective and amenity value to them, well above
the negative wage eﬀect that we identified.


6.2     Reconsidering the Short Run Eﬀects with Yearly Capital Adjustment

How long does it take for physical capital to adjust and restore its long run returns? And in the presence of
sluggish adjustment of capital what are the eﬀects of immigration on wages in the short run? As illustrated in
                                                                                    ³       ´
Section 3.3, accounting for capital adjustment simply adds a non-zero term, (1 − α) ∆κ κt
                                                                                          t
                                                                                                      , to the
                                                                                                  immigration
change in the wage of each group. Hence the short run wage response for each group and for the averages will
diﬀer from the long run response by a common constant, due to the chosen Cobb-Douglas structure in which κt
only aﬀects marginal productivity of workers through the overall average wage. A popular way to analyze the
deviation of ln(κt ) from its balanced growth path trend, used in the growth and business cycle literature, is to
represent its time-dynamics in the following way:


                                                                                 ∆Ft
                               ln(κt ) = β 0 + β 1 ln(κt−1 ) + β 2 (trend) + γ       + εt                              (26)
                                                                                 Lt
                                                                                                                ³            ´
                                                                                                       1            1−α
   where the term β 2 (trend) captures the balanced growth path trajectory of ln(κt ) equal to         α   ln       r+δ At

and the term β 1 ln(κt−1 ) captures the sluggishness of yearly adjustment to shocks. The parameter (1 − β 1 ) is
commonly called “speed of adjustment ” since it is the share of the deviation from the balanced growth path
                                         ∆Ft
(trend) eliminated each year. Finally,   Lt    are the yearly immigration shocks and εt are other shocks. Assuming
that immigration shocks cause a proportional decrease in κt for the same year (γ = −1), in order to calculate
the eﬀect of immigration on κt over, say, the 1990-2004 period, one needs an estimate of the parameter β 1 . Once
                                                               ∆Ft
we know β 1 and the sequence of yearly immigration flows,      Lt ,   one can use (26) to obtain an impulse response
of ln(κt ) and its deviation from trend as of 2004 (short run), as well as for later years (long run). The previous
                                                                                                        ∆Ft
migration literature has essentially assumed β 1 = 0 in the short run calculations cumulating the       Lt      over one
or two decades for fixed capital (implying a very large deviation from the trend). On the other hand, it has
assumed β 1 = 1, (full adjustment) in the long run calculations. The recent empirical growth literature (Islam,
1995; Caselli et al., 1996) and the recent business cycle literature (Romer, 2006, chapter 4), to the contrary,
provide model-based and empirical estimates of β 1 . The recent growth literature usually estimates a 10% speed
of convergence of capital to the own balanced growth path for advanced (OECD) economies (Islam, 1995; Caselli
et al., 1996), implying β 1 = 0.9. Similarly, the business cycle literature calculates speed of convergence of capital
around 10% (Romer, 2006, Chapter 4) for closed economies and faster for open economies. Hence β 1 = 0.9 seems


                                                          30
a reasonable estimate. We estimated a simple AR(1) process with trend for ln(κt ). We constructed the variable
κt = (Kt /Lt ), dividing the stock of U.S. capital at constant prices (Net Stock of Private and Government Fixed
Assets from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2006) by the total non-farm employment from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (2006) for each year during the period 1960-2004. We estimated several specifications including
                                       ³      ´                     ³     ´
changes in total employment as shock ∆L  Lt
                                            t
                                               , or immigrants only   ∆Ft
                                                                      Lt    as shock and instrumented those with
changes in population (to correct for endogeneity of employment)26 . All estimates of β 1 ranged between 0.8
and 0.9 (speed of adjustment of 10 to 20% a year) with standard errors ranging between 0.02 and 0.08. We
could never reject β 1 = 0.9, and we could always reject β 1 = 1 (no adjustment). Hence we consider 10%
a reliable and, if anything, conservative estimate of the yearly speed of capital adjustment. Using the series
of immigration rates over 1990-2004 and the estimated parameters of capital adjustment β 1 = 0.9, γ = −0.9
(assuming that capital adjustment begins the same year as immigrants are received) the recursive equation (26)
allows us to calculate (∆κ1990−2004 /κ1990 )immigration as of year 2004 and the share of the deviation from trend
that remains in 2009. Using formula (8) we can calculate the eﬀect of ∆κ on the average wage and on each
group’s wage. Recall that assuming no adjustment of capital in the short run ( β 1 = 1, γ = −1), since the
cumulated inflow of immigrants during the 1990-2004 period was 11% of the employment in 1990, this implies
an eﬀect of immigration on average real wages equal to (0.33) ∗ (−11%) = −3.6%, as of 2004. Using the actual
10% speed of adjustment of capital each year, however, we obtain only a −3.4% eﬀect of immigration on the
capital-labor ratio corresponding to a mere −1.1% (= 0.33 ∗ 3.4%) eﬀect on real wages as of 2004, and in five
more years (2009) the negative eﬀect on wages is reduced to −0.6%. Table 8 uses these adjustments of the
capital-labor ratio and shows the eﬀects of immigration on wages as of year 2004 (column 1) and as of year
2009 (column 2). Those columns use the same parameter values as column 2 of Table 7, i.e., the median and
preferred estimates of σ. We also report in column 3 the long run eﬀects for full capital adjustment (identical
to column 2 of Table 7) and, for comparison, the “short run ” eﬀects calculated assuming fixed capital (as in
the previous literature) in column 4. Finally, the short run eﬀects with fixed capital and perfect substitutability
between U.S.- and foreign-born workers are shown in column 5. Hence column 1 reports the newly calculated
“short run ” eﬀects of immigration while column 5 reports those calculated using the methods prevailing in the
previous literature. The diﬀerences are remarkable. The average wage of U.S.-born workers increased by 0.7%
in our estimates as of 2004, rather than experiencing a decrease of 3.5%. U.S. workers with no degree experience
a loss of 2.2% of their real wage rather than a loss of almost 8%. College educated, U.S.-born workers have
essentially no change in their wage (rather than a 5% loss) and the groups of high school graduates and college
dropouts experience, even in the short run, significant gains rather than significant losses in their real wages.
  26 We constructed ∆F , for each year from 1960 to 2004, using the following procedure. From the U.S. Department of Justice,
                        t
Immigration and Naturalization Service (2004) we obtain the number of (legal) immigrants for each fiscal year 1960-2004. We then
distribute the net change of foreign-born workers in each decade (measured from census data and from the American Community
Survey, which includes illegal immigrants as well as legal ones) over each year in proportion to the gross yearly flows of legal
immigrants.


                                                              31
The benefits of immigration are already realized for most workers in the short run and certainly most benefits
are enjoyed by 2009, with an average wage gain of more than 1% distributed as gains for the three groups with
at least a high school degree and a small loss for high school dropouts. The wage losses, in the short run as well
as in the long run, are concentrated among previous immigrants who experience most of the competition from
new immigrants and undergo sizeable wage losses as a consequence.


6.3    Robustness Checks

Table 9 shows the changes in the calculated long run eﬀects when we use diﬀerent values for the parameters δ
and η in the simulations. While the values used in Table 8, equal to 2 and 4 respectively, seem to be right in the
middle of the estimated range for these parameters (both in our estimates and in previous ones), some scholars
report values of δ as low as 1.5 and as high as 2.5, while the range for η is between 3 and 5. We reproduce
simulations from columns 1-3 of Table 8 using, respectively, the low estimates of δ and η (columns 1-3 in Table
9) and the high estimates of δ and η (columns 4-6 in Table 9). While the average eﬀects on wages of native
and foreign-born workers are not sensitive to changes in those parameters, the distributional eﬀects between
education groups become stronger when we use lower estimates of δ and η . Considering columns 2 and 5 as
references, since they use the median estimate of σ, we see that the wage loss of U.S.-born high school dropouts
can be as large as −2.5%, when δ = 1.5. Still, this number is much smaller than the previous estimates. On the
other hand, if we use the higher elasticity of substitution estimates (δ = 2.5 and η = 5), unskilled natives barely
suﬀer a loss in wages (−0.3%) from immigration. A similar widening of the distributional eﬀects of wages of
foreign-born workers across education groups takes place using the lower estimates. The widening distributional
eﬀects would also be observed if we lowered δ and η in the simulation with σ = ∞.


6.4    Contribution of Immigration to the Average Wage and Wage Dispersion of
       U.S.-Born Workers

The diﬀerences in the real wage eﬀects of immigration on natives shown in Table 8 between specification 1 (our
preferred one) and specification 5 (representative of previously estimated short run eﬀects) are important. In
order to put them in perspective, it is instructive to compare them with the actual changes in average wages
of U.S.-born workers during the 1990-2004 period and with changes in the measures of their wage dispersion
during the same period. Specification 1 in Table 8 implies an eﬀect on average U.S. real wages 4.2% points
larger than the usually estimated short run eﬀects reported in column 5 of Table 10 (+0.7% vs. -3.5%). This is
a large diﬀerence even when compared to the average growth rate of wages of U.S.-born workers in the period,
which equals 12.5%, and is even more notable if compared to the typical changes of real wages over the business
cycle (amounting, on average, to less than 0.5%). Roughly 60% of the diﬀerence between specifications is due to


                                                        32
the hypothesis of yearly capital adjustment, while about 40% is due to the imperfect substitutability between
U.S.- and foreign-born workers.
   Even more interestingly, since immigration has been connected to increased wage dispersion (e.g., Freeman,
Borjas and Katz 1997 and several others), we can inquire as to the fraction of that increase that could be due
to immigration. There are several ways of measuring wage dispersion across educational groups, depending
on which group we focus on. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 10 provide some standard measures of increased
wage dispersion across educational groups during the period 1990-2004. In particular, Column 2 reports, in
the first four rows, the percentage variation in the real wage for each of the four groups relative to the average
real increase in wages27 and, in the last 2 rows, the table shows the real increase in the college/high school
dropout wage premium and in the college/high school wage premium. All numbers are calculated for U.S.-born
workers only. Column 1 reports the actual percentage changes for each real wage group (not net of the average)
showing that high school dropouts actually experienced a real wage loss in the period. Notice, first of all,
that wage dispersion increased between any two groups, since lower wage groups (lower education groups) had
lower growth rates of wages. The performance of U.S.-born high school dropouts has been particularly bad,
with wages dropping by 24.4% relative to the average during the period. Also sub-average (but much less so)
were the performances of wages of high school graduates (6.1% lower than average) and college dropouts (4.1%
lower than average). On the other hand, wages of college graduates substantially out-performed the average
(8.9% better). As a consequence, the wage premium (as a ratio) between college graduates and high school
dropouts increased by 33% during the period and the college/high school wage premium increased by 15%.
These statistics are calculated using Census and American Community Survey IPUMS data on wages of all
U.S.-born workers as defined in Section 4. Column 3 shows the percentage changes in real wages attributed to
immigration by our model (specification 2 of Table 7) and column 4 shows the share they represent of the actual
1990-2004 change. Looking at the first four rows, immigration actually decreased wage dispersion for three
groups (HSG, COD and COG), in that it helped the first two groups which performed worse than average, and
hurt the last one that performed better. This is noted in Table 10 by the caption “attenuate dispersion ” under
the corresponding figures. As for native high school dropouts, immigration contributed to wage dispersion but
it explains less than one eighth (0.12) of the diﬀerence in the performance of this group’s wage with respect to
the average wage. Moreover, immigration does not contribute at all to explaining the increased college/high
school wage premium; if anything, immigration caused a reduction in that premium as the last row of column
4 shows, and immigration only explains one twentieth (0.05) of the increase in the college/high school dropout
premium (second-to-last row of column 4). These numbers seem to show that immigration cannot be considered
 27 The average increase is calculated by weighting the percentage wage increases of each group by the average wage share of that
group in the 1990-2004 period. It is diﬀerent from the change in the average wage which also includes the eﬀect of changes in
educational shares.




                                                               33
as an important candidate in explaining increased wage dispersion. Even giving immigration the best shot at
causing wage dispersion by adopting the old assumption of σ = ∞28 (column 5 and 6) one still obtains the
result that immigration attenuated wage dispersion for three groups (helping those which are under-performing,
and hurting those outperforming, the mean) while it only contributed to the under-performance of high school
dropout wages. However, even in this scenario, only one sixth (0.17) of the growth diﬀerential with respect to
the average wage, and less than one tenth (0.087) of the increase in the college/high school dropout premium
can be attributed to immigration.



7     Conclusions

The main message of this paper is that only within a model that specifies the interactions between workers
of diﬀerent skills and between labor and physical capital (in a production function) can we derive marginal
productivity, labor demands and analyze the eﬀects of immigration on the wages of diﬀerent types of work-
ers. The existing literature on immigration has paid much attention to the estimates of the partial eﬀect of
immigrants on wages of U.S.-born workers with similar skills. Those estimates are partial in that they assume
a constant supply of all other groups and of physical capital and therefore are not informative of the actual
overall eﬀects of immigration on wages. In taking the general equilibrium approach instead, one realizes that
the substitutability between U.S.- and foreign-born workers with similar schooling and experience, as well as
the investment response to changes in the supply of skills are important parameters in evaluating the short and
long run eﬀects of immigration on wages. We therefore carefully tackle the tasks of estimating the elasticity
of substitution between U.S.- and foreign-born workers within education-experience and gender cells and we
account for physical capital adjustment in the short and long run. We find robust evidence that U.S.- and
foreign-born workers are not perfect substitutes within an education-experience-gender group. This fact, and
the yearly adjustment of capital to immigration, imply that average wages of natives benefit from immigration,
even in the short run. These average gains are, in the short and long run, distributed as a small wage loss to the
group of high school dropouts and wage gains for all the other groups of U.S. natives. The group suﬀering the
biggest loss in wages is the contingent of previous immigrants, who compete with new immigrants for similar
jobs and occupations. Finally, our model implies that it is hard to claim that immigration has been a significant
determinant in the deterioration of the wage distribution of U.S.-born workers during the period 1990-2004.
  28 Assumptions on capital adjustment do not have any impact on relative wages but only on the average wage. Hence the relative

changes in specifications 3 and 5 of Table 10 could be either for fixed or for fully adjusted capital.




                                                              34
References

Altonji, Joseph, and David Card. 1991. The Eﬀects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes of Less-
Skilled Natives. in John M. Abowd and Richard Freeman eds, Immigration, Trade and the Labor Market,
Chicago, the University of Chicago Press.

Angrist, Joshua. 1995. The Economic Returns to Schooling in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. American
Economic Review 85, no. 5:1065-1087.

Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney. 2005. Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality, Re-Assessing the
Revisionists. NBER Working Paper no 11627, Cambridge, Ma.

Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney. 2006 The Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market. American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96, no.2: 189 - 194.

Bacolod, Marigee, and Bernardo Blum. 2006. Two Sides of the Same Coin: US Residual Inequality and the
Gender Gap. Manuscript, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Black, Sandra, and Spitz-Oener, Alexandra. 2007. Explaining Women’s Success: Technological Change and the
Skill Content of Women’s Work. NBER Working Paper, no.13116, Cambridge Ma.

Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2006. Interactive NIPA Tables and Interactive Fixed Assets Tables.
http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn/home/gdp.htm.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2006. National Employment Data. http://www.bls.gov/bls/employment.htm.

Borjas, George. 1994. The Economics of Immigration. Journal of Economic Literature 32, no. 4:1667-1717.

Borjas, George. 1995. The Economic Benefits from Immigration. Journal of Economics Perspectives 9, no.2:
3-22.

Borjas, George. 1999. Heaven’s Door. Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, 1999.

Borjas, George. 2003. The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immigration
on the Labor Market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 4: 1335-1374.

Borjas, George. 2006. Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration. Journal of
Human Resources 41, no.2: 221-258.

Borjas, George, and Katz, Larry. 2007. The Evolution of the Mexican-Born Workforce in the United States.
in Borjas, George, editor “Mexican Immigration to the United States” National Bureau of Economic Research
Conference Report, Cambridge Ma.


                                                    35
Borjas, George, Freeman, Richard and Katz, Larry. 1997. How Much Do Immigration and Trade Aﬀect Labor
Market Outcomes?. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1997, no1: 1-90

Butcher, Katrin and Card, David. 1991. Immigration and Wages: Evidence from the 1980s. American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 81, no. 2: 292-296.

Card, David. 1990. The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market. Industrial and Labor Relation
Review 43, no 2: 245-257.

Card, David. 2001. Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher Immi-
gration. Journal of Labor Economics 19, no. 1: 22-64.

Card, David. 2007. How Immigration Aﬀects U.S. Cities. CReAM Discussion Paper, no. 11/07.

Card, David, and John Di Nardo. 2000. Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows? NBER Working Paper,
no. 7578, Cambridge, Ma.

Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Returns to College for Younger
Men? A Cohort Based Analysis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, no.2: 705-746.

Card, David, and Ethan Lewis. 2007. The Diﬀusion of Mexican Immigrants During the 1990s: Explanations and
Impacts. in Borjas, George , editor Mexican Immigration to the United States. National Bureau of Economic
Research Conference Report, Cambridge Ma.

Caselli, Francesco, Gerardo Esquivel, and Fernando Lefort. 1996. Reopening the Convergence Debate; A New
Look at Cross-Country Growth Empirics. Journal of Economic Growth 1, no.3: 363-389.

Caselli, Francesco, and Wilbur Coleman. 2006. The World Technology Frontier. American Economic Review
96, no.3: 499-522.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Giovanni Peri. 2005. Long-Run Substitutability between More and Less Educated Work-
ers: Evidence from U.S. States 1950-1990. Review of Economics and Statistics 87, no. 4: 652-663.

Cortes, Patricia. 2006. The Eﬀect of Low-Skilled Immigration on US Prices: Evidence from CPI Data.
Manuscript. Massachussetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Friedberg, Rachel, and Jennifer Hunt. 1995. The Impact of Immigrants on Host Country Wages, Employment
and Growth. Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, no. 2: 23-44.

Friedberg, Rachel. 2001. The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116, no. 4: 1373-1408.



                                                        36
Gollin, Douglas. 2002. Getting Income Shares Right. Journal of Political Economy 100, no 2: 458-474.

Grossman, Jean. 1982. The Substitutability of Natives and Immigrants in Production. Review of Economics
and Statistics 64, no.4: 596-603.

Jones, Charles. 2005. The Shape of Production Functions and the Direction of Technical Change. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120, no2: 517-549.

Hatton, Timothy, and Jeﬀrey Williamson. 2005. A Dual Policy Paradox: Why Have Trade and Immigration
Policies Always Diﬀered in Labor-Scarce Economies? NBER Working Paper no. 11866. Cambridge, MA.

Islam, Nasrul. 1995. Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, no.4:
1127-1170.

Jaeger, David. 1996. Skill Diﬀerences and the Eﬀect of Immigrants on the Wages of Natives. U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics, Economic Working Paper no.273. Washington D.C.

Kaldor, Nicholas. 1961. Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth in the Theory of Capital. F. A. Lutz and
D.C. Hague Editors. New York, St. Martins.

Katz, Larry, and Kevin Murphy. 1992. Changes in Relative Wages 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Factors.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no.1: 35-78.

Krusell, Per, Lee Ohanian, Victor Rios-Rull and Giovanni Violante. 2000. Capital-Skill Complementarity and
Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis. Econometrica 68, no. 5: 1029-53.

Lewis, Ethan. 2005. Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Working Paper no. 05-08 Philadelphia, PA.

Longhi, Simonetta, Peter Nijkamp, and Jacques Poot . 2005. A Meta-Analytic Assessment of the Eﬀect of
Immigration on Wages Journal of Economic Surveys 86, no. 3 451-477.

Manacorda Marco, Alan Manning and John Wadsworth (2006) The Impact of Immigration on the Structure of
Male Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain IZA Discussion paper 2352. Bonn, Germany.

Mayda, Anna Maria. 2006. Who is Against Immigration? A Cross-Country Investigation of Individual Attitudes
toward Immigrants. Review of Economics and Statistics 88, no.3: 510-530.

Murphy, Kevin, Craigh Riddle and Paul Romer.1998. Wages, Skills and Technology in the United States and
Canada. in General Purpose Technology and Economic Growth. Elhanan Helpman Editor, Cambridge, MA.




                                                     37
National Research Council. 1997. The New Americans: Economic, Demographic, and Fiscal Eﬀects of Immi-
gration. National Academy Press, Washington D.C..

Ottaviano, Gianmarco, and Giovanni Peri. 2005. Cities and Cultures. Journal of Urban Economics 58, no.2:
304-307.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco, and Giovanni Peri. 2006. The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity: Evidence from
U.S. Cities. Journal of Economic Geography 6, no1: 9-44.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco, and Giovanni Peri. 2007. The Eﬀect of Immigration on U.S. Wages and Rents: A General
Equilibrium Approach. CReAM Discussion Paper no 13/07 London, UK.

Passel, Jeﬀrey. 2006. The Size and Characteristics of the Unauthorized Immigrant Population. PEW Hispanic
Center,Washington D.C.

Peri, Giovanni, and Chad Sparber, 2007. Task Specialization, Comparative Advantages, and the Eﬀects of
Immigration on Wages. NBER Working Paper, no. 13389. Cambridge, Ma.

Ramsey, Frank. 1928. A Mathematical Theory of Saving. Economic Journal 38, no.152: 543-559.

Romer, David. 2006. Advanced Macroeconomics. McGraw-Hill, Third Edition. New York, NY.

Ruggles, Steven , Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly
Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2005.. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:         Version 3.0
[Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor].
http://www.ipums.org.

Solow, Robert. 1956. A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 70:
65-94.

U.S. Department of Justice Immigration and Naturalization Service. 2004. Statistical Yearbook of the Immi-
gration and Naturalization Service, Year 2004. Washington, DC.

Welch, Finis. 1979. Eﬀects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom Babies Financial Boost. Journal of
Political Economy 87, no. 5: 65-97.

Welch, Finis. 1990. In Defense of Inequality. American Economic Review 89, no.2: 1-17.




                                                    38
                             Tables and Figures




                             Table 1
  Index of Congruence in the Choice of Occupations, Census 2004


    Index of          Foreign,       Natives        Natives       Natives       Natives
   Congruence          Same           HSD            HSG           COD           COG
                     Education
  Natives, HSD          0.65            1
  Natives, HSG          0.68          0.68              1
  Natives, COD          0.61          -0.25           0.22            1
  Natives, COG          0.70          -0.73          -0.91          0.35           1

Note: The Index of Congruence between the two groups (row and column headers) is
calculated as the centered correlation coefficient using 180 different occupations and data
from the 2004 American Community Survey in Ruggles et al. (2006). The exact definition
of the index is provided in the main text. The index ranges between -1 and +1.




                                              39
                                                 Table 2
                   Relative Male-Female Wage Elasticity within Education-Experience Cells


                                                                  1                 2                   3
                     Table entries:                              Basic           Omit 2004           Omit 1960
        1/λ (male-female relative wage elasticity)
                     All Workers                               -0.04               -0.05                -0.04
                                                               (0.04)              (0.04)               (0.05)
                       US-born only                             -0.03              -0.05                -0.02
                                                               (0.04)              (0.04)               (0.04)
                    Foreign-Born Only                          -0.10               -0.09                -0.12
                                                               (0.08)              (0.08)               (0.07)



Note: All Regressions include education-by-experience fixed effects, education-by-year fixed effects and experience-
by-year fixed effects. The reported standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by education-experience.
The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of relative male-female weekly wage of workers in the same education-
experience –nativity group, the explanatory variable is the relative labor supply of female to male workers in the same
education-experience-nativity group. The first row includes in the regression education-experience cells for U.S.- and
foreign-born workers. This implies a total of 384 observations for column 1 and 320 for columns 2 and 3. The second
row only includes cells with US-born workers and the third row only includes cells with foreign-born workers. This
implies 192 observations for column 1 and 160 for columns 2 and 3. Observations are weighted by the total employment
in the cell, in all specifications.




                                                            40
                                                              Table 3
                Relative U.S.-Foreign-Born Wage Elasticity within Education-Experience Cells, Overall and by Gender

          Dependent Variable and Explanatory                 1            2                3               4                        5
                      variable:                             Basic    Weekly         Non weighted Omit 2004                       Omit 1960
                                                                      Wages
                         1/σ (US-Foreign born relative wage elasticity) Overall estimates and by gender groups
            Relative Wage and Employment             0.16**           0.14**            0.14**          0.14**                      0.18**
            U.S./Foreign Born, All Workers            (0.04)           (0.03)           (0.05)          (0.04)                      (0.04)
            Relative Wage and Employment             0.16**           0.09**            0.15**          0.15**                      0.17**
           U.S./Foreign Born , Male Workers           (0.05)           (0.03)           (0.07)          (0.05)                      (0.06)
            Relative Wage and Employment             0.18**           0.05**            0.13**          0.20**                      0.20**
          U.S./Foreign Born , Female Workers          (0.03)           (0.01)           (0.04)          (0.05)                      (0.03)
                              1/σ (US-Foreign born relative wage elasticity) Estimates across gender groups
          Relative Wage of U.S./Foreign Born ,       0.15**            0.09*            0.12**          0.13**                      0.17**
               Male Workers and Relative              (0.04)           (0.03)           (0.06)          (0.04)                      (0.04)
           Employment of U.S./Foreign Born ,
                        Female
          Relative Wage of U.S./Foreign Born         0.17**           0.05**            0.13**          0.21**                      0.20**
              Female Workers and Relative             (0.04)           (0.02)           (0.06)          (0.06)                      (0.05)
           Employment of U.S./Foreign Born
                     Male workers
                     Observations                      192              192              192             128                         128


Note: All Regressions include seducation-by-experience fixed effects, education-by-year fixed effects and experience-by-year fixed effects. Errors are
heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by education-experience. The dependent variable is natural logarithm of relative wage of US and foreign born
workers in the same education and experience group, the explanatory variable is the relative employment of US and foreign-born workers in the same
education experience group. Results in the first row are relative to regressions that use all workers to calculate employment and wages, results in the
second row use male workers only, and results in the third row use female workers only. The fourth row uses relative wages of male workers and
relative employment of female workers. The fifth row uses relative wages of female workers and relative employment of male workers. Observations
are weighted by total employment in the cell, in all specifications except for 3. Specifications 1 to 3 are estimated using observations for 1960, 1970,
1980, 1990, 2000 and 2004.


                                                                           41
                                                              Table 4
                  Relative U.S.-Foreign-Born Wage Elasticity within Education-Experience Cells: Robustness Checks


     Table entries: 1/σ                                      1                  2                3                 4                5
     (US-Foreign born relative wage elasticity)             Basic            Weekly         Non weighted        Omit 2004        Omit 1960
                                                                             Wages
      Using Effective Experience to construct              0.17**            0.12**              0.16**           0.16**           0.18**
             Education-experience cells                    (0.05)            (0.04)              (0.05)           (0.06)           (0.05)
      Using weeks-Person as measure of labor               0.14**            0.20**              0.12**           0.14**            0.14
                        supply                             (0.04)            (0.03)              (0.06)           (0.05)           (0.04)
     Restricted to the groups of workers with at           0.20**            0.18**              0.19**           0.19**           0.22**
             most a high school degree                     (0.03)            (0.03)              (0.04)           (0.02)           (0.03)

Note: All regressions include education-by-experience fixed effects, education-by-year fixed effects and experience-by-year fixed effects. Errors are
heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by education-experience. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of relative wage of US and foreign born
workers in the same education and experience group, the explanatory variable is the relative labor supply of US and foreign-born workers in the same
education experience group. In the first row the effective experience for foreign-born workers is calculated by converting years of experience abroad into
years of US experience. The period considered is 1970-2004, since in 1960 there is no information on the year when immigrants entered the country. In
the second row we use week-person as measure of labor supply of each group and 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2004 as years. In the third row we
select only the education-experience groups within the two educational groups HSD (high school dropouts) and HSG (high school graduates) for a total
of 96 observations.




                                                                           42
                                                            Table 5
                              Estimates of 1 /η : Relative Wage Elasticity across Experience Cells


  Entries are estimates of      CES Foreign-U.S.- Born Using Estimated σ                     Simple Sum Foreign- U.S.-Born
            1 /η                                                                                    (imposing σ= ∞ )
       Specification                       1                         2                          3                    4
         Sample                      All workers                 Male only               All Workers           Male Only
       Yearly Wages                    0.30**                     0.30**                    0.26**                0.25**
                                        (0.09)                    (0.10)                     (0.06)               (0.07)
       Weekly Wages                    0.29**                     0.29**                    0.25**                0.25**
                                        (0.09)                    (0.10)                     (0.07)               (0.08)
        Observations                     192                       160                        192                   160

Note: Method of estimation is 2SLS using the log of foreign-born employed in the education-experience group as instrument for the
variable ln(Lkjt) that is constructed as described in the text. All regressions include education by experience fixed effects and education
by year fixed effects. Specifications 2 and 4 use male workers only to calculate the wages and employment. In parenthesis we report the
Heteroskedasticity Robust Standard error clustered by education group.




                                                                    43
                                                               Table 6
                             Estimates of 1 / δ : Relative Wage Elasticity Across Education Cells


 Entries are estimates of            CES across Experience Groups,                     Simple Sum Across Experience Groups
           1/ δ                                estimated η                                        ( imposing η= ∞ )
      Specification                       1                    2                              3                        4
         Sample                     All workers            Male Only                    All workers             Male Only
      Yearly wages                    0.45**                0.46**                        0.51**                   0.52**
                                       (0.12)               (0.14)                         (0.14)                   (0.16)
     Weekly Wages                     0.40**                0.40**                        0.44**                   0.44**
                                       (0.09)               (0.10)                         (0.11)                   (0.12)
      Observations                       24                   20                             24                       20

Note: Method of estimation is 2SLS using the log of foreign-born employed in the education group as instrument for the variable ln(Lkt)
that is constructed as described in the text. All regressions include 5 time fixed effects and 4 education-specific time trends.
Specifications 2 and 4 include male individuals only in calculating wages and employment. Specifications 1 and 3 use all individuals in
each education and experience group. In parenthesis we report the Heteroskedasticity Robust Standard error clustered by education
group.




                                                                  44
                                                             Table 7
                         Calculated Percentage Changes in Real Wages Due to Immigrant Inflows: 1990-2004.
                                                    Long Run Effects (Δκ/κ=0)




            Specification                            1                        2                        3                         4
            Estimates of σ                          Low                     Median                    High              σ , imposed = ∞
                                                    σ=5                     σ=6.6                     σ=10
                                % Real Wage Change of Us Born Workers Due to Immigration, 1990-2004
1) HS dropouts US-born                            -0.2%                     -1.1%                    -2.1%                    -4.2%
2) HS graduates, US-born                          +2.9%                     +2.4%                    +2.0%                    +1.0%
3) CO dropouts, US-born                           +3.7%                      +3.4                    +3.1%                    +2.4%
4) CO graduates, US-born                          +1.4%                     +0.7%                     0.0%                    -1.5%
5) Average, US-born                               +2.3%                     +1.8%                    +1.2%                    +0.1%
                             % Real Wage Change of Foreign Born Workers Due to Immigration, 1990-2004
6) HS dropouts Foreign-born                       -20.2%                    -16.3%                   -12.3%                   -4.4%
7) HS graduates, Foreign-born                     -31.7%                    -23.5%                    -15%                    +1.0%
8) CO dropouts, Foreign-born                      -17.4%                    -12.3%                    -7.3%                   +2.4%
9) CO graduates, Foreign-born                     -31.6%                    -24.2%                    -16%                    -1.6%
10) Average Foreign-born                          -26.3%                    -19.8%                   -13.3%                   -0.9%
11) Overall Average:                                0%                        0%                       0%                      0%
Native and US-Born


Note: Values of the other parameters used in the estimation: δ=2, η=4, α=0.66. The inflow of immigrants in the period 1990-2004 as a percentage of
initial employment in the group were as follows: High School Dropouts: 20%, High School Graduates: 9.9%, College Dropouts: 6.5%, College
Graduates: 14.1%, Overall 11.0%. The percentage change for the wage of each worker in group k, j is calculated using the formula (11) for US-born
and (12) for foreign-born. Then percentage wage changes are averaged across experience groups using the wage-share of the group in 1990 to obtain
the Table entries. The averages for US- and Foreign-born are obtained averaging the wage change of each education group weighted by its share in
the wage (as described in formulas 13 and 14). The overall average wage change adds the change of US- and foreign-born weighted for the relative
wage shares in 1990 (equal to 8.5% for foreign-born and 91.5% for US-born).

                                                                       45
                                                                 Table 8
                            Calculated Percentage Changes in Real Wages Due to Immigrant Inflows: 1990-2004.
                                       Short Run Effects, Accounting for Yearly Capital Adjustment.

             Specification                          1                     2                     3                     4                    5
             Estimates of σ                    As of 2004             As of 2009             Long Run              Fixed K            Fixed K and
                                               (short run)                                                       (Traditional       σ , imposed = ∞
                                                                                                                  Short Run)

                                     % Real Wage Change of US-Born Workers Due to Immigration, 1990-2004
  HS dropouts US-born                             -2.2%                  -1.7%                 -1.1%                 -4.8%                 -7.9%
  HS graduates, US-born                           +1.3%                  +1.8%                 +2.4%                 -1.2%                 -2.6%
  CO dropouts, US-born                            +2.3%                  +2.8%                  +3.4                 -0.2%                 -1.2%
  CO graduates, US-born                           -0.4%                  +0.1%                 +0.7%                 -2.9%                 -5.2%
  Average, US-Born                               +0.7%                   +1.2%                 +1.8%                 -1.9%                -3.5%
                                  % Real Wage Change of Foreign Born Workers Due to Immigration, 1990-2004
  HS dropouts Foreign-born                       -17.4%                 -16.9%                 -16.3%               -19.9%                -8.1%
  HS graduates, Foreign-born                     -24.6%                 -24.1%                 -23.5%               -27.1%                -2.6%
  CO dropouts, Foreign-born                      -13.4%                 -12.9%                 -12.3%               -15.9%                -1.2%
  CO graduates, Foreign-born                     -25.3%                 -24.8%                 -24.2%               -27.8%                -5.3%
  Average Foreign-born                           -20.9%                 -20.4%                 -19.8%               -23.4%                -4.7%
  Overall Average:                                -1.1%                  -0.6%                   0%                  -3.6%                -3.6%
  Native and US-Born

Note: Values of the other parameters used in the estimation of columns 1, 2, 3 and 4: σ=6.6, δ=2, η=4, α=0.66. Column 5 assumes : σ= ∞ ,
δ=2, η=4, α=0.66. The inflow of immigrants in the period 1990-2004 as a percentage of initial employment in the group were as follows:
High School Dropouts: 20%, High School Graduates: 9.9%, College Dropouts: 6.5%, College Graduates: 14.1%, Overall 11.0%. The formulas
used to obtain single entries and averages are identical to those used in Table 9. The method used to construct the percentage changes in wages
is identical to the one used in Table 9. The change in the capital-labor ratio due to immigration as of 2004 and 2009 is calculated using yearly
immigration flows and the recursive formula (26) in the text. The effect of immigration 1990-2004 on the capital-labor ratio as of 2004
(column 1) is -3.4% and it is -2.0% as of 2009 (column 2). To the contrary, the effect assuming fixed capital (column 4 and 5) is -11%.


                                                                           46
                                                        Table 9
                    Calculated Percentage Changes in Real Wages Due to Immigrant Inflows: 1990-2004.
                                Long Run Effects. Robustness Checks, for Different Values of δ, η.


            Value of δ                              1.5                                         2.5
            Value of η                               3                                           5
           Specification                1            2           3            4                 5                            6
            Value of σk               Low        Median       High           Low            Median                          High
                                      σ=5         σ=6.6       σ=10           σ=5             σ=6.6                          σ=10
                            % Real Wage Change of US-Born Workers Due to Immigration, 1990-2004
 HS dropouts US-born                 -1.6%        -2.5%       -3.5%         +0.6%            -0.3%                          -1.3%
 HS graduates, US-born               +3.3%        +2.8%       +2.3%         +2.7%            +2.2%                          +1.8%
 CO dropouts, US-born                +4.6%        +4.2%       +3.9%         +3.2%            +2.9%                          +2.6%
 CO graduates, US-born                0.9%        +0.2%       -0.6%         +1.7%            +1.0%                          -0.2%
 Average, US-Born                   +2.3%        +1.8%       +1.2%          +2.3%           +1.8%                          +1.2%
                        % Real Wage Change of Foreign -Born Workers Due to Immigration, 1990-2004
 HS dropouts Foreign-born           -21.0%      -17.8%       -14.0%         -19.3%         -15.3%                          -11.4%
 HS graduates, Foreign-born         -31.2%      -23.3%       -15.0%         -31.5%         -23.4%                          -15.3%
 CO dropouts, Foreign-born          -16.1%      -11.2%        -6.4%         -17.5%         -12.7%                           -7.8%
 CO graduates, Foreign-born          -32%       -24.8%        -17%           31.1%         -23.8%                           -16%
 Average Foreign-born                -26%       -19.6%       -13.6%          -26%          -19.6%                          -13.6%
 Overall Average:                     0%          0%           0%             0%             0%                              0%
 Native and Foreign-Born

Note: Inflow of immigrants in the period 1990-2004 as a percentage of initial employment in the group: High School Dropouts: 20%,
High School Graduates: 9.9%, College Dropouts: 6.5%, College Graduates: 14.1%, Overall 11.0%. The formulas used to obtain single
entries and averages are identical to those used in Table 9. The method used to construct the percentage changes in wages is identical
to the one used in Table 9.




                                                                  47
                                                               Table 10
                                    Effect of Immigrants on Real Wage Dispersion of US Natives, 1990-2004

                                       1                   2             3                 4                5                            6
                                     Actual          Percentage     Percentage        Share of (2)     Percentage                  Share of (2)
                                   Percentage          Change        Change         Explained by (3)    Change                    Explained by (5)
                                  Change 1990-                    (Relative to the
                                                    Relative to the                                  (Relative to the
                                      2004            Average        Average                            Average
                                                                  Change) Due to                     Change) Due to
                                                                   Immigration,                       Immigration
                                                                    Our Model                             σ= ∞
                                                                       σ=6.6
                                      Real Percentage Changes in Wages of Education Groups 1990-2004
Real Wage of US-born, HS             -11.9%          -24.4%            -2.9%              0.12            -4.3%                          0.17
dropouts
Real Wage of US-born HS               6.5%              -6.1%               +0.6%       -0.098                      +0.9%               -0.15
graduates                                                                             (Attenuate                                     (Attenuate
                                                                                      Dispersion)                                    Dispersion)
Real Wage of US-born CO               8.5%            -4.1%            +1.4%             -0.34                      +2.3%               -0.56
dropouts,                                                                             (Attenuate                                     (Attenuate
                                                                                      Dispersion)                                    Dispersion)
Real Wage of US-born, CO             21.5%           +8.9%             -1.1%             -0.12                      -1.4%              -0.015
graduates                                                                             (Attenuate                                     (Attenuate
                                                                                      Dispersion)                                    Dispersion)
                                            Real Percentage Changes in Wage Premia, 1990-2004
College/High School Dropout          +33.3%          +33.3%            +1.8%              0.05                      +2.9%               0.087
Wage Premium
College/High School                   +15%              +15%                -1.7%               -0.11               -2.3%               -0.15
Graduates                                                                                    (Attenuate                              (Attenuate
Wage Premium                                                                                 Dispersion)                             Dispersion)

Note: The wages for each group are calculated considering all US-born workers between the ages of 17 and 65, from the IPUMS Census 1990 and
the IPUMS American Community Survey 2004 as described in the main text. The CPI deflator is used to convert the wages to constant 2000 $. The
average growth of real wages between 1990 and 2004 was 12.5%. It is calculated weighting the percentage increases in real wages of each education
group by their average wage shares in the period 1990-2004.


                                                                       48
                                                                                                      Figure 1
                                                                                                Capital-Output Ratio
                                                                   US Capital-Output ratio, 1960-2004

      3.500



      3.000



      2.500



      2.000
k/y




      1.500

                                                                                                                                                     capita/output ratio
                                                                                                                                                     average
      1.000



      0.500



      0.000
            60

                         62

                                64

                                       66

                                              68

                                                     70

                                                            72

                                                                   74

                                                                          76

                                                                                 78

                                                                                        80

                                                                                               82

                                                                                                      84

                                                                                                             86

                                                                                                                    88

                                                                                                                           90

                                                                                                                                  92

                                                                                                                                         94

                                                                                                                                                96

                                                                                                                                                        98

                                                                                                                                                               00

                                                                                                                                                                      02

                                                                                                                                                                             04
          19

                       19

                              19

                                     19

                                            19

                                                   19

                                                          19

                                                                 19

                                                                        19

                                                                               19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                             19

                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                year


                                                                                    Figure 2
                                                                        De-Trended Log Capital-Labor Ratio
                                                                         log Capital-Labor Ratio, de-trended, 1960-2004


                    0.06


                    0.05
                                                                                                                                              log Capital-Labor, de-trended


                    0.04


                    0.03


                    0.02
        deviation




                    0.01


                       0
                        60

                                62

                                       64

                                              66

                                                     68

                                                            70

                                                                   72

                                                                          74

                                                                                 76

                                                                                        78

                                                                                               80

                                                                                                      82

                                                                                                             84

                                                                                                                    86

                                                                                                                           88

                                                                                                                                  90

                                                                                                                                         92

                                                                                                                                                94

                                                                                                                                                       96

                                                                                                                                                               98

                                                                                                                                                                      00

                                                                                                                                                                             02

                                                                                                                                                                                    04
                      19

                              19

                                     19

                                            19

                                                   19

                                                          19

                                                                 19

                                                                        19

                                                                               19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                             19

                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                                  20




                    -0.01


                    -0.02


                    -0.03


                    -0.04
                                                                                                       Year




                                                                                                                  49
                                                                                            Figure 3
                                                                 Immigration and Employment Growth, 1990-2004
                                                                Immigrants during the period as percentage of initial Employment,
                                                                                      by Education Group

                                                                  20.0
                                  20.0                    19.0                                                                               1990-2000

                                  18.0                                                                                                       1990-2004

                                  16.0
                                                                                                                                             14.1
                                  14.0
Percentage Growth




                                  12.0
                                                                                           9.9                                        9.5
                                  10.0


                                        8.0
                                                                                                                       6.5
                                        6.0                                        5.3                         5.3

                                        4.0


                                        2.0


                                        0.0
                                                    High School Dropouts    High School Graduates         College Dropouts       College Graduates
                                                                                           Educational Group



                                                                                            Figure 4
                                                            Growth of Real Yearly Wages of US Natives: 1990-2004.
                                                                  Percentage Change of Real Yearly Wage by Education Group



                                         25.0                                                                        1990-2000
                                                                                                                                             21.5
                                                                                                                     1990-2004       20.2
                                         20.0


                                         15.0


                                                                                     9.1                       9.9
                                                                                                                       8.5
                    Percentage growth




                                         10.0
                                                                                            6.5
                                              5.0


                                              0.0


                                          -5.0
                                                             -6.5
                                         -10.0
                                                                    -11.9
                                         -15.0
                                                        High School             High School            College Dropouts      College Graduates
                                                         Dropouts                Graduates
                                                                                                  Group




                                                                                                  50
                                                  Appendix
                                  Table A1:
           Share of Foreign-Born Workers by Education and Experience

            Group                                                             Year
Education     Experience                  1960         1970          1980        1990          2000          2004
              0 to 4                      0.039        0.036         0.058       0.101         0.119         0.116
              5 to 9                      0.061        0.060         0.138       0.264         0.375         0.354
              10 to 14                    0.058        0.066         0.166       0.252         0.426         0.472
High School   15 to 19                    0.056        0.072         0.143       0.262         0.416         0.493
Dropouts      20 to 24                    0.058        0.070         0.132       0.270         0.364         0.442
              25 to 29                    0.055        0.061         0.124       0.222         0.363         0.377
              30 to 34                    0.083        0.061         0.101       0.179         0.358         0.382
              34 to 40                    0.122        0.058         0.086       0.161         0.281         0.345
              All Experience
                                          0.07          0.060        0.109        0.205        0.306         0.341
              Levels
              0 to 4                      0.019         0.025        0.032        0.057        0.095         0.107
              5 to 9                      0.025         0.028        0.038        0.062        0.125         0.148
              10 to 14                    0.028         0.033        0.046        0.057        0.118         0.167
High School   15 to 19                    0.036         0.035        0.047        0.057        0.100         0.157
Graduates     20 to 24                    0.035         0.037        0.051        0.062        0.085         0.119
              25 to 29                    0.046         0.041        0.050        0.059        0.082         0.105
              30 to 34                    0.065         0.040        0.051        0.060        0.081         0.097
              34 to 40                    0.108         0.049        0.054        0.055        0.072         0.097
              All Experience
                                          0.038         0.034        0.044        0.059        0.095         0.124
              Levels
              0 to 4                      0.030         0.031        0.046        0.062        0.084         0.081
              5 to 9                      0.042         0.047        0.051        0.071        0.097         0.104
              10 to 14                    0.048         0.054        0.058        0.066        0.103         0.110
College       15 to 19                    0.055         0.058        0.065        0.063        0.095         0.117
Dropouts      20 to 24                    0.048         0.054        0.070        0.065        0.084         0.101
              25 to 29                    0.052         0.058        0.065        0.070        0.076         0.087
              30 to 34                    0.076         0.046        0.067        0.074        0.074         0.077
              34 to 40                    0.099         0.057        0.067        0.072        0.077         0.076
              All Experience
                                          0.052         0.048        0.057        0.067        0.088         0.095
              Levels
              0 to 4                      0.035         0.035        0.042        0.070        0.121         0.114
              5 to 9                      0.045         0.064        0.062        0.090        0.143         0.173
              10 to 14                    0.053         0.069        0.080        0.094        0.153         0.178
              15 to 19                    0.056         0.060        0.097        0.087        0.138         0.160
College       20 to 24                    0.052         0.053        0.088        0.093        0.120         0.149
Graduates     25 to 29                    0.064         0.058        0.073        0.107        0.105         0.126
              30 to 34                    0.071         0.056        0.072        0.095        0.105         0.104
              34 to 40                    0.088         0.070        0.072        0.088        0.125         0.122
              All Experience
                                          0.054         0.056        0.070        0.089        0.128         0.146
              Levels


Note: Individuals included in calculations are those between 17 and 65 years, not living in group quarters who received
non-zero income and worked at least one week during the previous year. Foreign-born are workers born outside of the
US who are not citizens at birth. Sources: Authors’ calculations on individual data from Census IPUMS and ACS from
Ruggles, et al (2006).




                                                          51
                                   Table A2:
Weekly Wages of U.S. Natives in Constant 2000 U.S. $ by Education and Experience

            Group                                                             Year
 Education   Experience                    1960         1970         1980        1990           2000          2004
             0 to 4                        207          246          207         180            214           179
             5 to 9                        324          384          370         358            406           357
             10 to 14                      377          442          415         423            480           446
 High School 15 to 19                      403          452          444         455            507           489
 Dropouts    20 to 24                      401          468          471         476            554           548
             25 to 29                      403          486          482         500            579           549
             30 to 34                      399          470          494         522            594           599
             34 to 40                      402          463          500         521            608           585
             All Experience
                                           374          431           495          402          424           400
             Levels
             0 to 4                        307          355           334          313          350           325
             5 to 9                        404          476           439          437          485           457
             10 to 14                      454          526           487          504          553           567
 High School 15 to 19                      472          538           526          537          606           631
 Graduates   20 to 24                      484          546           544          559          642           645
             25 to 29                      486          551           552          596          658           658
             30 to 34                      485          565           560          606          665           681
             34 to 40                      476          556           558          587          681           673
             All Experience
                                           463          501           478          507          579           576
             Levels
             0 to 4                        354          402           365          359          388           374
             5 to 9                        473          565           495          522          571           570
             10 to 14                      543          639           573          604          665           686
 College     15 to 19                      574          672           631          656          731           755
 Dropouts    20 to 24                      583          694           649          708          775           794
             25 to 29                      573          706           660          749          805           846
             30 to 34                      567          715           670          757          836           820
             34 to 40                      572          669           666          731          855           832
             All Experience
                                           516          593           537          600          685           693
             Levels
             0 to 4                        469          573           477          569          658           645
             5 to 9                        611          763           639          786          904           976
             10 to 14                      728          908           798          932          1155          1230
             15 to 19                      779          983           906          1024         1287          1349
 College
             20 to 24                      776          1036          964          1147         1318          1357
 Graduates
             25 to 29                      779          1038          992          1203         1340          1365
             30 to 34                      789          996           997          1213         1430          1347
             34 to 40                      782          950           953          1178         1413          1336
             All Experience
                                           693          863           761          950          1170          1201
             Levels

Note: Individuals included in calculations are those between 17 and 65 years, not living in group quarters, which received
non-zero income and worked at least one week during the previous year. Wages are in real US Dollars calculated using
the CPI deflator with 2000 as base year. Natives are workers born within the US or who are US citizens at birth. Sources:
Authors’ calculations on individual data from Census IPUMS and ACS from Ruggles, et al (2006).




                                                               52
                                   Table A3:
Relative Weekly Wages Foreign-Born/ US-Born Workers by Education and Experience

              Group                                                             Year
  Education      Experience                 1960         1970          1980        1990           2000         2004
                 0 to 4                         1.172        1.147        1.304         1.463        1.756        1.442
                 5 to 9                         0.969        1.003        0.956         0.984        1.082        1.624
                 10 to 14                       0.969        1.030        0.942         0.904        1.062        1.031
  High School    15 to 19                       0.987        1.024        0.954         0.937        0.936        0.980
  Dropouts       20 to 24                       1.009        0.996        0.959         0.991        0.947        0.874
                 25 to 29                       1.008        0.966        0.925         0.868        1.038        0.859
                 30 to 34                       1.055        1.046        0.892         0.933        0.935        1.027
                 34 to 40                       1.075        1.007        0.882         0.909        0.859        0.921
                 All Experience
                 Levels                         1.030        1.027        0.977         0.999        1.077        1.095
                 0 to 4                         0.936        1.046        1.008         1.000        1.070        1.056
                 5 to 9                         0.948        0.977        0.918         0.988        0.961        0.970
                 10 to 14                       0.885        0.963        0.961         1.030        1.004        0.909
  High School    15 to 19                       0.984        1.011        0.962         1.037        1.057        0.938
  Graduates      20 to 24                       1.032        0.971        0.947         1.027        0.949        0.986
                 25 to 29                       1.063        0.965        0.962         0.982        0.988        0.905
                 30 to 34                       1.043        1.058        0.902         0.930        0.936        0.953
                 34 to 40                       1.060        1.022        0.961         0.976        0.980        1.142
                 All Experience
                 Levels                         0.994        1.002        0.953         0.996        0.993        0.982
                 0 to 4                         0.963        0.985        0.948         1.114        0.997        0.964
                 5 to 9                         0.920        0.966        0.955         1.013        1.053        1.142
                 10 to 14                       0.915        1.002        0.976         0.980        0.969        0.931
  College        15 to 19                       0.976        0.928        0.962         1.017        0.986        0.982
  Dropouts       20 to 24                       1.054        0.950        0.950         1.018        1.023        1.105
                 25 to 29                       1.011        0.919        0.954         0.952        0.967        0.915
                 30 to 34                       1.059        1.034        0.910         0.980        0.978        1.042
                 34 to 40                       1.005        1.053        0.953         1.026        0.959        0.967
                 All Experience
                 Levels                         0.988        0.980        0.951         1.012        0.992        1.006
                 0 to 4                         0.959        0.984        0.995         1.011        1.163        1.141
                 5 to 9                         0.929        0.917        0.959         0.934        1.120        1.002
                 10 to 14                       0.927        0.909        0.977         1.006        1.017        1.020
                 15 to 19                       0.946        0.966        1.005         1.047        0.945        0.967
  College
  Graduates      20 to 24                       0.980        0.991        0.956         1.014        0.946        0.905
                 25 to 29                       0.994        0.941        0.989         1.083        1.049        0.951
                 30 to 34                       1.021        1.011        0.933         0.996        0.973        0.965
                 34 to 40                       0.976        1.008        0.899         1.017        0.918        0.905
                 All Experience
                 Levels                         0.966        0.966        0.964         1.013        1.016        0.982

 Note: Individuals included in calculations are those between 17 and 65 years, not living in group quarters, which received
 non-zero income and worked at least one week during the previous year. The entries are equal to the ratio of foreign-born
 to native weekly wages. Natives are workers born within the US or who are US citizens at birth. Foreign-born are workers
 born outside the US and who are not citizens at birth. Sources: Authors’ calculations on individual data from Census
 IPUMS and ACS from Ruggles, et al (2006).




                                                                53
