NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNEMPLOYMENT FLUCTUATIONS WITH
STAGGERED NASH WAGE BARGAINING
Mark Gertler
Antonella Trigari
Working Paper 12498
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12498
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006

Special thanks to Larry Christiano, Eva Nagypal, Gianluca Violante, and Carl Walsh, as well as seminar
participants at Bocconi, Columbia, EUI, the New York Fed, NYU, UPenn, the San Francisco Fed, and
UQAM for many helpful comments. Thanks also to the NSF for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2006 by Mark Gertler and Antonella Trigari. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash Wage Bargaining
Mark Gertler and Antonella Trigari
NBER Working Paper No. 12498
August 2006
JEL No. E24, E32, J23, J3
ABSTRACT

A number of authors have recently emphasized that the conventional model of unemployment
dynamics due to Mortensen and Pissarides has difficulty accounting for the relatively volatile
behavior of labor market activity over the business cycle. We address this issue by modifying the MP
framework to allow for staggered multiperiod wage contracting. What emerges is a tractable relation
for wage dynamics that is a natural generalization of the period-by-period Nash bargaining outcome
in the conventional formulation. An interesting side-product is the emergence of spillover effects of
average wages on the bargaining process. We then show that a reasonable calibration of the model
can account well for the cyclical behavior of wages and labor market activity observed in the data.
The spillover effects turn out to be important in this respect.
Mark Gertler
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
mark.gertler@nyu.edu

Antonella Trigari
IGIER
Università Bocconi
Via Salasco 5
20136 Milano
ITALY
antonella.trigari@uni-bocconi.it

1

Introduction

A long standing challenge in macroeconomics is accounting for the relatively smooth behavior of real
wages over the business cycle along with the relatively volatile behavior of employment. A recent
body of research, beginning with Shimer (2005a), Hall (2005a) and Costain and Reiter (2003), has
re-ignited interest in addressing this challenge. These authors show that the conventional model of
unemployment dynamics due to Mortensen and Pissarides (hereafter “MP”) cannot account for the
key cyclical movements in labor market activity, at least for standard calibrations of parameters.
The basic problem is that the mechanism for wage determination within this framework, periodby-period Nash bargaining between firms and workers, induces too much volatility in wages. This
exaggerated procyclical movement in wages, in turn, dampens the cyclical movement in firms’
incentives to hire. Shimer (2004) and Hall (2005a) proceed to show that with the introduction of
ad hoc wage stickiness, the framework can account for employment volatility. Of course, this begs
the question of what are the primitive forces that might underlie this wage rigidity.
A rapidly growing literature has emerged to take on this puzzle. Much of this work attempts to
provide an axiomatic foundation for wage rigidity, explicitly building up from assumptions about
the information structure, and so on.1 To date, due to complexity, this work has focused mainly
on qualitative findings and has addressed quantitative issues only in a limited way.2
In this paper we take a pragmatic approach to modelling wage rigidity, with the aim of developing a framework that is tractable for quantitative analysis. In particular, we retain the empirically
appealing feature of Nash bargaining, but modify the conventional MP model to allow for staggered multi-period wage contracting. Each period, only a subset of firms and workers negotiate a
wage contract. Each wage bargain, further, is between a firm and its existing workforce: Workers
hired in-between contract settlements receive the existing wage. We restrict the form of the wage
contract to call for a fixed wage per period over an exogenously given horizon. Though it would
be undoubtedly preferable to completely endogenize the contract structure, these restrictions are
reasonable from an empirical standpoint. The payoﬀ is a simple empirically appealing wage equation that is an intuitive generalization of the standard Nash bargaining outcome. The gain over a
simple ad hoc wage adjustment mechanism is that the key primitive parameter of the model is the
average frequency of wage adjustment, as opposed to an arbitrary partial adjustment coeﬃcient
in a wage equation. In this way, the staggered contracting structure provides more discipline in
evaluating the model than do simple ad hoc adjustment mechanisms.
1

Examples include Menzio (2005), Kennan (2006) and Shimer and Wright (2004). Others have explored flexible
wage alternatives: e.g. Hagedorn and Manovski (2006), Mortensen and Nagypal (2006), and Rotemberg (2006). See
Hall (2005c) for a survey.
2
An exception is Menzio (2005) who presents a calibrated model with endogenous wage rigidity. His model does
well except for wages, which are too smooth. We instead focus on explaining the joint dynamics of labor market
activity and wages.

2

The use of time dependent staggered price and wage setting, of course, is widespread in macroeconomic modelling, beginning with Taylor (1980) and Calvo (1983). More recently, Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2003) have found that staggered wage contracting is critical to the empirical performance of the recent vintage of dynamic general equilibrium
macroeconomic frameworks (i.e., sticky prices alone are not suﬃcient). There are, however, some
important distinguishing features of our approach. First, macroeconomic models with staggered
wage setting typically have employment adjusting along the intensive margin. That is, wage stickiness enhances fluctuations in hours worked as opposed to total employment. As a consequence,
these frameworks are susceptible to Barro’s (1977) argument that wages may not be allocational
in this kind of environment, given that firm’s and workers have an on-going relationship. If wages
are not allocational, of course, then wage rigidity does not influence model dynamics. By contrast,
in the model we present, wages aﬀect employment at the extensive margin: They influence the rate
at which firms add new workers to their respective labor forces. As emphasized by Hall (2005a), in
this kind of setting the Barro critique does not apply.
A second key diﬀerence involves the nature of the wage contracting process. In the conventional
macroeconomic models, monopolistically competitive workers set wages. Here, firms and workers
bargain over wages in a setting with search and matching frictions. As a consequence, some interesting “spillover” eﬀects emerge of the average market wage on the contract wage. These spillover
eﬀects are a product of the staggered contract/bargaining environment. They introduce additional
stickiness in the movement of real wages, much the same way that real rigidities enhance nominal
price stickiness in models of staggered price setting (e.g., Kimball, 1995, and Woodford, 2003).
As we noted, the wage/unemployment volatility puzzle arises with standard calibrations of the
MP model. An interesting recent paper by Hagedorn and Manovskii (HM, 2006) considers an
alternative parameterization. In particular, these authors find parameters that allow the model to
match the low elasticity of wages with respect to productivity present in the data. By generating
smooth wages in this fashion, the model is then able to capture unemployment volatility. At
issue, however, is that some of the key parameters required to permit the model to capture the
volatility puzzle are quite diﬀerent than conventional analyses suggest may be reasonable. In eﬀect,
HM make labor supply high elastic, much more so than do standard calibrations. In addition,
despite calibrating to match wage data, their model does not account well for either the cyclical
co-movement or volatility of wages, as we discuss below.
We diﬀer by using a more conventional model parametrization. In our framework, accordingly,
it is the overlapping multi-period wage contracts that accounts for the low elasticity of wages with
respect to productivity. Further, rather than picking parameters to match this elasticity, we choose
them to be consistent with the available micro evidence on the duration of wage adjustments. In
this regard, we add a degree of discipline on the calibration. We then investigate how well the model
captures wage dynamics, as well as the volatility of unemployment and the other key variables of
the model.

3

In section 2 we characterize the basic features of the model. In section 3 we derive a set of simple
dynamic equations for wages and the hiring rate, obtained by considering a local approximation
of the model about the steady state. We also exposit the spillover eﬀects that influence the wage
bargaining process, contributing to overall wage stickiness. One additional distinguishing feature
of the setup is that a “horizon eﬀect” emerges that influences the bargaining process, since firms
care about the implications of the contract wage for future hires, while workers do not. While the
horizon eﬀect is interesting from a theoretical perspective, it turns out to not be quantitatively
important in our baseline calibration. In section 4 we examine the empirical performance of the
model and show that the framework does a good job of accounting for the basic features of the
U.S. data, including wage dynamics. In section 5, we verify that under our calibration the model
satisfies the important technical condition that the wage always lies within the bargaining set over
the life of the contract. Concluding remarks are in section 6. Finally, the appendix provides an
explicit derivation of all the key results, including the steady state of the model. It also presents
the complete loglinearized model.

2

The Model

The framework is a variation of the Mortensen and Pissarides search and matching model (Mortensen
and Pissarides, 1994, Pissarides, 2000). The main diﬀerence is that we allow for staggered multiperiod wage contracting. Within the standard framework, workers and firms negotiate wages based
on period-by-period Nash bargaining. We keep the Nash bargaining framework, but in the spirit
of Taylor (1980) and Calvo (1983), only a fraction of firms and workers re-set wages in any given
period. As well, they strike a bargain that lasts for multiple periods. Workers hired in between
contracting periods receive the existing contract wage. Here the idea is that due to scale economies
in bargaining, employment terms are negotiated only periodically: Firms do not negotiate separate
terms for the relatively small percentage of workers who enter in-between contracting periods.3 Indeed, Bewley (1999) presents some evidence consistent with this scenario: In particular, he shows
that wages of new workers are often linked to the existing internal pay structure.4
For technical reasons, there are two other diﬀerences from MP. First, because it will turn out
to be important for us to distinguish between existing and newly hired workers at a firm, we drop
the assumption of one worker per firm and instead allow firms to hire a continuum of workers. We
assume constant returns to scale, however, which greatly simplifies the bargaining problem. Second,
we drop the conventional assumption of a fixed cost per vacancy opened and instead assume that
firms face quadratic adjustment costs of adjusting employment size. The reason is as follows: With
3

Our scenario applies to situations where workers are relatively homogenous: e.g. clerical workers as opposed to
professional basketball players.
4
Bewley (1999) argues that internal equity considerations constrain workers of similar productivity to receive
similar wages, consistent with the hypothesis that new workers receive the existing contract wage.

4

staggered wage setting, there will arise a dispersion of wages across firms in equilibrium. Quadratic
costs of adjusting employment ensures a determinate equilibrium in the presence of wage dispersion.
To be clear, however, while this assumption is necessary for technical reasons, it does not drive our
results, as we show below.
Finally, we embed our search and matching framework within a simple intertemporal general
equilibrium framework in order to study the dynamics of unemployment and wages. Following
Merz (1995) and others, we adopt the representative family construct, which eﬀectively involves
introducing complete consumption insurance.

2.1

Unemployment, Vacancies and Matching

Let us now be more precise about the details: There is a continuum of infinitely lived workers
and a continuum of infinitely lived firms, each of measure one. We index firms by i and workers
according to the identity of their employer. Each firm i employs nt (i) workers at time t. It also
posts vt (i) vacancies in order to attract new workers for the next period of operation. The total
R1
R1
number of vacancies and employed workers are vt = 0 vt (i)di and nt = 0 nt (i)di. The total number
of unemployed workers, ut , is given by
(1)
ut = 1 − nt .
Following convention, we assume that the number of new hires or “matches”, mt , is a function
of unemployed workers and vacancies, as follows:
mt = σ m uσt vt1−σ .

(2)

The probability a firm fills a vacancy in period t, qt , is given by
qt =

mt
.
vt

(3)

Similarly, the probability an unemployed worker finds a job, st , is given by
st =

mt
.
ut

(4)

Both firms and workers take qt and st as given.
Finally, each firm exogenously separates from a fraction 1 − ρ of its workers each period, where
ρ is the probability a worker “survives” with the firm until the next period. Accordingly, within our
framework fluctuations in unemployment will be due to cyclical variation in hiring as opposed to
separations. Both Hall (2005b,c) and Shimer (2005a,b) argue that this characterization is consistent
with recent U.S. evidence.

5

2.2

Firms

Each period, firms produce output, yt (i) , using capital, kt (i) , and labor, nt (i) , according to the
following Cobb-Douglas technology:
yt (i) = at kt (i)α nt (i)1−α ,

(5)

where at is a common productivity factor. As we noted earlier, because we will have wage dispersion
across firms, we replace the standard assumption of fixed costs of posting a vacancy with quadratic
labor adjustment costs. For simplicity, we assume capital is perfectly mobile across firms and that
there is a competitive rental market in capital.
It is convenient to define the hiring rate, xt (i), as the ratio of new hires, qt vt (i) , to the existing
workforce, nt (i):
xt (i) =

qt vt (i)
.
nt (i)

(6)

Note that the firm knows the hiring rate with certainty at time t, since it knows that likelihood qt
that each vacancy it posts will be filled. The total workforce, in turn, is the sum of the number of
surviving workers, ρnt (i), and new hires, qt vt (i):
nt+1 (i) = ρnt (i) + qt vt (i) .

(7)

Let wt (i) be the the wage rate, zt the rental rate of capital, and βEt Λt,t+1 be the firm’s
discount rate, where the parameter β is the household’s subjective discount factor and where
Λt,t+1 = u0 (ct+1 )/u0 (ct ). Then given quadratic costs of adjusting the workforce, the value of the
firm Ft (i), may be expressed as:
κ
(8)
Ft (i) = yt (i) − wt (i) nt (i) − xt (i)2 nt (i) − zt kt (i) + βEt Λt,t+1 Ft+1 (i) .
2
At any time, the firm maximizes its value by choosing the hiring rate (by posting vacancies)
and its capital stock, given its existing employment stock, the probability of filling a vacancy, the
rental rate on capital and the current and expected path of wages. If it is a firm that is able to
renegotiate the wage, it bargains with its workforce over a new contract. If it is not renegotiating, it
takes as given the wage at the previous period’s level, as well the likelihood it will be renegotiating
in the future.
We next consider the firm’s hiring and capital rental decisions, and defer a bit the description
of the wage bargain. Let Jt (i) be the value to the firm of adding another worker at time t:
Jt (i) = (1 − α)

yt (i)
κ
− wt (i) + xt (i)2 + ρβEt Λt,t+1 Jt+1 (i) .
nt (i)
2

(9)

Then the first order condition for vacancy posting equates the marginal cost of adding a worker
with the discounted marginal benefit:
6

κxt (i) = βEt Λt,t+1 Jt+1 (i) .

(10)

In turn, the first order condition for capital is simply:
zt = α

yt
yt (i)
=α .
kt (i)
kt

(11)

With Cobb-Douglas production and perfectly mobile capital, output/capital ratios are equalized
across firms. It follows that capital/labor ratios and output/labor ratios are also equalized.
Let fnt denote the firm’s marginal product of labor at t (i.e., fnt = (1 − α)yt /nt ). Then,
combining equations yields the following forward looking diﬀerence equation for the hiring rate:
h
i
κ
(12)
κxt (i) = βEt Λt,t+1 fnt+1 − wt+1 (i) + xt+1 (i)2 + ρκxt+1 (i) .
2
The hiring rate thus depends on a discounted stream of the firm’s expected future surplus from the
marginal worker: the sum of net earnings at the margin, fnt+1 − wt+1 (i), and saving on adjustment
costs, κ2 xt+1 (i)2 .

2.3

Workers

In this sub-section we develop an expression for a worker’s surplus from employment, which becomes
a critical determinant of the outcome of the wage bargain.
Let Vt (i) be the value to a worker of employment at firm i and let Ut be the value of unemployment. Vt (i) is given by
Vt (i) = wt (i) + βEt Λt,t+1 [ρVt+1 (i) + (1 − ρ) Ut+1 ] .

(13)

Note that this value depends on the wage specific to firm i, wt (i), as well as the likelihood the
worker will remain employed in the subsequent period.
To construct the value of unemployment, we first define Vx,t as the average value of employment
conditional on being a new worker at t. The subscript x is meant to denote that we are averaging
Vt (i) across new workers, i.e., workers at t who were hired in period t − 1. Vx,t is given by
Vx,t =

Z

0

1

Vt (i)

xt−1 (i)nt−1 (i)
di,
xt−1 nt−1

(14)

where xt−1 (i)nt−1 (i) is total new workers at firm i at time t (i.e., hires from the previous period)
and xt−1 nt−1 is total new workers at t.5 Next, let b be the flow value from unemployment, taken
to be unemployment benefits. Then, Ut may be expressed as
U1
Vx,t is thus distinct from the unconditional average value of employment Vt = 0 Vt (i) nnt (i)
di. However, since in
t
the steady state hiring rates are identical across firms and employment shares are constant, Vx,t and Vt are identical in
the steady state and have similar dynamics outside the steady state, up to a first order approximation. The appendix
elaborates.
5

7

Ut = b + βEt Λt,t+1 [st Vx,t+1 + (1 − st ) Ut+1 ] ,

(15)

where, as before, st is the probability of finding a job for the subsequent period. The value of
unemployment thus depends on the current flow value b and the likelihood of being employed
versus unemployed next period. Note that the value of finding a job next period for a worker that
is currently unemployed is Vx,t+1 , the average value of working next period conditional on being a
new worker. That is, unemployed workers do not have a priori knowledge of which firms might be
paying higher wages next period. They instead just randomly flock to firms posting vacancies.6
The worker surplus at firm i, Ht (i), and the average worker surplus conditional on being a new
hire, Hx,t , are given by:
Ht (i) = Vt (i) − Ut ,

(16)

Hx,t = Vx,t − Ut .

(17)

Ht (i) = wt (i) − b + βEt Λt,t+1 [ρHt+1 (i) − st Hx,t+1 ] .

(18)

and
It follows that:

2.4

Consumption and Saving

Following Merz (1995) and others, we use the representative family construct, which gives rise to
perfect consumption insurance. In particular, the family has employed workers at all firms and
unemployed workers, representative of the population at large. The family pools their incomes
before choosing per capita consumption and asset holdings. In addition to wage income and unemployment income, the family has a diversified ownership stake in firms, which pay out profits
Πt . Finally, households may either consume ct , or save in the form of capital, which they rent
to firms at the rate zt . Let Ωt be the value function for the representative household. Then the
maximization problem may be expressed as
Ωt = max [log (ct ) + βEt Ωt+1 ]

(19)

ct + kt+1 = wt nt + (1 − nt ) b + (zt + 1 − δ) kt + Πt + Tt ,

(20)

{ct ,kt+1 }

subject to

6

There is accordingly no directed search. Note, however, that wage diﬀerentials across firms are only due to the
diﬀerential timing of contracts, which is transitory. Thus, because a worker who arrives at a firm in the midst of an
existing contract may expect a new one reasonably soon, the payoﬀ from directed search may not be large.

8

where Tt are transfers from the government.7
Let λt ≡ c−1
be the marginal utility of consumption. Then the first order necessary condition
t
for consumption/saving yields:
λt = βEt λt+1 (zt+1 + 1 − δ) .

2.5

(21)

Nash Bargaining and Wage Dynamics

We restrict the form of the wage contract to call for a fixed wage per period over an exogenously
given length of time. Though it would be undoubtedly preferable to completely endogenize the
contract structure, these restrictions are reasonable from an empirical standpoint. The payoﬀ will
be a simple empirically appealing wage equation that is an intuitive generalization of the standard
Nash bargaining outcome. In particular, given these restrictions on the form of the contract, workers
and firms determine the contract wage through Nash bargaining.
We introduce staggered multiperiod wage contracting in a way that simplifies aggregation. In
particular, each period a firm has a fixed probability 1 − λ that it may re-negotiate the wage.
This adjustment probability is independent of its history. Thus, while how long an individual wage
contract lasts is uncertain, the average duration is fixed at 1/(1 − λ). The coeﬃcient λ is thus a
measure of the degree of wage stickiness that can be calibrated to match the data.8 This simple
Poisson adjustment process, further, implies that it is not necessary to keep track of individual
firms’ wage histories, which makes aggregation simple. In the end, the model will deliver a simple
relation for the evolution of wages that is the product of Nash bargaining in conjunction with
staggered wage setting.
Firms that enter a new wage agreement at t negotiate with the existing workforce, including
the recent new hires. Due to constant returns, all workers are the same at the margin. The wage
is chosen so that the negotiating firm and the marginal worker share the surplus from the marginal
match. Given the symmetry to which we just alluded, all workers employed at the firm receive
the same newly-negotiated wage.9 When firms are not allowed to renegotiate the wage, all existing
and newly hired workers employed at the firm receive the wage paid the previous period.10 As we
discussed earlier, we appeal to scale economies in bargaining to rule out separate negotiations for
7

The government simply collects lump-sum taxes (negative transfers) and uses them to pay unemployment benefits.
This kind of Poisson adjustment process is widely used in macroeconomic models with staggered price setting,
beginning with Calvo (1983).
9
To be clear, with constant returns, one could either think of the firm bargaining with each marginal worker
individually or bargaining with a union that wishes to maximixe average worker surplus.
10
The only research we are aware of that studies the relation between the wages of existing employees and new
hires is Bewley (1999), who finds such a link. Other studies of the cyclical behavior of wages for new hires (e.g.
Bils, 1985) do not examine the link with existing workers wages (due to data limitations) and thus do not speak to
our hypothesis. We think that explaining the facts in these studies will require introducing heterogeneity into our
framework.
8

9

worker who arrive in between contracting periods.11 Of course, the newly hired workers recognize
that they will be able to re-negotiate wage at the next round of contracting. In the benchmark
case where the contract length corresponds to just one period, wage dynamics are just as in the
conventional model and behave counterfactually as recently argued.
Let wt∗ denote the wage of a firm that renegotiates at t. Given constant returns, all sets of
renegotiating firms and workers at time t face the same problem, and thus set the same wage. As
we noted earlier, the firm negotiates with the marginal worker over the surplus from the marginal
match. We assume Nash bargaining, which implies that the contract wage wt∗ is chosen to solve
max Ht (r)η Jt (r)1−η ,

(22)

where Ht (r) and Jt (r) are the values of J and H for renegotiating workers and firms.
Because the contract is multi-period, we need to take into account the impact of the contract
wage on the expected future path of firm and worker surplus. Let Wtf (r) denote the firm’s discounted sum of expected future wage payments over both the existing contract and subsequent
contracts and let Wth (r) be the corresponding value of the worker’s expected wage receipts. Note
that the two values will diﬀer in general because the firm has a longer horizon than the worker:
The firm cares about the impact of the current wage contract on payments not only to the existing
workforce, but also to new workers who enter under the terms of the existing contract. A worker,
on the other hand, only cares about wages during his or her tenure at the firm. Accordingly, let
Σt (r) be the firm’s cumulative discount factor and ∆t the worker’s cumulative discount factor.
Then:
Wtf (r) = Σt (r) wt∗ + (1 − λ) Et

∞ n
P
t+s
∗
(r)β s Λt,t+s Σt+s (r)wt+s
,
s=1 nt

Wtw (r) = ∆t wt∗ + (1 − λ) Et
with
Σt (r) = Et

∞
P

s=1

∗
(ρβ)s Λt,t+s ∆t+s wt+s
,

∞ n
P
t+s
(r) (λβ)s Λt,t+s ,
s=0 nt

∆t = Et

∞
P

(ρλβ)s Λt,t+s .

(23)
(24)

(25)
(26)

s=0

Observe that each term s in the firm’s cumulative discount factor depends on the expectation of
(r), the
the product of three factors: the employment size at firm t + s relative to time t, nnt+s
t
11

In addition to scale economies in bargaining, there are several complementary justifications for why hires in
between contracts receive the existing contract wage. First, as we noted earlier, Bewley (1999) argues that internal
equity constrains workers of similar productivity to receive similar wages. Second, Menzio and Moen (2006) show
how asymmetric information can link the wages of new and existing workers. Third, consistent with Hall (2005a),
one might interpret the existing contract wage as the “wage norm” for workers hired in between contracts.

10

probability the contract survives to t + s, λs , and the households’ discount factor, β s Λt,t+s . It is
similar for the worker, except the survival probability ρs replaces the relative employment size.
(r) exceeds ρs , the firm places relatively more weight on the future than does
Since on average nnt+s
t
the worker. This simply reflects that, unlike the worker, the firm cares about the implications of
the contract for new workers as well as existing ones.
The appendix shows that for renegotiating firms and workers we can write
Jt (r) = Et
and

h
i
∞ n
P
κ
t+s
(r)β s Λt,t+s fnt+s − xt+s (r)2 − Wtf (r) ,
2
s=0 nt

Ht (r) = Wtw (r) − Et

∞
P

(ρβ)s Λt,t+s [b + st+s βΛt+s,t+s+1 Hx,t+s+1 ] .

(27)

(28)

s=0

Equation (27) is obtained by combining the hiring rate condition with the expression for the shadow
value of a worker to the firm Jt (r) given by equation (9). Intuitively, given constant returns and
given the hiring rate is chosen optimally, the surplus of the marginal worker at t may be expressed
(r) enters the discount factor to adjust
as discounted profits per worker at t, where the term nnt+s
t
for relative changes in firm size in the future. In turn, the marginal worker’s surplus, Ht (r),
depends on the expected discounted value of wage payments, net the discounted sum of flow value of
unemployment, b, plus expected discounted surplus of moving from unemployment to employment,
st+s βΛt,t+s+1 Hx,t+s+1 .
The solution to the Nash bargaining problem, then, is
η∆t Jt (r) = (1 − η) Σt (r) Ht (r) ,

(29)

where ∆t = ∂Ht (r) /∂wt∗ is the eﬀect of a rise in the contract wage on worker surplus, while
Σt (r) = −∂Jt (r) /∂wt∗ is minus the eﬀect of a rise in the contract wage on firm surplus. Since on
average Σt (r) > ∆t , shifts in the contract wage have a larger impact in absolute value on firms
surplus than on worker surplus. This contrasts with the conventional case of period-by-period
bargaining, where the two eﬀects are of identical absolute values (since the future is irrelevant in
this case.)
It is possible to rewrite equation (29) as
χt (r) Jt (r) = (1 − χt (r)) Ht (r) ,
with
χt (r) =

η
.
η + (1 − η) Σt (r) /∆t

(30)
(31)

Equation (31) is a variation on the conventional sharing rule, where the relative weight χt (r)
depends not only on the worker’s bargaining power η, but also on the diﬀerential firm/worker
horizon, reflected by the term Σt (r) /∆t . Note that in the limiting case of λ = 0, Σt (r) /∆t = 1
and χt (r) = η, as in the conventional case of period-by-period wage bargaining. With λ > 0,
11

however, χt (r) is less than η on average (since Σt (r) /∆t exceeds unity on average). Intuitively,
since movements in the contract wage have a larger impact on discounted firm surplus than on
worker surplus, the “horizon eﬀect” works to raise the eﬀective bargaining power of firms from
1 − η to 1 − χt (r).12
As the appendix shows, combining equations yields the following first order forward looking
diﬀerence equation for the contract wage:
∗
,
∆t wt∗ = wto (r) + ρλβEt Λt,t+1 ∆t+1 wt+1

(32)

where the forcing variable wto (r) can be thought of as the “target” wage and is given by
´
³
κ
2
= χt (r) fnt + xt (r) + (1 − χt (r)) (b + st βEt Λt,t+1 Hx,t+1 ) .
(33)
2
Observe that the target wage has the same form as the wage that would emerge under period-byperiod Nash bargaining, though with an adjustment for the horizon eﬀect. In particular, it is a
convex combination of what a worker contributes to the match and what the worker loses by accepting a job, where the weights depend on the worker’s relative horizon-adjusted bargaining power
χt (r) . The worker’s contribution is the marginal product of labor plus the saving on adjustment
costs. With our quadratic cost formulation, this saving is measured by κ2 xt (r)2 . The foregone benefit from unemployment, in turn, is the flow value of unemployment, b, plus expected discounted
gain of moving from unemployment this period to employment next period, st βΛt,t+1 Hx,t+1 .
As in the conventional literature on time-dependent wage and price contracting (Taylor, 1980
and Calvo, 1983), the contract wage depends on an expected discounted sum of the target under
perfectly flexible adjustment, in this case wto (r) . Iterating equation (32) yields
wto (r)

wt∗ = Et
with
φt,t+s

∞
P

s=0

o
φt,t+s wt+s
(r)

(ρλβ)s Λt,t+s
P
=
s
Et ∞
s=0 (ρλβ) Λt,t+s

(34)

(35)

Observe that in the limiting case of period by period wage negotiations, i.e., when λ = 0, wt∗
converges to wto (r) .
A significant diﬀerence from the traditional literature on wage contracting, however, is that
spillover eﬀects emerge directly from the bargaining problem that have the contract wage depend
positively on the economy-wide average wage. As we show in section 3, these spillover eﬀects emerge
because the average wage aﬀects the two key determinants of the target wage, wto (r): the expected
discounted surplus of moving from unemployment to employment, st βΛt,t+1 Hx,t+1 , and the hiring
rate, xt (r) . Through both these channels, the spillover works to enhance wage rigidity.
12

We thank Larry Christiano for pointing out to us that in an earlier version of the paper we had not properly
taken into account the impact of the “horizon eﬀect” on the bargaining problem.

12

Finally, the average wage across workers is given by
Z 1
nt (i)
wt =
wt (i)
di
nt
0

(36)

Since the fraction of firms that re-negotiate contracts is a random draw across the population and
since all firms that renegotiate at t choose the same contract wage wt∗ , by the law of large numbers
we can express the wage index as
wt = (1 − λ)wt∗ + λ

Z

1

wt−1 (i)

0

nt (i)
di
nt

(37)

where 1 − λ is the fraction of firms who are re-negotiating and λ is the fraction who are not. The
average wage is thus a convex combination of the contract wage, wt∗ , and the average wage across
the population of firms that do not re-negotiate, given by the integral in the second term. As we
show below, up to a first order, this integral can be approximated by last period’s average wage,
wt−1 .13

2.6

Resource Constraint

We complete the model with the following resource constraint, which divides output between consumption, investment and adjustment costs:
κ
yt = ct + kt+1 − (1 − δ) kt +
2
This completes the description of the model.

3

Z

1

xt (i)2 nt (i)di.

(38)

0

Wage/Hiring Dynamics and Spillover Eﬀects

To gain some intuition for the model, we next derive loglinear equations for wages and hiring. In
doing so, we identify the spillover eﬀects that make the wage bargain sensitive to the average wage
in a way that works to enhance wage rigidity. We also clarify how the horizon eﬀect that emerges
because firms and workers weight the future diﬀerently aﬀects the bargaining outcome.
We begin by deriving an expression for the target wage, wto (r) , the forcing variable in the
diﬀerence equation for wages. Loglinearizing the target wage equation (33) gives
³
´
³
´
b t+1 + Λ
b t,t+1 + ϕχ χ
bt (r) + ϕs Et sbt + H
b t (r) ,
w
bto (r) = ϕf n fbnt + ϕx x

(39)

U1
Since each wt−1 (i) is weighted by nt (i)/nt and not nt−1 (i)/nt−1 , 0 wt−1 (i) nnt (i)
di is not quite identical to
t
wt−1 . However, given that the employment shares are constant in the steady state, the dynamics of this integral are
equivalent to the dynamics of wt−1 , up to a first order.
13

13

£
¤
where ϕf n = χfn w−1 , ϕx = χκx2 w−1 , ϕs = χsκxw−1 , ϕχ = χ fn + (κ/2) x2 − b − sβH w−1 .
Note that zb denotes the percent deviation of variable z from its steady state value and the coeﬃcients
are either parameters or steady state values of variables.14
The first two terms in parentheses in equation (39) reflect factors that move the target wage
in the case of conventional period-by-period bargaining. The first captures the variation in the
marginal worker’s contribution to firm value. The second captures the variation in the worker’s
forgone benefit from unemployment. In addition to these conventional factors, however, the target
wage is also influenced by the horizon eﬀect on bargaining that arises with multi-period contracting.
The horizon eﬀect influences w
bto (r) in two ways. First, movements in the conventional factors
that cause w
bto (r) to vary are multiplied by the steady state horizon-adjusted bargaining weight,
χ = η/[η + (1 − η)Σ/∆], as opposed to the pure weight η. As we noted in the previous section,
this adjustment in eﬀect raises the relative weight assigned to firms, leading to workers grabbing a
smaller share of the variation in the surplus. (Note χ < η). Second, the horizon adjusted bargaining
bto (r), as captured by the third term in
weight χt (r) may vary, leading to a direct influence on w
equation (39). Specifically, loglinearizing equations (25), (26) and (31), yields:
with

´
³
bt ,
b t (r) − ∆
χ
bt (r) = − (1 − χ) Σ

³
´
b t (r) = xλβb
b t+1 (r) ,
b t,t+1 + Σ
Σ
xt (r) + λβEt Λ
³
´
b t+1 .
b t = ρλβEt Λ
b t,t+1 + ∆
∆

(40)
(41)
(42)

In particular, χt (r) may vary due to relative movement in the firm and worker cumulative discount
b t (r) depends on the hiring rate x
bt (r), since the
factors, Σt (r) and ∆t , respectively. Note that Σ
latter influences the firm’s subsequent employment relative to current employment, one of the
determinants of its cumulative discount factor. (See equations (6), (7) and (25)).
Observe that as we move to the limiting case of flexible wages (λ = 0), the horizon eﬀect
disappears: χt (r) becomes a constant equal to η. The variation in the target wage then corresponds
to the conventional outcome for period-by-period Nash bargaining.
While the horizon eﬀect adds a new dimension to the bargaining problem, it is important to
stress that it is unlikely to be quantitatively important. As we show in the next section, given a
monthly job survival probability ρ that is consistent with the evidence, the diﬀerence between the
firm and worker cumulative discount factors is not suﬃciently large for the horizon eﬀect to have
a significant eﬀect on the outcome. In this instance, the steady state horizon-adjusted bargaining
weight χ does not diﬀer much from the primitive bargaining weight η. Nor does χt (r) vary much.
We next turn to analyzing the spillover eﬀect of market wages on the wage bargain. It turns out
that there is both a direct and indirect spillover eﬀect. The direct eﬀect arises because the worker’s
14

e x,t+1 = H
e t+1 , we drop the subscript x (see the appendix).
Since up to a first order approximation H

14

outside option depends on the wage he or she can expect to earn elsewhere. As the appendix
shows, by making use of the Nash bargaining condition at t + 1 and the period t vacancy posting
condition, the discounted surplus of moving from unemployment today to employment next period,
conditional on finding a job, may be expressed in loglinear form as
³
´
¡
¢
∗
b t,t+1 = x
b t+1 + Λ
bt + (1 − χ)−1 Et χ
bt+1 + ΓEt w
bt+1
bt+1 − w
,
(43)
Et H
where

Γ = (1 − xηΨ) η −1 Σw,

¡
¢
with Ψ = βλ2 / 1 − βλ2 , Σ = (1 − βλ)−1 , and = β (κx)−1 . Note that since the steady state
hiring rate x is a number close to zero, under any reasonable calibration, the slope coeﬃcient Γ is
positive.
³
´
b t,t+1 depends positively on the current hiring rate x
b t+1 + Λ
bt since the latter
Intuitively, Et H
varies positively with the expected marginal surplus from labor at t+1. It also depend positively on
a worker’s expected bargaining power next period Et χ
bt+1 . The spillover eﬀect, however, emerges
in the third term, which depends positively on the diﬀerence between the expected average market
∗ . If, everything else equal, E w
∗ ,
bt+1 and the contract wage Et w
bt+1
bt+1
wage Et w
t bt+1 exceeds Et w
opportunities are unusually good for workers expecting to move into employment next period, and
∗ . By influencing the worker’s outside option in this way, the
bt+1 is below Et w
bt+1
vice-versa if Et w
expected average market wage at t + 1 induces a direct spillover eﬀect on the wage bargain.
The indirect spillover emerges because the hiring rate of the renegotiating firm aﬀects the
bargaining outcome. It does so by influencing both the firm’s saving in adjustment costs and the
horizon-adjusted bargaining weight (because it aﬀects the firm’s cumulative discount factor.) The
bt depends positively on the diﬀerence
diﬀerence between hiring rate x
bt (r) and average hiring rate x
bt∗ :
between the average market wage w
bt and the contract wage w
x
bt (r) = x
bt + λ Σw (w
bt − w
bt∗ ) .

(44)

The dependency of the hiring rate on the wage gap thus introduces an indirect spillover of market
wages on the bargaining problem.
Let w
bto be the target wage absent the spillover eﬀects. Then combining equations (39), (43),
bto and the direct and indirect spillovers:
and (44), we can express w
bto (r) as the sum of w
with

bto +
w
bto (r) = w

¡
¢
τ1
τ2
∗
Et w
(w
bt − w
bt+1
bt∗ ) ,
bt+1 − w
+
1 − ρλβ
1 − ρλβ

w
bto = ϕf n fbnt + (ϕx + ϕs ) x
bt + ϕs sbt + ϕχ χ
b t + (1 − χ)−1 ϕs Et χ
bt+1 ,

and where τ 1 and τ 2 capture the direct and indirect spillovers, respectively

15

(45)

(46)

τ 1 = ϕs Γ (1 − ρλβ) ,
£
¤
τ 2 = ϕx λ − ϕχ (1 − χ) xΨ Σw (1 − ρλβ) .

(47)

bt+1 ),
Note that absent the adjustment for the horizon eﬀect on bargaining (captured by χ, χ
bt and Et χ
o
w
bt would be precisely the wage under period-by-period Nash bargaining. It is also worth emphasizing now that, given our calibration, the direct spillover eﬀect captured by τ 1 is quantitatively
more important than the indirect eﬀect captured by τ 2 . We report their values in the appendix.
Next, loglinearizing the equation for the contract wage and combining with the equation above
yields the contract wage as a first order forward looking diﬀerence equation, with the target wage
as the forcing variable:
∗
bto (r) + ρλβEt w
bt+1
.
(48)
w
bt∗ = (1 − ρλβ) w
The loglinearized wage index is in turn given by

bt∗ + λw
bt−1 .
w
bt = (1 − λ) w

(49)

bt−1 + γ w
bto + γ f Et w
bt+1 ,
w
bt = γ b w

(50)

Combining these equations along with the relation for w
bto (r) (equation (45)) then yields the
following second order diﬀerence equation which governs the evolution of the wage:
where

γ b = (1 + τ 2 ) φ−1
γ = ςφ
γf

(51)

−1

= (ρβ − τ 1 ) φ−1

φ = 1 + τ 2 + ς + ρβ − τ 1

ς = (1 − λ) (1 − ρλβ) λ−1

with γ b + γ + γ f = 1. Note the forcing variable in the diﬀerence equation is the “spillover free”
target wage w
bto (see equation (46)).
Due to staggered contracting, w
bt depends on the lagged wage w
bt−1 as well as the expected
bt+1 . Solving out for the reduced form of equation (50) will yield an expression
future wage Et w
that relates the wage to the lagged wage and a discounted stream of expected future values of w
bto .
Note that the spillover eﬀects, measured by τ 1 and τ 2 work to raise the relative importance of the
lagged wage (by raising γ b ) and reduce the importance of the expected future wage (by reducing
γ f ). In this way, the spillovers work to raise the inertia in the evolution of the wage. In this
respect, the spillover eﬀects work in a similar (though not identical) way as to how real relative
16

price rigidities enhance nominal price stickiness in monetary models with time-dependent pricing
(see, for example, Woodford, 2003).
Note also that as we converge to λ = 0 (the case of period by period wage bargaining), both γ b
and γ f go to zero), implying that w
bt simply tracks w
bto in this instance. Further, as we noted earlier,
w
bto , becomes identical to the wage in the flexible case. The model thus nests the conventional
period-by-period wage bargaining setup.
Finally, loglinearizing the diﬀerence equation for the hiring rate (12) and aggregating economywide yields:
b t,t+1 +
x
bt = Et Λ

³
´
fn fbnt+1 − wEt w
bt+1 + βEt x
bt+1 .

(52)

The hiring rate thus depends on current and expected movements of the marginal product of labor
relative to the wage. The stickiness in the wage due to staggered contracting, everything else equal,
implies that current and expected movement in the marginal product of labor will have a greater
impact on the hiring rate than would have been the case otherwise.
We defer to the appendix a complete presentation of the loglinear equations of the model.

4

Model Evaluation

4.1

Calibration

We choose a monthly calibration in order to properly capture the high rate of job finding in U.S.
data. Our parametrization is summarized in Table 1. There are ten parameters to which we need
to assign values. Four are conventional in the business cycle literature: the discount factor, β, the
depreciation rate, δ, the “share” parameter on capital in the Cobb-Douglas production function,
α, and the autoregressive parameter for the technology shock, ρa . We use conventional values for
1
1
all these parameters: β = 0.99 3 , δ = 0.025/3, α = 0.33, and ρa = 0.95 3 . Note in contrast to the
frictionless labor market model, the term 1 − α does not necessarily correspond to the labor share,
since the latter will in general depend on the outcome of the bargaining process. However, here we
simply follow convention by setting α = 0.33 to facilitate comparison with the RBC literature.15
15

Note that while 1 − α does not correspond to the labor share, α corresponds to the capital share.

17

Table 1: Values of parameters
Production function parameter
Discount factor
Capital depreciation rate
Technology autoregressive parameter
Survival rate
Elasticity of matches to unemployment
Job finding probability
Bargaining power parameter
Relative unemployment flow value
Renegotiation frequency

α
β
δ
ρa
ρ
σ
s
η
b
λ

0.33
0.997
0.008
0.983
0.965
0.5
0.45
0.5
0.4
0.889

There are an additional five parameters that are specific to the conventional search and matching
framework: the job survival rate, ρ, the matching function parameter, σ, the bargaining power
parameter, η, the steady state job finding probability, s, and the relative unemployment flow value,
b, equal to the ratio of the unemployment flow value, b, to the steady state flow contribution of the
worker to the match, fn + κ2 x2 . We choose the average monthly separation rate 1 − ρ based on the
observation that jobs last about two years and a half. Therefore, we set ρ = 1 − 0.035. We choose
the elasticity of matches to unemployment, σ, to be equal to 0.5, the midpoint of values typically
used in the literature.16 This choice is within the range of plausible values of 0.5 to 0.7 reported by
Petrongolo and Pissarides (2001) in their survey of the literature on the estimation of the matching
function. We then set s = 0.45 to match recent estimates of the U.S. average monthly job finding
rate (Shimer, 2005a).
To maintain comparability with much of the existing literature, we set the bargaining power
parameter η to be equal to 0.5.17 One of the few studies that provides direct estimates is Flinn
(2006), who finds a point estimates of 0.4, close to the value we use. An additional justification,
however, is that η = 0.5 implies a steady state labor share of 0.65, which is consistent with the
long run average of the labor share in the data. Finally, we note that η = 0.5 in conjunction with
σ = 0.5 ensures the eﬃciency of the equilibrium in the flexible version of the model (Hosios, 1990).
Perhaps most controversial is the choice of b. We follow much of the literature by assuming that
the value of non work activities is far below what workers produce on the job (see Hall, NBER
Macroannual, 2005, p. 121, for a brief discussion). In particular, we specifically follow Shimer
16

The values for σ used in the literature are: 0.24 in Hall (2005a), 0.4 in Blanchard and Diamond (1989), Andolfatto
(1994) and Merz (1995), 0.45 in Mortensen and Nagypal (2006), 0.5 in Hagedorn and Manovskii (2006), 0.5 in Farmer
(2004), 0.72 in Shimer (2005a). See also a brief discussion in Mortensen and Nagypal (2006), p. 10, comparing their
value of 0.45 to Shimer’s one.
17
In the literature the bargaining power has been typically set either to satisfy the Hosios (1990) condition or to
achieve symmetric Nash barganing (equally shared surplus). This has led most researchers to set values in the range
0.4 to 0.5. Shimer (2005a) uses the somewhat larger value of 0.72.

18

(2005a) and Hall (2005c) and set b = 0.4. Under the interpretation of b as unemployment benefits,
this parametrization implies a steady state replacement ratio of 0.42 (since the steady state ratio
of the wage to the worker’s contribution to the job is 0.956.)
We next observe that given the parameter values chosen so far, the steady state of the model
pins down both the adjustment cost parameter, κ, and the steady state values of the labor share,
the unemployment rate and the hiring rate (see the appendix.). Table 2 gives these values, along
with the steady state consumption and investment shares. Note that as we discussed in the previous section, the horizon adjusted bargaining parameter χ does not vary much from the primitive
parameter η (0.44 versus 0.50).
Table 2: Implied steady state values
Unemployment rate
Hiring rate
Horizon-adjusted bargaining power
Labor share
Investment/output ratio
Consumption/output ratio
Adjustment costs/output ratio

u
x
χ
ls
I
y
c
y
ac
y

0.07
0.035
0.44
0.65
0.24
0.75
0.01

Finally, there is one parameter that is specific to this model: the probability λ that a firm may
not renegotiate the wage. We pick λ to match the average frequency of wage contract negotiations.
While there is no systematic direct evidence on the frequency of wage negotiations, Taylor (1999)
argues that in most medium to large sized firms wages are typically adjusted once per year. He also
argues that this pattern characterizes union workers as well as non-union workers, including in the
latter workers who do not have formal employment contracts. In addition, based on microeconomic
data on hourly wages, Gottschalk (2005) concludes that wage adjustments are most common a
year after the last change. This evidence, of course applies primarily to base pay. There are,
however, other components such as bonuses that might be adjusted more frequently over the year,
though it is very unclear how important these adjustments might be in practice. Nonetheless, to be
conservative, for our baseline case we set λ = 1−1/9, implying that wage contracts are renegotiated
on average once every 3 quarters. We then consider the case of a 4 quarter average contract length
as a robustness exercise.

4.2

Results

We judge the model against quarterly U.S. data from 1964:1-2005:1. For series that are available
monthly, we take quarterly averages. Since the artificial series that the model generates are based
on a monthly calibration, we also take quarterly averages of this data.
19

Most of the data is from the BLS. All variables are measured in logs. Output y is production
in the non-farm business sector. The labor share ls and output per worker y/n are similarly from
the non-farm business sector. The wage w is average hourly earnings of production workers in
the private sector, deflated by the CPI. Employment n is all employees in the non-farm sector.
Unemployed u is civilian unemployment 16 years old and over. Vacancies v are based on the help
wanted advertising index from the Conference Board. Finally, the data are HP filtered with a
conventional smoothing weight.
We examine the behavior of the model taking the technology shock as the exogenous driving
force. To illustrate how the wage contracting process aﬀects model dynamics, we first examine
the impulse responses of the model economy to a unit increase in total factor productivity. The
solid line in each panel of Figure 1 illustrates the response of the respective variable for our model.
For comparison, the dotted line reports the response of the conventional flexible wage model with
period-by-period Nash bargaining (obtained by setting λ = 0).
Observe that in the conventional case with period-by-period wage adjustment, the response of
employment is relatively modest, confirming the arguments of Hall and Shimer. There is also only
a modest response of other indicators of labor market activity, such as vacancies, v, unemployment
u, labor market tightness, θ = v/u, and the hiring rate x. Wages, by contrast, adjust quickly.
The resulting small adjustment of employment leads to output dynamics that closely mimic the
technology shock.
By contrast, in the model with staggered multiperiod contracting, the hiring rate jumps sharply
in the wake of the technology shock along with the measures of labor market activity. A substantial
rise in employment follows, certainly as compared to the conventional flexible wage case. Associated
with the rise in employment, is a smooth drawn out adjustment in wages, directly a product of
the staggered multiperiod contracting. The lagged rise in employment leads to a humped shaped
response of output, i.e., output continues to rise for several periods before reverting to trend, in
contrast to the technology shock which reverts immediately.
We next explore how well the model economy is able to account the overall volatility in the
data. Table 3 reports the standard deviation, autocorrelation, and contemporaneous correlation
with output for the nine key variables in the U.S. economy and in the model economy. The standard
deviations are normalized relative to output.
Overall the model economy for the baseline case (3 quarters) appears to capture well most of
the basic features of the data. It comes reasonably close to capturing the relative volatilities and
co-movements of the key indicators of labor market activity, including unemployment u, vacancies v
and the tightness measure θ. These were the variables emphasized in the Hall/Shimer analysis. The
model only captures about sixty percent of the relative volatility of employment. However, here it is
important to keep in mind that the framework abstracts from labor force participation, a non-trivial
source of cyclical employment volatility. (We also emphasize that perhaps for this consideration,
the papers in literature typically avoid reporting statistics on employment volatility.)

20

Table 3: Aggregate Statistics
y

Relative Standard Deviation
Autocorrelation
Correlation with y

Relative Standard Deviation
Autocorrelation
Correlation with y

Relative Standard Deviation
Autocorrelation
Correlation with y

w

ls

n

u

v

θ

y/n

1.00
0.87
1.00

US Economy, 1964:1-2005:01
0.52 0.51 0.60 5.15 6.30
0.91 0.73 0.94 0.91 0.91
0.56 −0.20 0.78 −0.86 0.91

11.28
0.91
0.90

0.61
0.79
0.71

1.00
0.84
1.00

Model Economy, λ → 3Q
0.56 0.57 0.35 4.46 5.83
0.95 0.65 0.90 0.90 0.83
0.66 −0.56 0.77 −0.77 0.91

9.88
0.88
0.94

0.71
0.76
0.97

1.00
0.85
1.00

Model Economy, λ → 4Q
0.47 0.58 0.44 5.66 7.25
0.96 0.68 0.91 0.91 0.86
0.56 −0.59 0.78 −0.78 0.94

12.47
0.90
0.95

0.64
0.74
0.95

A distinguishing feature of our analysis is that we appear to capture wage dynamics. Note that
we come very close to matching the relative volatility of wages (0.56 versus 0.52 in the data), their
autocorrelation (0.95 versus 0.91 in the data) and the contemporaneous correlation of wages with
output (0.66 versus 0.56 in the data).
As we noted earlier, we assumed three quarter average length wage contracts for our baseline
case to error on the side of caution, even though the evidence suggests that the modal period of
wage adjustments is one year. In the bottom panel of Table 3 we also report statistics based on four
quarter average length wage contracts. Interestingly, the performance of the model improves overall.
Not surprising, the enhanced wage rigidity raises the volatilities of the labor market variables. In the
end, the model tracks the relative volatilities and co-movements of the key labor market variables,
u, v, and θ as well as in the baseline case. The model, however, is also now able to capture nearly
three quarters of the relative volatility of employment.
We next consider several variations of the model designed to illustrate what features are important. First, as we also discussed earlier, the inertia in wage dynamics is not simply a product
of staggered multi-period contracting, but also of the spillover eﬀect of economy-wide wages on
the individual wage bargain that arises in this kind of environment. To quantify the importance
of these spillovers for model dynamics, we simulate the model eliminating the spillover eﬀects on
wage dynamics. In particular, we set equal to zero the parameters τ 1 and τ 2 , which govern the
magnitude of the spillover eﬀect, in equations (50) and (51).
21

Table 4: The Spillover Eﬀect and Other Robustness Exercises
Relative Standard Deviations
ls
n
u
v
θ

y

w

y/n

Model Economy

1.00

0.56

0.57

0.35

4.46

5.83

9.88

0.71

Model Economy - No Spillover

1.00

0.70

0.48

0.18

2.35

3.18

5.25

0.84

Model Economy - Flexible Wages

1.00

0.88

0.09

0.10

1.25

1.58

2.74

0.93

Flexible Wages - Standard Hiring Costs

1.00

0.93

0.02

0.06

0.72

1.01

1.63

0.95

Model Economy - No Horizon Eﬀect

1.00

0.53

0.53

0.39

5.13

6.70

11.37

0.67

Table 4 reports the results. As the table makes clear, eliminating the spillovers significantly
enhances wage flexibility and reduces employment volatility. When the spillovers are removed, the
relative volatility of wages jumps nearly fifty percent, from 0.56 to 0.70 . Conversely, the relative
volatility of employment is reduced roughly in half, from 0.35 to 0.18. The other measures of labor
activity u, v and θ similarly fall by about half. Overall, the spillovers are responsible for about
a half of the added rigidity in wages relative to the flexible benchmark model and for about two
thirds of the added volatility in the labor market. Thus, the wage inertia and resulting employment
dynamics in our model are not only a product of staggered multiperiod wage contracting, but also
of the spillover eﬀects from the Nash bargaining process.
The next two rows of the table makes clear that our assumption of quadratic adjustment costs
is not responsible for the ability of our baseline model to account for the key moments of the data.
The model with flexible wages and quadratic adjustment costs performs about as poorly as the
conventional formulation with proportional hiring costs. It is thus the presence of staggered wage
contracting in conjunction with the spillover eﬀects that account for the results in Table 3.
The last row of Table 4 presents information on the importance of the horizon eﬀect on the
wage bargain. The row presents the model statistics for our baseline case, but with the horizon
eﬀect shut oﬀ (i.e., χt (r) fixed at η). The relative volatilities remain close to those arising in the
baseline case. Thus, as we conjectured, the horizon eﬀect is not that important quantitatively.
Finally, it is interesting to compare our analysis with Hagedorn and Manovskii (HM, 2006).
They find from micro data that the wage elasticity with respect to labor productivity is 0.47. As
we noted earlier, they choose parameters to have the model match this elasticity. To do so, they
require a very low value of η, the bargaining power of workers, and a very high value of b, the relative
steady state flow value of unemployment, as compared to what is conventional in the literature. In
22

particular, they require η very close to zero, well below the conventionally used value of 0.5, as well
as Flinn’s (2006) estimate of 0.4. In addition they require b close to unity, well above Shimer (2005a)
and Hall’s (2005c) preferred value of 0.4. A value of b close to unity, of course implies that workers
are nearly indiﬀerent between employment and unemployment. The overall calibration eﬀectively
makes labor supply highly elastic, enabling the model to have large employment movements with
moderate wage adjustments. Nonetheless, while the HM framework is able to account for labor
market volatility, the resulting calibration is not without controversy.18
Interestingly, we find from our macro data that the wage elasticity with respect to labor productivity is 0.53, which is very close to the estimate that the authors obtained from micro evidence.
However, as we suggested earlier, we stick with conventional values of η and b, and instead introduce
wage sluggishness by appealing to staggered multi-period contracts. Further, as opposed to picking
parameters to match the wage elasticity, we calibrate the average duration of wages contracts to
match the evidence. We then ask how well the model explains the wage elasticity (along with other
volatilities.) It turns out the model does very well on this accounting, generating a wage elasticity
of 0.50, nearly identical to what our data suggests.
In addition, as we observed in Table 3, our model does well at explaining the overall cyclical volatility of wages, including the co-movement with aggregate activity as well as the relative
volatility. On the other hand, the HM model does not do well on this dimension, even though it is
calibrated to match the wage elasticity with respect to productivity. How can this be? Note that
since this elasticity, el(w, p), is eﬀectively a regression coeﬃcient from the regression of log wages
on log productivity it equals the product of the correlation corr(w, p) and the relative standard
deviations σ w /σ p . Since the HM calibration only fixes the product of these two moments, it needs
not do well at matching them individually. This turns out to be the case, as we show next.
Table 5 compares values of el(w, p), corr(w, p) and σ w /σ p against U.S. data for three models:
the conventional Mortensen and Pissarides model (with capital), the framework based on the HM
calibration, and our baseline model with staggered wage contracting (GT). While the HM model
captures el(w, p) by construction, it misses badly on the other two moments. The correlation
between wages and productivity is too high (unity versus 0.62 in the data) while the relative
volatility of wages is too low (0.49 versus 0.85). The former outcome is due to the period by
period Nash bargaining that ties aggregate wage movements to current period productivity. The
latter result arises from the low bargaining power of workers which forces their wages close to
their reservation values. Thus while the HM model by construction matches el(w, p), it does so by
inducing oﬀsetting errors in corr(w, p) and σ w /σ p .
18

In addition to having values of η and b that are at variance with the literature, Hornstein, Krusell and Violante
(2005) note that the HM calibration implies suspiciously large employment eﬀects from changes in unemployment
insurance.

23

Table 5: Wages and Labor Share Statistics

U.S. data
MP baseline
HM
GT

el(w, p)
0.53
0.98
0.49
0.50

corr(w, p)
0.62
1.00
1.00
0.62

σ w /σ p
0.85
0.98
0.49
0.80

U.S. data
MP baseline
HM
GT

el(ls, p)
-0.50
-0.02
-0.51
-0.51

corr(ls, p)
-0.60
-0.96
-1.00
-0.64

σ ls /σ p
0.83
0.02
0.51
0.80

By contrast, our model does well at matching not only the wage elasticity but also the correlation
of wages and productivity, as well as the relative volatility. The staggered contract structure works
to dampen the correlation between productivity and wages. At the same time, because workers
have more bargaining power than in the HM calibration, wages are more sensitive to productivity
movements, permitting the model to match the data. Again, we stress that our model is calibrated
to match the average duration of contract lengths. It is therefore not by construction that we match
the wage elasticity, in contrast to HM.
Finally, the bottom part of Table 5 shows that similar conclusions apply for the volatility of the
labor share. While the HM model does not explain all the relevant moments well, our framework
does.

5

Bargaining Set

A key maintained hypothesis in our analysis is that workers and firms can expect that they will not
want to voluntarily dissipate their relationship over the life of their relationship. This assumption
simplifies how both parties form expectations when they enter relationships. Here we demonstrate
that this condition holds to a reasonable approximation. Put diﬀerently, under our parametrization,
wages have a negligible probability of falling outside the bargaining set. Intuitively, given our
Poisson process for contract adjustment, only a very small fraction of contracts will have a duration
suﬃciently long for the wage to move out of the bargaining set.19
19

Note that we could have instead employed a “truncated” Poisson process where the probability of renegotiation
is Poisson for N periods and then unity for any contract that has lasted N periods. Assuming N is not too large say 40 months (see below) - then we could guarantee firms never go out of the bargaining set with certainty. Given

24

Note first that the lower and upper limits of the bargaining set are given by, respectively, the
reservation wage of the marginal worker and the reservation wage of the firm20 . These limits
will depend on the time elapsed since the firm has last negotiated a contract, denoted by τ . The
appendix derives loglinear expressions for the worker reservation wage, denoted Rtw (τ ), and the firm
reservation wage, denoted Rtf (τ ) . Given these expressions we can then check whether a contract
wage set τ periods earlier, wt∗ (τ ), lies within the bargaining set, i.e., whether, Rtw (τ ) < wt∗ (τ ) <
Rtf (τ ) .
We emphasize first that for the typical firm in the midst of a contract, the bargaining set is quite
wide. Figure 2 displays a time series of the bargaining set (based on artificial time series generated
by the model), for firms on a contract that has been in place for three quarters, the average length.
Note that the contract lies safely within the bargaining set throughout the time series.21
It is possible, however, that a small fraction of firms could stay on contracts well beyond the
average length. Thus, we need to determine a threshold value for contract duration τ , where the
contract wage still remains in the bargaining set. Note that the probability that a contract will last
more than τ periods is given by the per period probability the contract will not be renegotiated,
λ, raised to the τ power, i.e., λτ . Given the law of large numbers, this will also correspond to
the percentage of existing contracts that have lasted more than τ periods. This percentage thus
declines exponentially with τ .
We pick a threshold value for τ such that the fraction of contracts outstanding that have lasted
more than τ periods is 0.0089 (a number less than one percent). We then check for the ninety nine
percent plus of contracts that have lasted τ periods or less, whether the contract wage remains in
the bargaining set. If this is the case, then we argue that violations of our maintained hypothesis
are negligible from a quantitative standpoint.
Specifically, we set τ to satisfy λτ = (1 − 1/9)τ = 0.0089, which leads to a value τ equal to
40 (months). We then generate artificial times series from our model and ask whether the wage
lies within the bargaining set for contracts of duration 40 months or less. Figure 3 displays the
results. For our cutoﬀ, the wage is always in the bargaining set. We therefore conclude that for
99.11 percent of firms this condition is satisfied.
While the wage lies safely within the bargaining set for firms on contracts that have lasted
three quarters, for (the small fraction of) firms that have been for 40 months, the boundaries
of the bargaining set vary much closer to the wage. What this suggests is that if one wishes to
add idiosyncratic shocks, it may be necessary to alter the simple binomial process for contract
adjustment, where a small fraction of firms can remain indefinitely on the contract, by imposing a
terminal length that any contract can survive.
our calibration, however, the truncated Poisson generated results nearly identical to what our simple Poisson process
gives. The gain from using the simple process is that the algebra stays simple.
20
Note that all workers with the firm will have the same reservation wage, regardless of whether they are new or
old.
21
Note that in figures 2 and 3 wages are plot in levels.

25

6

Concluding Remarks

We have modified the Mortensen and Pissarides model of unemployment dynamics to allow for
staggered multiperiod wage contracting. What emerges is a tractable relation for wage dynamics
that is a natural generalization of the period-by-period Nash bargaining outcome in the conventional
formulation. An interesting side-product is the emergence of spillover eﬀects of aggregate wages
that influence the bargaining process. We then show that a reasonable calibration of the model
can account reasonably well for the cyclical behavior of wages and labor market activity observed
in the data. The spillover eﬀects turn out to be important in this respect.
As we noted earlier, in addition to the presence of the spillover eﬀects, another important
diﬀerence from existing macroeconomic models that rely on staggered multiperiod wage setting (e.g.
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), Smets and Wouters (2003)) is that in our framework
wages aﬀect the adjustment of employment along the extensive margin, as opposed to the intensive
margin. As Hall has recently emphasized, for adjustment on the intensive margin, wages may not be
allocational, as originally argued by Barro (1977). The same criticism, however, does not apply to
adjustment on the extensive margin. For this reason it may be interesting to consider our approach
with employment adjustment along the extensive margin as a way to shore up a potential weakness
of these conventional macroeconomic models. Trigari (2004) and Walsh (2005), for example, have
integrated the search and matching framework within a monetary model that has many of the same
features as these models, including nominal price stickiness. In their framework, though, there is
period-by-period wage bargaining. We think it may be straightforward to extend their analysis by
incorporating our model of staggered wage contracting. We expect that doing so will improve the
overall empirical performance.

26

References
[1] Andolfatto, David (1996). “Business Cycles and Labor Market Search,” American Economic
Review 86, 112-132.
[2] Barro, Robert (1977). “Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 3 (3), 305-316.
[3] Bewley, Truman (1999). “Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession,” Harvard University
Press.
[4] Bils, Mark (1985), “Real Wages Over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data,” Journal
of Political Economy 93 (4), 666-689.
[5] Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein and Asher Wolinsky (1986). “The Nash Bargaining Solution
in Economic Modelling,” Rand Journal of Economics 17, 176-188.
[6] Blanchard, Olivier and Peter Diamond (1989). “The Beveridge Curve,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1, 1-60.
[7] Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Katz (1999). “Wage Dynamics: Reconciling Theory and
Evidence,” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), 69-74.
[8] Calvo, Guillermo (1983). "Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework," Journal of
Monetary Economics 12, 383-398.
[9] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum and Charles Evans (2005). “Nominal Rigidities and
the Dynamics Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy 113 (1),
1-45.
[10] Cole, Harold and Richard Rogerson (1999). “Can the Mortensen-Pissarides Model Match the
Business Cycle Facts?,” International Economic Review 40, 933-960.
[11] Costain, James and Michael Reiter (2003). “Business Cycles, Unemployment Insurance and
the Calibration of Matching Models,” CESifo Working Paper No.1008.
[12] Farmer, Roger (2004). “Shooting the Auctioneer,” mimeo, UCLA.
[13] Flinn, Christopher (2006). “Minimum Wage Eﬀects on Labor Market Outcomes under Search,
Bargaining and Endogenous Contact Rates,” Econometrica 74, 1013-1062.
[14] Gottschalk, Peter (2005). “Downward Nominal Wage Flexibility: Real or Measurement Error?,” Review of Economics and Statistics 87(3), 556-568.

27

[15] Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii (2006). “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
[16] Hall, Robert (2006). “The Labor Market and Macro Volatility: A Nonstationary General
Equilibrium Analysis,” mimeo, Stanford University.
[17] Hall, Robert (2005a). “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” American Economic Review, 95 (1), 50-65.
[18] Hall, Robert (2005b). “Employment Eﬃciency and Sticky Wages: Evidence from Flows in the
Labor Market,” Review of Economics and Statistics 87(3), 397-407.
[19] Hall, Robert (2005c). “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy over
the Past Fifty Years,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, M. Gertler and K. Rogoﬀ editors, MIT
Press, 101-137.
[20] Hornstein, Andreas, Per Krusell and Gianluca Violante (2005). “Unemployment and Vacancy
Fluctuations in the Matching Model: Inspecting the Mechanism,” Economic Quarterly (Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond) 91(3), 19-51.
[21] Hosios, Arthur (1990). “On the Eﬃciency of Matching and Related Models of Search and
Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies 57(2), 279-298.
[22] Kennan, John (2006). “Private Information, Wage Bargaining and Employment Fluctuations,”
NBER Woorking Paper No. 11967.
[23] Kimball, Miles (1995). “The Quantitative Analytics of The Basic Neomonetarist Model,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 27(4-2), 1241-1289.
[24] Krause, Michael and Thomas Lubik (2005). “The Cyclical Upgrading of Labor and On-the-Job
Search,” mimeo, Johns Hopkins University.
[25] Menzio, Guido (2005). “High Frequency Wage Rigidity,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
[26] Menzio, Guido and Espen Moen (2006), “Incomplete Self-Enforcing Labor Contracts,” mimeo,
University of Pennsylvania.
[27] Merz, Monika (1995). “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 36, 269-300.
[28] Mortensen, Dale and Eva Nagypal (2006). “More on Unemployment and Vacancy Fluctuations,” mimeo, Northwestern University.
[29] Mortensen, Dale and Christopher Pissarides (1994). “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies 61, 397-415.
28

[30] Petrongolo, Barbara and Christopher Pissarides (2001). “Looking into the Black Box: A Survey
of the Matching Function,” Journal of Economic Literature 39(2), 390-431.
[31] Pissarides, Christopher (1985). “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies and Real Wages,” American Economic Review 75 (4), 676-690.
[32] Pissarides, Christopher (2000). Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, The MIT Press.
[33] Rotemberg, Julio (2006). “Cyclical Wages in a Search-and-Bargaining Model with Large
Firms,” mimeo, HBS.
[34] Shimer, Robert (2005a). “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment, Vacancies,
and Wages: Evidence and Theory,” American Economic Review 95 (1), 25-49.
[35] Shimer, Robert (2005b). “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment,” mimeo, University
of Chicago.
[36] Shimer, Robert (2004). “The Consequences of Rigid Wages in Search Models,” Journal of the
European Economic Association (Papers and Proceedings) 2, 469-479.
[37] Shimer, Robert and Randall Wright. (2004), “Competitive Search Equilibrium with Asymmetric Information,” mimeo.
[38] Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters (2003). “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (5), 527-549.
[39] Stole, Lars and Jeﬀrey Zwiebel (1996). “Intrafirm Bargaining under Non-Binding Contracts,”
Review of Economic Studies 63, 375-410.
[40] Taylor, John B. (1980). “Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,” Journal of Political
Economy 88, 1-23.
[41] Trigari, Antonella, (2004). “Equilibrium Unemployment, Job Flows and Inflation Dynamics,”
ECB WP 304.
[42] Taylor, John B. (1999). “Staggered Price and Wage Setting in Macroeconomics,” Handbook of
Macroeconomics, Volume 1, J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford editors, Elsevier.
[43] Yashiv, Eran (2005). “Forward-Looking Hiring Behavior and the Dynamics of the Aggregate
Labor Market,” mimeo, Tel Aviv University.
[44] Walsh, Carl (2005). “Labor Market Search, Sticky Prices and Interest Rate Rules,” Review of
Economic Dynamics 8, 829-849.
[45] Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices, Princeton University Press.
29

APPENDIX A
A1. Sum of expected future wages for a worker at a firm renegotiating at t, Wtw (r)
• Let Wtw (r) denote the discounted sum of expected future wages to be received by a worker
over the life of the relationship at a firm renegotiating at t:
Wtw (r) = Et

∞
P

(ρβ)s Λt,t+s wt+s (r)

s=0

= wt (r) + (ρβ) Et Λt,t+1 wt+1 (r) + (ρβ)2 Et Λt,t+2 wt+2 (r) + ...
• At a firm renegotiating at time t, the current and future expected wages are given by:
wt (r) = wt∗
∗
Et wt+1 (r) = λwt∗ + (1 − λ) Et wt+1

£
¤
∗
∗
Et wt+2 (r) = λ λwt∗ + (1 − λ) Et wt+1
+ (1 − λ) Et wt+2
∗
∗
= λ2 wt∗ + λ (1 − λ) Et wt+1
+ (1 − λ) Et wt+2

and so on....
• Using these expressions, we can write:
Wtw (r) = wt∗

£
¤
∗
+ (ρβ) Et Λt,t+1 λwt∗ + (1 − λ) wt+1
£
¤
∗
∗
+ (1 − λ) wt+2
+ (ρβ)2 Et Λt,t+2 λ2 wt∗ + λ (1 − λ) wt+1
+...

• Collecting terms:

h
i
Wtw (r) = Et 1 + (ρλβ) Λt,t+1 + (ρβλ)2 Λt,t+2 + ... wt∗
h
i
∗
+ (1 − λ) (ρβ) Et Λt,t+1 1 + (ρλβ) Λt+1,t+2 + (ρλβ)2 Λt+1,t+3 + ... wt+1
h
i
∗
+ (1 − λ) (ρβ)2 Et Λt,t+2 1 + (ρλβ) Λt+2,t+3 + (ρλβ)2 Λt+2,t+4 + ... wt+2
+...

• Letting

∆t = Et

∞
P

s=0

30

(ρλβ)s Λt,t+s

we have
Wtw (r) = ∆t wt∗
∗
+ (1 − λ) (ρβ) Et Λt,t+1 ∆t+1 wt+1

∗
+ (1 − λ) (ρβ)2 Et Λt,t+2 ∆t+2 wt+2

+...
• Finally, rearranging:

Wtw (r) = ∆t wt∗ + (1 − λ) Et

∞
P

s=1

∗
(ρβ)s Λt,t+s ∆t+s wt+s

A2. Sum of expected future wages for a firm renegotiating at t, Wtf (r)
• Let Wtf (r) denote the discounted sum of expected future wage payments by a firm renegotiating at t over both the existing contract and subsequent contracts:
∞ n
P
t+s
(r) β s Λt,t+s wt+s (r)
s=0 nt
nt+1
nt+2
= wt (r) + Et
(r) βΛt,t+1 wt+1 (r) + Et
(r) β 2 Λt,t+2 wt+2 (r) + ...
nt
nt

Wtf (r) = Et

• Using the expressions for the future expected wages, we can write:
Wtf (r) = wt∗

£
¤
nt+1
∗
(r) βΛt,t+1 λwt∗ + (1 − λ) wt+1
nt
£
¤
nt+2
∗
∗
(r) β 2 Λt,t+2 λ2 wt∗ + λ (1 − λ) wt+1
+ (1 − λ) wt+2
+Et
nt
+...
+Et

• Collecting terms:

¸
∙
nt+2
nt+1
Wtf (r) = Et 1 +
(r) (λβ) Λt,t+1 +
(r) (λβ)2 Λt,t+2 + ... wt∗
nt
nt
¸
∙
nt+1
nt+2
∗
+ (1 − λ) Et
(r) βΛt,t+1 1 +
(r) (λβ) Λt+1,t+2 + ... wt+1
nt
nt+1
∙
¸
nt+2
nt+3
∗
+ (1 − λ) Et
(r) β 2 Λt,t+2 1 +
(r) (λβ) Λt+2,t+3 + ... wt+2
nt
nt+2
+...

31

• Letting

Σt (r) = Et

we have

∞ n
P
t+s
(r) (λβ)s Λt,t+s
n
t
s=0

Wtf (r) = Σt (r) wt∗

nt+1
∗
(r) βΛt,t+1 Σt+1 (r) wt+1
nt
nt+2
∗
+ (1 − λ) Et
(r) β 2 Λt,t+2 Σt+2 (r) wt+2
nt
+...
+ (1 − λ) Et

• Finally, rearranging
Wtf (r) = Σt (r) wt∗ + (1 − λ) Et

∞ n
P
t+s
∗
(r) β s Λt,t+s Σt+s wt+s
s=1 nt

A3. Worker surplus at a firm renegotiating at t, Ht (r)
• The worker surplus at a firm renegotiating at t is
Ht (r) = wt (r) − b + ρβEt Λt,t+1 Ht+1 (r) − st βEt Λt,t+1 Hx,t+1
∞
P
= Wtw (r) − Et
(ρβ)s Λt,t+s [b + st+s βΛt+s,t+s+1 Hx,t+s+1 ]
s=0

• Substituting the expression for Wtw (r), we get
∞
P

(ρβ)s Λt,t+s [b + st+s βΛt+s,t+s+1 Hx,t+s+1
s=0
¤
∗
− (1 − λ) (ρβ) Λt+s,t+s+1 ∆t+s+1 wt+s+1

Ht (r) = ∆t wt∗ − Et

A4. Firm marginal surplus for a firm renegotiating at t, Jt (r)
• The value of a marginal worker for a firm renegotiating at t is
κ
xt (r)2 + ρβEt Λt,t+1 Jt+1 (r)
2
h
i
∞
P
κ
s
= Et
(ρβ) Λt,t+s fnt+s + xt+s (r)2 − Wtw (r)
2
s=0

Jt (r) = fnt − wt (r) +

32

• Substituting the expression for Wtw (r), we get
h
i
∞
P
κ
∗
−∆t wt∗
Jt (r) = Et
(ρβ)s Λt,t+s fnt+s + xt+s (r)2 − (1 − λ) (ρβ) Λt+s,t+s+1 ∆t+s+1 wt+s+1
2
s=0
• Using the vacancy posting condition, the value of a marginal worker can similarly be expressed
as discounted profits per worker:
κ
Jt (r) = fnt − wt (r) − xt (r)2 + [ρ + xt (r)] βEt Λt,t+1 Jt+1 (r)
2
κ
nt+1
(r) βEt Λt,t+1 Jt+1 (r)
= fnt − wt (r) − xt (r)2 +
2
nt
h
i
∞ n
P
κ
t+s
= Et
(r) β s Λt,t+s fnt+s − xt+s (r)2 − Wtf (r)
2
s=0 nt
A5. The contract wage
• The Nash first-order condition is
χt (r) Jt (r) = (1 − χt (r)) Ht (r)
with
χt (r) =

η
η + (1 − η) Σt (r) /∆t

• Substituting Jt (r) and Ht (r) and rearranging, we obtain:
³
h
´ ¡
∞
¢
P
κ
∆t wt∗ = Et
(ρβ)s Λt,t+s χt+s (r) fnt+s + xt+s (r)2 + 1 − χt+s (r) (b + st+s βΛt+s,t+s+1 Hx,t+s+
2
s=0
¤
∗
− (1 − λ) ρβΛt+s,t+s+1 ∆t+s+1 wt+s+1
• The above equation can be written in a recursive form in the following way:
´
³
κ
∆t wt∗ = χt (r) fnt + xt (r)2 + (1 − χt (r)) (b + st βEt Λt,t+1 Hx,t+1 )
2
∗
∗
− (1 − λ) ρβEt Λt,t+1 ∆t+1 wt+1
+ ρβEt Λt,t+1 ∆t+1 wt+1

• Simplifying, we obtain
∗
∆t wt∗ = wto (r) + ρλβEt Λt,t+1 ∆t+1 wt+1

with wto (r) denoting the target wage:
³
´
κ
wto (r) = χt (r) fnt + xt (r)2 + (1 − χt (r)) (b + st βEt Λt,t+1 Hx,t+1 )
2

33

A6. The loglinearized target wage
• Let Vt be the unconditional average value of employment at t and Vx,t the average value of
employment at t conditional on being a new hire:
Z 1
nt (i)
Vt (i)
di
Vt =
nt
0
Z 1
xt−1 (i)nt−1 (i)
Vt (i)
di
Vx,t =
xt−1 nt−1
0
Note that Vt and Vx,t are identical up to a first order approximation:
Vbt = Vbx,t

This implies that Ht = Vt − Ut and Hx,t = Vx,t − Ut are also identical up to a first order:
b x,t
bt = H
H

• Loglinearizing the target wage then yields
h
i
h
i
b t+1 + Λ
b t,t+1 + ϕχ χ
bt (r) + ϕs Et sbt + H
bt (r)
w
bto (r) = ϕf n fbnt + ϕx x
where

£
¤
ϕf n = χfn w−1 ϕx = χκx2 w−1 ϕs = χsκxw−1 ϕχ = χ fn + (κ/2) x2 − b − sβH w−1

• Finally, the weight in the target wage is
χt (r) =

η
η + (1 − η) Σt (r) /∆t

with
∆t = 1 + ρλβEt Λt,t+1 ∆t+1
Σt (r) = 1 + [ρ + xt (r)] (λβ) Et Λt,t+1 Σt+1 (r)
Loglinearizing yields
with

³
´
b t (r) − ∆
bt
χ
bt (r) = − (1 − χ) Σ

³
´
b t+1
b t = ρλβEt Λ
b t,t+1 + ∆
∆
³
´
b t+1 (r)
b t (r) = xλβb
b t,t+1 + Σ
xt (r) + λβEt Λ
Σ
34

A7. Hiring rate at a firm renegotiating at t, xt (r)
• Let xt be the unconditional average value of the hiring rate:
Z 1
nt (i)
xt =
xt (i)
di
nt
0
• Using the job creation condition, xt can be written as
³
´
κ
κxt = βEt Λt,t+1 fnt+1 + xt+1 2 − wt+1 + ρκxt+1 + ς xt
2
with
∙Z 1 ³
´¸
´ n (i)
³κ
κ
t
2
x
2
xt+1 (i) − wt+1 (i) + ρκxt+1 (i)
xt+1 − wt+1 + ρκxt+1
ς t = βEt Λt,t+1
di −
2
nt
2
0
• Loglinearizing yields:
with

b t,t+1 +
x
bt = Et Λ

´
³
fn Et fbnt+1 − wEt w
bt+1 + βEt x
bt+1
= β (κx)−1

and where
b
ς xt = 0

• Consider now a firm renegotiating at time t. We can write:
x
bt − x
bt (r) = − wEt (w
bt+1 − w
bt+1 (r)) + βEt (b
xt+1 − x
bt+1 (r))

which can be iterated forward to give:

bt (r) = − wEt (w
bt+1 − w
bt+1 (r))
x
bt − x

bt+2 − w
bt+2 (r))
−β wEt (w

−β 2 wEt (w
bt+3 − w
bt+3 (r))

−...

• Using the loglinear version of the wage index (37):
w
bt = λw
bt−1 + (1 − λ) w
bt∗

together with the loglinear expressions for the expected future wages at a firm renegotiating
at time t (see section A1), we obtain
Et (w
bt+1 − w
bt+1 (r)) = λ (w
bt − w
bt∗ )

bt+1 − w
bt+1 (r)) = λ2 (w
bt − w
bt∗ )
Et (w
and so on....
35

• Substituting and rearranging yields:
x
bt (r) = x
bt + λ Σw (w
bt − w
bt∗ )

with

Σ=

1
1 − λβ

A8. Expected average worker surplus at firm renegotiating at t, Et Ht+1
A8a. Average worker surplus Ht and firm marginal surplus Jt
• The unconditional average value of worker surplus Ht can be written as:
Ht = wt − b + (ρ − st ) βEt Λt,t+1 Ht+1 + ς w
t
with
ςw
t

∙ µZ
= βEt Λt,t+1 ρ

0

1

¶
µZ 1
¶¸
nt (i)
xt (i)nt (i)
Vt+1 (i)
di − Vt+1 − st
Vt+1 (i)
− Vt+1
nt
xt nt
0

• The unconditional average value of firm marginal surplus Jt can be written as:
κ
Jt = fnt − wt + x2t + ρβEt Λt,t+1 Jt+1 + ς ft
2
with
ς ft

κ
=
2

µZ

1
0

¶
µZ 1
¶
κ 2 nt (i)
κ 2
nt (i)
x (i)
di − xt + ρβEt Λt,t+1
Jt+1 (i)
di − Jt+1
2 t
nt
2
nt
0

• Loglinearizing Ht and Jt and rearranging
³
´
³
´
b t+1 − sβEt sbt + Λ
b t,t+1 + H
b t+1
b t,t+1 + H
b t = (1 − χ) χ−1 ww
bt + ρβEt Λ
H
where

³
´
b t,t+1 + Jbt+1
xt − ww
bt + ρβEt Λ
Jbt = fn fbnt + xβb
b
ςw
ς ft = 0
t =b

• Then we can write the following expressions22 :

´
³
bt − H
b t (i) = (1 − χ) χ−1 w (w
b t+1 (i)
b t+1 − H
H
bt − w
bt (i)) + ρβEt H

22

³
´
xt − x
bt (i)) − w (w
bt − w
bt (i)) + ρβEt Jbt+1 − Jbt+1 (i)
Jbt − Jbt (i) = xβ (b

e x,t+1 = Et H
e t+1 .
Note we are using Et H

36

A8b. Expected worker surplus at a firm renegotiating at t + 1, Et Ht+1 (r0 )
• Consider a firm renegotiating at time t + 1. We can write:
³
³
¡ ¢´
¡
¡ ¢¢
¡ ¢´
b t+1 r0
b t+2 r0
b t+1 − H
b t+2 − H
Et H
bt+1 r0 + ρβEt H
= (1 − χ) χ−1 wEt w
bt+1 − w
£¡
¡ ¢¢
¡
¡ ¢¢
¤
bt+1 − w
bt+2 − w
bt+1 r0 + ρβ w
bt+2 r0 + ...
= (1 − χ) χ−1 wEt w

• Note that, for a firm renegotiating at time t + 1, we have:

¡
¡ ¢¢
¡
¢
∗
bt+1 − w
bt+1 − w
bt+1 r0 = Et w
bt+1
Et w

¡
¡ ¢¢
£
¤
£
¡ ¢
¤
∗
∗
bt+2 r0
bt+2
bt+2 − w
= Et λw
bt+1 + (1 − λ) w
− Et λw
bt+1 r0 + (1 − λ) w
bt+2
Et w
¡
¡ ¢¢
= λEt w
bt+1 r0
bt+1 − w
¡
¢
∗
bt+1 − w
bt+1
= λEt w
¡
¡ ¢¢
£
¤
£
¡ ¢
¤
∗
∗
bt+3 r0
bt+3
bt+3 − w
= Et λw
bt+2 + (1 − λ) w
− Et λw
bt+2 r0 + (1 − λ) w
bt+3
Et w
¡
¡ ¢¢
bt+2 − w
bt+2 r0
= λEt w
¡
¢
∗
bt+1
bt+1 − w
= λ2 Et w
and so on....

• Substituting these expressions and rearranging:

with

¡ ¢
¡
¢
∗
b t+1 r0 = Et H
b t+1 − (1 − χ) χ−1 ∆wEt w
bt+1
bt+1 − w
Et H
∆=

1
1 − ρλβ

A8c. Expected firm marginal surplus for a firm renegotiating at t + 1, Et Jt+1 (r0 )
• We can write:
³
¡ ¢´
¡
¡ ¢¢
¡
¡ ¢¢
bt+1 r0 − wEt w
bt+1 r0
Et Jbt+1 − Jbt+1 r0
= xβEt x
bt+1 − x
bt+1 − w
³
¡ ¢´
+ρβEt Jbt+2 − Jbt+2 r0
£¡
¡ ¢¢
¡
¡ ¢¢
¤
= xβEt x
bt+1 r0 + ρβ x
bt+2 r0 + ...
bt+1 − x
bt+2 − x
£¡
¡ ¢¢
¡
¡ ¢¢
¤
bt+1 r0 + ρβ w
bt+2 r0 + ...
− wEt w
bt+1 − w
bt+2 − w
37

• Moreover, we have:

¡
¡ ¢
¢
¡
¢
∗
Et x
bt+1
bt+1 r0 − x
bt+1 = λ ΣwEt w
bt+1 − w
¡
¡ ¢
¢
¡
¢
∗
bt+1
Et x
bt+2 r0 − x
bt+2 = λ2 ΣwEt w
bt+1 − w
¡
¡ ¢
¢
¡
¢
∗
bt+3 r0 − x
bt+3 = λ3 ΣwEt w
bt+1 − w
Et x
bt+1
and so on....

• Substituting the expressions for the expected future wages and hiring rates and rearranging:
¡ ¢
¡
¢
∗
bt+1 − w
Et Jbt+1 r0 = Et Jbt+1 + ΣwEt w
bt+1
with

Σ=

1
1 − λβ

A8d. Weight in the Nash bargaining first order condition
• Recall that
with

´
³
bt
b t (r) − ∆
χ
bt (r) = − (1 − χ) Σ

³
´
b t+1
b t = ρλβEt Λ
b t,t+1 + ∆
∆
³
´
b t+1 (r)
b t (r) = xλβb
b t,t+1 + Σ
xt (r) + λβEt Λ
Σ

• Averaging across all firms the firm cumulative discount factor yields:
³
´
b t = xλβb
b t+1
b t,t+1 + Σ
Σ
xt + λβEt Λ

• Taking diﬀerences and iterating forward yields

b t (r) − Σ
b t = (xλβ) (b
Σ
xt (r) − x
bt )

+ (λβ) (xλβ) Et (b
xt+1 (r) − x
bt+1 )

+ (λβ)2 (xλβ) Et (b
xt+2 (r) − x
bt+2 )

+...

• Substituting the expressions for the future hiring rates and collecting terms:
with

b t = xΨ Σw (w
b t (r) − Σ
bt − w
bt∗ )
Σ
Ψ=

38

λ2 β
1 − λ2 β

• Finally, we have
• Similarly, we have

b t − (1 − χ) xΨ Σw (w
bt − w
bt∗ )
χ
b t (r) = χ
¡ ¢
¡
¢
∗
b t+1 r0 = Et χ
b t+1 − (1 − χ) xΨ ΣwEt w
bt+1
Et χ
bt+1 − w

A8e. Using the expected Nash condition at time t + 1
• The expected Nash condition for firms renegotiating at time t + 1 is

• Loglinearizing

¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¡
¡ ¢¢
¡ ¢
Et χt+1 r0 Jt+1 r0 = Et 1 − χt+1 r0 Ht+1 r0
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
b t+1 r0
bt+1 r0 = Et H
Et Jbt+1 r0 + (1 − χ)−1 Et χ

• Substituting the expressions found in sections A8b, A8c and A8d and rearranging yields

with

¡
¢
∗
b t+1 = Et Jbt+1 + ΓEt w
bt+1 − w
+ (1 − χ)−1 Et χ
Et H
bt+1
bt+1
Γ = (1 − ηxΨ) η −1 Σw

• Using the loglinear expression for the hiring rate averaged across all firms:
³
´
b t,t+1
x
bt = Et Jbt+1 + Λ

we finally obtain
³
´
¡
¢
∗
b t,t+1 = x
b t+1 + Λ
Et H
bt+1
b t+1
bt+1 − w
+ (1 − χ)−1 Et χ
bt + ΓEt w
A9. Spillover eﬀects

• Consider the loglinear target wage
³
´
³
´
b t+1 + Λ
b t,t+1 + ϕχ χ
bt (r) + ϕs sbt + H
b t (r)
w
bto (r) = ϕf n fbnt + ϕx x

39

• Substituting the following expressions in the target wage:
³
´
¡
¢
∗
b t,t+1 = x
b t+1 + Λ
bt + ΓEt w
Et H
bt+1
b t+1
bt+1 − w
+ (1 − χ)−1 Et χ
we obtain

with
and

x
bt (r) = x
bt + λ Σw (w
bt − w
bt∗ )

χ
b t (r) = χ
b t − (1 − χ) xΨ Σw (w
bt − w
bt∗ )

bto +
w
bto (r) = w

¡
¢
τ2
τ1
∗
bt+1 − w
+
Et w
(w
bt − w
bt+1
bt∗ )
1 − ρλβ
1 − ρλβ

w
bto = ϕf n fbnt + (ϕx + ϕs ) x
bt + ϕs sbt + ϕχ χ
bt + (1 − χ)−1 ϕs Et χ
b t+1
τ 1 = ϕs Γ (1 − ρλβ)
£
¤
τ 2 = ϕx λ − ϕχ (1 − χ) xΨ Σw (1 − ρλβ)

• Note that, given our calibration described in section 4, τ 1 = 0.47 and τ 2 = 0.015.
A10. Reservation wages at a firm that has not renegotiated for τ periods
A10a. Worker’s reservation wage, Rtw (τ )
• Consider a firm and a worker at time t who have not renegotiated for τ periods.
• The worker reservation wage, denoted with Rtw (τ ), is the wage that makes the worker surplus
Ht (τ ) equal to 0:
Ht (τ ) = Rtw (τ ) − b + ρβEt Λt,t+1 Ht+1 (τ ) − st βEt Λt,t+1 Hx,t+1 = 0
• Using similar arguments as in section A8 of the appendix we can write
´
³
´
³
b t (τ ) = H
b t + (1 − χ) χ−1 Rw R
b t+1 = 0
btw (τ ) − ww
b t+1 (τ ) − H
H
bt + ρβEt H
and

³
´
b t+1 = − (1 − χ) χ−1 λ∆w (w
b t+1 (τ ) − H
bt − w
bt∗ (τ ))
Et H

where wt∗ (τ ) is the wage that has been renegotiated in t − τ .
• Combining equations yields

b t − (1 − χ) χ−1 ρβλ∆w (w
b t (τ ) = H
bt − w
bt∗ (τ )) + (1 − χ) χ−1
H

´
³
btw (τ ) − ww
Rw R
bt = 0

which gives the following expression for the worker’s reservation wage:

btw (τ ) = ww
bt + ρβλ∆w (w
bt − w
bt∗ (τ )) − χ (1 − χ)−1
Rw R
40

−1

bt
H

• Rearranging:
btw (τ ) = w∆w
bt − w (∆ − 1) w
bt∗ (τ ) − χ (1 − χ)−1
Rw R

−1

bt
H

A10b. Firm’s reservation wage, Rtf (τ )
• The firm reservation wage, denoted with Rtf (τ ), is the wage that makes the firm surplus Jt (τ )
equal to 0:
κ
Jt (τ ) = fnt + xt (τ )2 − Rtf (τ ) + ρβEt Λt,t+1 Jt+1 (τ ) = 0
2
• Using similar arguments as in sections A7 and A8 of the appendix we can write
´
³
´
³
b
bf (τ ) − ww
b
+
ρβE
Jbt (τ ) = Jbt + xβ (b
xt (τ ) − x
bt ) − ε Rf R
b
(τ
)
−
J
J
t
t
t+1
t+1 = 0
t
and

³
´
Et Jbt+1 (τ ) − Jbt+1 = (b
bt ) = λ Σw (w
bt − w
bt∗ (τ ))
xt (τ ) − x

• Combining equations yields

´
³
bf (τ ) − ww
bt − w
bt∗ (τ )) − ε Rf R
bt = 0
Jbt (τ ) = Jbt + βλ Σw (w
t

which gives the following expression for the firm’s reservation wage:

• Rearranging:

bf (τ ) = ww
Rf R
bt + βλΣw (w
bt − w
bt∗ (τ )) +
t
bf (τ ) = wΣw
bt − w (Σ − 1) w
bt∗ (τ ) +
Rf R
t

41

−1

−1

Jbt

Jbt

APPENDIX B
Steady state calculation
• Given the calibrated parameters and target values in Table 1, we obtain implied values of
n, u, x, χ, ls, I/y, ac/y and c/y from steady state calculations.
• First obtain

s
1−ρ+s
u=1−n
su
x=
n

n=

and
χ=
• Then get

η
η + (1 − η) Σ/∆

z = 1/β − 1 + δ

α
k
=
y
z
k
I
=δ
y
y
µ ¶ 1
k 1−α
n
k= a
y

y = ak α n1−α
κ
ac = x2 n
2
µ ¶α
k
fn = (1 − α) a
n
• Then κ and w solve the following system (equations (12) and (33))
(
¡
¢
κx = β fn − w + κ2 x2 + ρκx
¡
¢
¡
¢
w = χ fn + κ2 x2 + sκx + (1 − χ) b fn + κ2 x2
where

b=

b
fn + κ2 x2

• The flow value of unemployment is given by
³
κ ´
b = b fn + x2
2
42

• The steady state labor share is calculated from
ls =
• Finally

wn
nk
=w
y
ky

I
κ x2 n
c
=1− −
y
y 2 y

43

APPENDIX C
The complete loglinear model
• Technology

ybt = b
at + αb
kt + (1 − α) n
bt

• Resource constraint
where cy = yc , iy =

I
y

• Employment dynamics
• Transition probabilities

• Unemployment
• Capital dynamics
• Aggregate vacancies
• Consumption-saving

• Marginal utility

ct + iyIbt + (1 − cy − iy) (2b
xt + n
bt )
ybt = cyb

(E2)

m
b t = σb
ut + (1 − σ) vbt

(E3)

and 1 − cy − iy =

• Matching

(E1)

κ x2 n
2 y

nt + (1 − ρ) m
bt
n
bt+1 = ρb
b t − vbt
qbt = m

bt − u
bt
sbt = m
n
bt
u
bt = − n
u

(E4)

(E5)

(E6)

(E7)

b
kt + δ Ibt
kt+1 = (1 − δ) b

(E8)

bt
x
bt = qbt + vbt − n

(E9)

bt+1 + 1/β − 1 + δ Et zbt+1
bt = Et λ
λ
1/β
bt = −b
ct
λ

44

(E10)

(E11)

• Aggregate hiring rate

³
´
fn fbnt+1 − wEt w
bt+1 + βEt x
bt+1

b t,t+1 +
x
bt = Et Λ

where

(E12)

= β (κx)−1
• Marginal product of labor

bt
fbnt = ybt − n

• Capital renting
• Weight in Nash bargaining
with

• Spillover-free target wage

where

kt = zbt
ybt − b

´
³
bt
bt − ∆
χ
b t = − (1 − χ) Σ

³
´
b t+1
b t = ρλβEt Λ
b t,t+1 + ∆
∆
³
´
b t = xλβb
b t+1
b t,t+1 + Σ
Σ
xt + λβEt Λ

w
bto = ϕf n fbnt + (ϕx + ϕs ) x
bt + ϕs sbt + ϕχ χ
bt + (1 − χ)−1 ϕs Et χ
b t+1

(E13)

(E14)

(E15)
(E16)
(E17)

(E18)

£
¤
ϕf n = χfn w−1 ϕx = χκx2 w−1 ϕs = χsκxw−1 ϕχ = χ fn + (κ/2) x2 − b − sβH w−1

• Aggregate wage
where

bt−1 + γ w
bto + γ f Et w
bt+1
w
bt = γ b w

γ b = (1 + τ 2 ) φ−1

γ = ςφ−1

φ = 1 + τ 2 + ς + ρβ − τ 1

(E19)

γ f = (ρβ − τ 1 ) φ−1

ς = (1 − λ) (1 − ρλβ) λ−1

τ 1 = ϕs Γ (1 − ρλβ)
£
¤
τ 2 = ϕx λ − ϕχ (1 − χ) xΨ Σw (1 − ρλβ)
¡
¢
Ψ = βλ2 / 1 − βλ2
Γ = (1 − xηΨ) η −1 Σw
Σ = (1 − βλ)−1

• Technology process

at−1 + εat
b
at = ρab
45

(E20)

Figure 1: Impulse responses to a technology shock
1.5

1

0.5

y
y flex
1

w
w flex

lshare
lshare flex

0

0.5
-0.5

0.5

0

50

100

0.4

0

0

50

100

0
n
n flex

-1

0

50

100

10
u
u flex

-2

0.2

v
v flex
5

-4
0

0

50

100

15

0

50

5
0

50

100

4

0

0

50

100

100

0

100
x
x flex

2

-2

0

50

I
I flex
2

50

50

100

1

k
k flex

0

0

0

4

0.5

0
4

s
s flex

2

1

0

100

6
theta
theta flex

10

0

-6

a
a flex
0.5

0

50

100

0

0

50

100

Figure 2: Bargaining set for contracts still in place after the average duration (3Q)

firm reservation wage
actual wage
worker reservation wage

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
0

2000

4000

6000

8000

10000

12000

Figure 3: Bargaining set for contracts still in place after 40 months
firm reservation wage
actual wage
worker reservation wage

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
0

2000

4000

6000

8000

10000

12000

