                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE TRADEOFF BETWEEN MORTGAGE PREPAYMENTS
                      AND TAX-DEFERRED RETIREMENT SAVINGS

                                             Gene Amromin
                                             Jennifer Huang
                                             Clemens Sialm

                                         Working Paper 12502
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12502


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




We thank Jeff Brown, Keith Brown, John Campbell, Courtney Coile, Gary Engelhardt, Amy Finkelstein,
Leora Friedberg, Roger Gordon, Anil Kumar, Brigitte Madrian, Olivia Mitchell, Robert Parrino, Jim Poterba,
Josh Rauh, Scott Weisbenner, Michelle White, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, the Trans-Atlantic Public Economics Seminar on Public Policy and Retirement in Uppsala
(Sweden), the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, and the University of Texas at Austin for helpful
comments and discussions. We are very grateful to Kevin Moore of the Board of Governors for support with
the SCF data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Gene Amromin, Jennifer Huang and Clemens Sialm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Tradeoff between Mortgage Prepayments and Tax-Deferred Retirement Savings
Gene Amromin, Jennifer Huang and Clemens Sialm
NBER Working Paper No. 12502
August 2006
JEL No. G11, G18, H24, H31

                                            ABSTRACT


We show that a significant number of households can perform a tax arbitrage by cutting back on their
additional mortgage payments and increasing their contributions to tax-deferred accounts (TDA).
Using data from the Survey of Consumer Finances, we show that about 38% of U.S. households that
are accelerating their mortgage payments instead of saving in tax-deferred accounts are making the
wrong choice. For these households, reallocating their savings can yield a mean benefit of 11 to 17
cents per dollar, depending on the choice of investment assets in the TDA. In the aggregate, these
mis-allocated savings are costing U.S. households as much as 1.5 billion dollars per year. Finally,
we show empirically that this inefficient behavior is unlikely to be driven by liquidity considerations
and that self-reported debt aversion and risk aversion variables explain to some extent the preference
for paying off debt obligations early and hence the propensity to forgo our proposed tax arbitrage.


Gene Amromin
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
gamromin@frbchi.org

Jennifer Huang
Department of Finance
B6000
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
jennifer.huang@mccombs.utexas.edu

Clemens Sialm
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street
D3219
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
sialm@umich.edu
                                                           “Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
                                                      For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
                                                  And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.”
                                                                             –William Shakespeare


1     Introduction

Many households are reluctant to participate in financial markets either as lenders or

as borrowers. According to the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances, nearly half of U.S.
households do not own stocks and more than one third of the households eligible for

employer-sponsored retirement plans do not contribute at all to such plans. Furthermore,

some households are also reluctant to carry debt. At a first glance, this runs counter to
stylized facts on the proliferation of consumer borrowing, especially in unsecured credit
markets. Yet, a surprising number of households accelerate paydowns of their mortgage

loans, which account for a much bigger share of their debt. We show that these choices

generate substantial monetary costs for a significant number of households.

    This paper focuses on two of the most important financial decisions of households:
retirement savings and home-ownership borrowing. Many households, at one time or
another, face the trade-off between paying an extra dollar off the remaining mortgage

on their house and saving that extra dollar in tax-qualified retirement accounts. In

a world without frictions, paying off mortgage loans early and investing in retirement

accounts would be equivalent saving decisions. In reality, however, taxes and transaction

costs play a key role in the determination of the effective borrowing and lending rates.

We show that, under certain conditions, it becomes a tax-arbitrage to reduce mortgage

prepayments and to increase contributions to tax-deferred accounts (TDA).1

    Mortgage interest payments are deductible from taxable income for households that
    1
      Throughout the paper, we use the term “mortgage prepayment” to denote extra payments on an
existing mortgage or taking out a mortgage with a maturity shorter than the standard 30 years. Short
maturity mortgages carry higher periodic payments, which can be considered committed “prepayments”
in the same sense as writing extra checks to the mortgage company. We do not include mortgage
refinancing in our definition of “prepayments,” although this interpretation is common in the industry.


                                                  1
itemize their deductions, while investment income in retirement accounts remains ef-

fectively tax-exempt.2 Hence, households earn pre-tax returns (rL ) in their retirement
accounts and pay after-tax rates (1 − τ )rB on their mortgage borrowing. Although the

borrowing rate (rB ) on the mortgage is likely higher than the investment rate (rL ) for
an asset with similar risk properties, we show that, as long as rL > (1−τ ) rB , households

are generally better off saving in a TDA instead of prepaying their mortgage. Given the

simplicity of this strategy, it is reasonable to ask whether and to what extent households
recognize this tradeoff in their personal decisions.

   Using data from the Survey of Consumer Finances, we investigate household choices
between mortgage prepayments and retirement account contributions. While it is not

surprising that some households are not making the right choice, the magnitude of the

overall inefficiency is striking. On the margin, 38% of households who prepay their mort-
gages could benefit from our proposed arbitrage strategy. Depending on the choice of

the investment asset in the TDA, the mean gain from such a reallocation ranges between
11 and 17 cents per dollar of “mis-allocated savings.” In the aggregate, correcting this
inefficient behavior could save U.S. households as much as 1.5 billion dollars per year.

The finding that a significant number of households make substantial mistakes in their
financial decisions echoes the conclusions of Campbell (2006).

   Although there are numerous potential rational reasons for agents either to prepay

the mortgage or not to contribute to their retirement accounts–among them interest rate

risks, liquidity and default risks, credit constraints, and fixed costs of participation–we

show that, given the nature of the tax arbitrage, those reasons are unlikely to explain

simultaneously why households prepay and do not contribute. Hence, it is difficult
to identify rational reasons for the inefficient behavior of forgoing the substantial tax

benefit.
   2
     Consider, for example, a Roth account where households pay income tax when they contribute and
no more tax is owed upon withdrawal. Also, when tax rates are constant over time, investing in a
401(k) account is equivalent to investing in a Roth account.


                                                2
       Rather, these households seem to be influenced by an aversion to take on debt. Em-

pirically, debt aversion and risk aversion explain to some extent the household preference
for reducing their debt obligations in spite of incurring considerable monetary losses in

the process. The propensity of debt-averse households to forgo such tax arbitrages is
related to the findings in Graham (2000), who shows that many corporations forgo

substantial tax benefits by holding too little debt.

       Our paper is most closely related to the recent literature on the optimal asset location
choice which considers the tradeoff between savings in taxable vs. tax-deferred accounts.

Dammon, Spatt, and Zhang (2004), Shoven and Sialm (2004), Poterba, Shoven, and
Sialm (2004), Huang (2005), and Garlappi and Huang (2006) show theoretically that,

in order to maximize the tax benefit of retirement accounts, highly-taxed assets should

generally be located in tax-deferred accounts and that lightly-taxed assets should be
located in taxable accounts. The actual behavior of individuals investing in taxable

and tax-deferred accounts is analyzed by Bodie and Crane (1997), Barber and Odean
(2003), Bergstresser and Poterba (2004), and Amromin (2004). These papers find that
many households have significant amounts of money in both accounts and that a large

proportion of them do not appear to take advantage of the potential benefits of optimal
asset location. Similar to this literature, we theoretically compare the tax efficiency of

two forms of savings choices, and then document actual household behavior and evaluate

the extent of losses relative to the theoretical benchmark. Our main contribution is to

introduce mortgage payments as an additional investment option in the tax arbitrage

framework. There is also a vast literature on both the retirement savings decisions3 and

their mortgage choices4 . To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to link these
   3
     For example, Benartzi and Thaler (2001), Madrian and Shea (2001), Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and
Metrick (2002), Cunningham and Engelhardt (2002), Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sunden (2003), Duflo and
Saez (2003), Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2004, 2005), Mitchell, Utkus, and Yang (2005), Duflo, Gale,
Liebman, Orszag, and Saez (2006), Huberman and Jiang (2006), and Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner
(2006) consider the determinants of individual TDA participation and portfolio choice.
   4
     For example, Quigley (2002), Campbell and Cocco (2003), and Hurst and Stafford (2004) study
mortgage choices including type of contract, refinancing, and prepayment decisions.


                                                 3
two strands of research by considering retirement contributions and mortgage payments

as two alternative forms of household savings decisions.
    Our finding is also consistent with the explanation that households may not treat

these two forms of saving decisions as substitutes. Hoynes and McFadden (1997) find
little substitution between retirement savings and other forms of personal financial asset

saving and housing wealth, and Poterba, Venti and Wise (1995) find that even similar

saving vehicles like 401(k)s and IRAs are not close substitutes.
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the tax-arbitrage strategy in

detail and Section 3 discusses the robustness of the tax arbitrage strategy. Section 4
describes the data and Section 5 provides summary statistics for TDA contribution and

mortgage payment behavior. Section 6 calculates the cost of choosing the wrong saving

strategy. Section 7 looks at possible explanations for why households may forgo the tax
arbitrage and Section 8 concludes.


2     Tax Arbitrage Strategy

This section describes the tax arbitrage strategy between tax-deferred retirement ac-

count contributions and mortgage prepayments. We consider a household whose TDA

contributions are less than the statutory maximum and who at the same time makes

additional mortgage payments. Households that make additional mortgage payments

have effectively chosen to save some of their income through a specific savings chan-

nel. We analyze the marginal trade-off between contributing to a TDA and building

up home equity to determine whether these households would be better off reallocating
their savings.

    There exist several different types of retirement accounts. Because of data limita-

tions, we restrict our attention to traditional employer-sponsored TDAs, such as 401(k)

and 403(b) plans which allow contributions on a before-tax basis. These contributions



                                            4
grow tax-deferred until withdrawal when the household pays taxes both on its original

contribution amount and the cumulative investment returns.
   The household is assumed to have a constant tax rate τ over time, and faces a penalty

κt on TDA withdrawals at time t. Currently, withdrawals by individuals younger than
59 12 years of age generally face a 10% penalty. Hence, κt = 10% if t < 59 12 and κt = 0

otherwise.

   To derive our main result, we make the following simplifying assumptions. First, the
household has a fixed-rate mortgage with a rate rB and earns a constant rate of return rL

on its tax-deferred savings. Second, the household itemizes deductions and can therefore

effectively subtract mortgage interest from taxable income. Third, the mortgage has a

fixed remaining horizon T , which means that the household never defaults or pays off the

entire mortgage for moving or refinancing purposes. Fourth, each dollar of prepayment
in the current year affects only year T cash flow and reduces the after-tax mortgage

payment by $(1 + (1 − τ )rB )T . These assumptions are useful for illustrating the tax
arbitrage strategy. We discuss their robustness in Section 3.
   Under these assumptions, we propose a simple tax arbitrage strategy where the

household makes the following perturbation to its current savings strategy: (i) decreases
the mortgage prepayment by one dollar; (ii) contributes an additional
                                             Ã                    !T
                                   1             1 + (1 − τ )rB
                           X≡                                                           (1)
                              1 − τ − κT            1 + rL

dollars to the tax-deferred account which earns a return of rL ; (iii) receives an immediate

tax credit of τ X dollars for the additional contribution; and (iv) withdraws X(1 + rL )T

dollars from the tax-deferred account in year T .

   Since the additional contribution X to the tax-deferred account grows to X(1 + rL )T
by the end of year T , exactly offsetting the withdrawal amount, the new strategy yields

the same wealth in the tax-deferred account as the current strategy. Moreover, the total

proceeds from the withdrawal are X(1+rL )T (1−τ −κT ) = (1+(1−τ )rB )T ,where τ is the

                                             5
tax rate and κT is the penalty upon withdrawal.5 At the same time, we have assumed

that reducing the current mortgage prepayment by one dollar increases the mortgage
obligation by (1 + (1 − τ )rB )T dollars in year T . Hence, the withdrawal proceeds exactly

offset the additional mortgage liability due to the reduced prepayment of the mortgage
loan. Finally, the combination of steps (i)-(iv) implies that the household can walk

away with a net profit of 1 + τ X − X in the taxable account, which can be consumed

immediately. We simplify its expression and term it the “Marginal Arbitrage Profit”
(MAP),
                                                                  Ã                    !T
                                             1−τ                      1 + (1 − τ )rB
                 M AP ≡ 1 + τ X − X = 1 −                                                   .           (2)
                                          1 − τ − κT                     1 + rL

    For any household, as long as the MAP measure is positive, it is better off following

the arbitrage strategy of reducing its prepayment and increasing its TDA contributions.

Inspection of equation (2) yields the following intuitive results. First, the arbitrage
profit decreases with rB and increases with rL . A higher mortgage borrowing rate rB

makes it less profitable to stop prepaying, while a higher investment return rL makes

it more attractive to invest in the tax-deferred account. Second, the arbitrage benefit
increases with the investment horizon T as long as rL > (1 − τ )rB , since the money
grows tax-deferred for a longer period of time. Finally, this arbitrage strategy is always

feasible since it is “self-financed.” The only cash outflow implied by the strategy is the

additional mortgage payment on the terminal date, which is exactly covered by the

future withdrawal from the tax-deferred account. As a result, the household never needs

to put in additional money after pocketing the arbitrage profit (MAP).
    If households continue to save in the future, this self-financing requirement yields con-

servative estimates of the arbitrage profit. In particular, if κT > 0, our strategy requires
households to withdraw and pay penalties in order to meet the additional mortgage

obligation at time T . However, if they can use other funds in their taxable accounts or
   5
     Note that the household receives $(1 − τ − κT ) for each dollar withdrawn rather than (1 − τ )(1 − κT )
since the penalty is not tax-deductible under the current tax code.


                                                     6
can reduce their future contributions to retirement accounts to satisfy these obligations,

they will be able to delay the withdrawal and avoid the penalty. Even when the penalty
is zero, delaying the withdrawal allows households to shelter assets from taxation for a

longer time period, and hence improves the arbitrage profit.
        The MAP further underestimates the benefit of the tax arbitrage strategy if a house-

hold does not consume the arbitrage profit immediately. In particular, its current wealth

level is increased by the MAP amount. Without reducing its current consumption level
or altering any part of its remaining portfolio, it can contribute an additional amount

(up to the MAP measure) to its TDA. This additional contribution allows it to further
enjoy the benefit of tax-deferred savings. The proposed arbitrage transaction also ig-

nores employer matches and deductibility of TDA contributions from state income taxes,

which increase its profitability.6


3         Discussion

We now discuss the robustness of the tax arbitrage strategy by relaxing the assumptions
in the previous section.


3.1        Stochastic Interest Rates

In our derivation of the tax arbitrage strategy in Section 2, both the mortgage borrowing
rate (rB ) and the tax-deferred investment return (rL ) are assumed to be constant over
time. These assumptions work well in the case of a household with a fixed-rate mortgage

that never refinances and that buys and holds to maturity Treasury bonds term-matched
to the remaining lifetime of its mortgage. While this scenario appears restrictive, we

argue below that it likely provides a lower bound on the tax-arbitrage gain.
    6
    The proposed strategy may also have an indirect benefit of reducing fixed participation costs as
discussed by Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) and encouraging equity market participation. Moving mortgage
prepayments to employer-sponsored TDA accounts introduces some households to an environment with
lower equity participation costs, either because of employer subsidies or simplified investment options.



                                                   7
   First, since we restrict our empirical investigation to households with fixed rate

mortgages, the assumption of a constant rB is only violated if the mortgage is refinanced
in a year S < T . As long as the refinancing decision is driven purely by interest rate
                                       0
considerations, the new mortgage rate rB is less than rB . For each dollar following the
arbitrage strategy today, the mortgage obligation is increased by (1+(1−τ )rB )S at time

S, which grows to (1 + (1 − τ )rB )S (1 + (1 − τ )rB
                                                   0 T −S
                                                     )    at time T . The arbitrage strategy

also yields an extra X(1 + rL )T dollars in TDA, which is equal to (1 + (1 − τ )rB )T by (1),
and is higher than the new mortgage obligation. Hence, the arbitrage profit is increased

after the refinancing.
   Second, while buying-and-holding Treasury bonds is generally feasible in the TDA, it

is conservative because interest rates on mortgages at origination tend to be significantly

higher than interest rates on Treasury bonds due to prepayment and default risks. To
get a better sense of the magnitude of the tax benefit, we maintain the overall risk

level of the household portfolio by allowing TDA contributions to be invested in pass-
through instruments like a Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), which pool individual
mortgages. Although there is still a mismatch in the default and prepayment risks

between an individual mortgage and an MBS, the MBS is generally less risky due to the
benefit of diversification. Moreover, an MBS has a variable maturity due to prepayment

and default risks, and its yields vary over time since they are typically sold through

mutual funds, which change their asset composition each year. In this setting, households

are trading off a fixed mortgage liability for an asset with variable rate of return and

maturity, both of which are affected by general movements in interest rates. Yet, we

still expect our estimation of the arbitrage profit to be rather conservative, since interest
rates have an asymmetric impact on the benefit of the tax arbitrage strategy. When

rates increase, households gain since the newly invested amount earns higher rates than
the corresponding liability. On the other hand, when rates go down, households are more



                                             8
likely to exercise their option to refinance, reducing the downside risk of the arbitrage

strategy.


3.2       Moving-Related Prepayment Risks

In addition to falling interest rates, households may choose to pay off their entire mort-

gages early when they sell their existing homes, either because of relocations or simply
because of changes in tastes and housing needs.
      We have shown that the tax arbitrage benefit can actually be improved if the pre-

payment is driven purely by interest rate considerations. If, on the other hand, interest

rates stay constant over time, the perturbation specified by the arbitrage strategy re-

mains valid for an exogenous moving shock, as long as households are able to roll over
their mortgage debt into the new house.
      When both the interest rate and moving risks are present, our tax strategy is no

longer a risk-free arbitrage. While households are clearly better off if they choose to
move when the interest rate goes down, it is also possible that they may need to move
                                                                            0
when the interest rate goes up and the new mortgage borrowing rate becomes rB > rB .
                                                                    0 T −S
As a result, the extra mortgage obligation (1+(1−τ )rB )S (1+(1−τ )rB )    is larger than

the potential withdrawal from the tax-deferred saving (1 + (1 − τ )rB )T , making it less

beneficial to follow our strategy. Of course, in this case, the overall loss from replacing

a lower-rate mortgage is substantially greater than the change in the value of the tax
strategy. To the extent that moving decisions are somewhat endogenous, households

may delay their moving and prepayment decisions when the interest rate environment

is not favorable. Thus, it is reasonable to conclude that, although the combination of
moving and interest rate risks makes the tax strategy risky, its impact on the expected

profitability of the strategy is likely to be small.7
  7
      Quigley(2002) finds that households do, in fact, delay relocating when interest rates are rising.




                                                     9
3.3       Liquidity Risks

Our arbitrage strategy also assumes that households never face large liquidity needs that
may require them to take out additional home equity loans. At a first glance, paying

down a mortgage improves household borrowing capacity almost dollar-for-dollar by en-

abling higher home equity lines of credit (HELOC). Thus, concerns for future liquidity
needs may prompt households to accelerate home equity build-up and forgo implement-

ing the arbitrage strategy. However, a comparison of relative liquidity characteristics of

HELOCs and TDAs is far from straightforward.

       Most HELOCs are re-evaluated annually and may indeed be cancelled in the event

of job loss, making them a poor source of liquidity when it’s likely to be needed. On

the other hand, most households can borrow up to 50% of their TDA assets and in

worst-case scenarios (e.g. job loss or financial hardship) access TDA assets by paying
a 10% penalty. The tax burden on these hardship withdrawals tends to be low since
households will be in relatively low tax brackets under these circumstances.

       Since the arbitrage strategy simply reallocates assets between accounts, its effect

on household’s liquidity is summarized by the difference in transaction costs. TDA

withdrawal penalties are likely costlier than the spread on home equity loans.8 Still,
as long as the probability q of liquidity event is low enough, the ex-ante expected cost

(q × 10%) is small relative to the expected arbitrage profit, which is in the range of

11-17% (as shown in Section 6).

       Another reason that liquidity risks prove to be less relevant as a rational explanation

for forgoing the tax arbitrage profit is that fluctuations in future housing prices make

mortgage prepayments less effective as a mean to provide liquidity when needed. If
house prices appreciate significantly over time, then the amount of home equity is likely

to be sufficient to meet any liquidity needs even without mortgage prepayment. No
   8
    In our data set, the home equity loan has a mean interest rate of 9.3%, while the same household
has an average mortgage rate of 7.6%.


                                                10
withdrawal from the tax-deferred account is necessary. On the other hand, if house

prices fall drastically to wipe out most of the equity, it is unlikely that the household
may be able to take out additional home equity loans, even if it has been diligently

prepaying the mortgage. In this case, had the household followed our tax strategy to
save in the tax-deferred account instead of prepaying the mortgage, the funds would

still be available for liquidity-related withdrawals. Hence, our strategy of saving in the

tax-deferred account has the additional benefit of providing a good hedge against the
combination of housing price risk and liquidity risk.


3.4    Default Risks

Default risks are extraordinary liquidity events in the future that may force households
to default on mortgage payments and hence lose their houses. A household may prefer
to pay off its mortgage before saving in retirement accounts in order to reduce the risk of

ever losing the house. Although reasonable on the surface, we argue that this argument
does not justify foregoing the tax-arbitrage either.

   First, following the tax-arbitrage strategy is unlikely to increase the probability of

default for a household. Consider the case when the large liquidity event happens after

the household would have paid off its mortgage had it followed the accelerated payment

schedule. By construction, our tax arbitrage strategy is “self-financed” in the sense that
once the original plan would have paid off the mortgage, households rely solely on the
withdrawal from the tax-deferred account to pay for the remaining mortgage. Hence,

following the arbitrage strategy does not cause extra defaults in this case.

   If, on the other hand, the liquidity event happens before the household would have
paid off its mortgage even under the accelerated schedule, borrowing or withdrawing from

the tax-deferred account is at least as effective as (if not more than, considering housing
price risks) prepaying the mortgage in meeting this liquidity need. Again, following the

arbitrage strategy does not increase the default risk.

                                            11
       Second, in the unfortunate event of personal bankruptcy, households are generally

better off had they followed the tax-arbitrage. As a federal policy, employer-sponsored
retirement savings are exempt from personal bankruptcy.9 On the other hand, home-

stead exemptions vary by state, with some states (e.g. Florida) allowing nearly unlimited
exemptions and others (e.g. Pennsylvania) only a token amount. In the event of large

liquidity shocks, our tax arbitrage strategy provides households with the additional op-

tion of defaulting on the house and claiming bankruptcy while at the same time retaining
their extra TDA savings. While the psychological costs of losing a house may be large,

this free option increases the benefit of the tax arbitrage strategy from a pure monetary
point of view, especially for residents of states with stringent homestead exemptions.10


3.5       Tax Environments

We have also made several simplifying assumptions regarding tax environments, the

most significant one being the constant tax rate over time.11 This assumption excludes
the possibilities of either changing tax laws or changing tax brackets over a household’s
lifetime. Although it is hard to predict the direction of tax law changes, the assumption

of a constant tax rate is likely conservative for estimating the tax benefits of our arbitrage

strategy. The tax rate for a given household is generally lower during retirement since the

taxable income is often lower. According to the 1995-2001 SCF data, 41% of households
are in the top four tax brackets (i.e., at or above 28%) before retirement while only

18% of households are in these top brackets after retirement.12 The household can also

optimally time the withdrawals from its retirement account to minimize the effective tax
   9
      Since the passage of the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act in April 2005,
all IRA assets are fully protected from creditors in the event of bankruptcy. Prior to that, the amount
of IRA assets exempt from bankruptcy estate varied by state.
   10
      See, for example, White (1998) and Fay, Hurst, and White (2002) for a discussion of the household
bankruptcy decision.
   11
      See, for example, Sialm (2006) for a discussion of historical tax rates on investment income between
1926-2004.
   12
      Households are assumed to be retired if they receive positive Social Security, pension, or disability
income in the corresponding years.



                                                    12
burden. Hence, tax-deductible contributions are made when rates are relatively high and

taxable withdrawals are made when rates are relatively low, increasing the tax arbitrage
profit. To gauge sensitivity of the arbitrage strategy to changes in tax rates, we evaluate

a number of alternative tax scenarios in Section 6.3.
      In this section we have argued that relaxing the assumptions of the illustrative ar-

bitrage example is unlikely to eliminate gains from the strategy. However, whether

households use similar reasoning in practice is an open question. For example, they
may have a different perception of relative liquidity of the two savings choices, or not be

aware of differences in their bankruptcy treatment. We return to this question in our
empirical analysis of Section 7.


4       Data Sources

We use the 1995, 1998, and 2001 Surveys of Consumer Finances (SCF) to analyze the

actual savings behavior of households with mortgage debt and with the opportunity
to save in employer-sponsored tax-deferred retirement accounts. The surveys are con-

ducted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and cover a substantial
cross-section of U.S. households. They collect data on many aspects of households’ fi-

nancial situation–their financial, real estate, and pension assets, portfolio composition,

availability and price of credit, and sources of earnings.13

      The surveys over-sample wealthy households, since these households own a dispro-

portionate fraction of financial assets. We use a set of sampling weights from the SCF

to compute distributions of survey variables in the population. Unless otherwise noted,
all descriptive statistics utilize population weights.

      Since our analysis focuses on evaluating the trade-off between saving in retirement

accounts and through additional mortgage payments, SCF data on real estate holdings,

financing, and on tax-deferred savings choices are of particular interest. For each house-
 13
      See Kennickell and Starr-McCluer (1994) for a description of the SCF data set.

                                                  13
hold in the sample, the SCF collects exhaustive information on home ownership status

and financing characteristics. Thus, we know whether a household owns its home and
if so, whether it still has an outstanding mortgage. We know the key characteristics

of mortgages such as their current interest rate, mortgage term, remaining as well as
original balance, and whether a mortgage is an adjustable rate or a balloon mortgage.

Moreover, we know whether a household is actively prepaying its mortgage, sticking to

the original payment schedule, or falling behind scheduled payments.
       We distinguish between two different methods of prepayments: discretionary and

those due to short mortgages, which are defined as mortgages with a term of less than
30 years. Discretionary prepayments occur if households make payments in addition

to their required mortgage obligations at regular or irregular intervals. We identify

discretionary prepayments from household responses to the SCF question on whether
they are ahead, behind, or on time with their mortgage payments.14

       Unfortunately, the SCF does not ask prepaying households for the exact amount or
the frequency of discretionary prepayments. However, they are asked for an expected
date of full repayment. By contrasting this date with the original mortgage term and

assuming a constant prepayment schedule, we are able to estimate the additional annual
mortgage payments.15 We define prepayments due to short mortgages as the difference

between the required payment on the existing mortgage and a required payment on a hy-

pothetical 30-year mortgage that the household could have taken out on the origination
date. Specifically, we derive the average mortgage rates from the Freddie Mac series of

the average initial contract rate on new commitments for 15- and 30-year conventional

fixed-rate mortgages with 80% loan-to-value ratios. For each household with a 15-year
  14
      Using this method, we classify about 16% of households with 30-year fixed-rate mortgages as “dis-
cretionary prepayers.” This number is very similar to the 14% incidence of accelerated repayments
reported by Fu et al. (1997) on the basis of administrative records of Citibank mortgage holders
between 1995 and 1997.
   15
      We also investigate alternative discretionary prepayment measures, which are based on the compar-
ison of the reported current mortgage balance with the balance expected if only required payments were
made. If the former is smaller, a household is effectively ahead of its mortgage repayment schedule.
Our results remain qualitatively similar if we use this alternative prepayment measure.


                                                  14
mortgage, for example, we compute the difference between its mortgage rate and the

average rate on 15-year mortgages taken on the same date. Assuming that this qual-
ity spread is independent of the mortgage term, we can add it to the average 30-year

mortgage rate to construct the rate on a hypothetical 30-year mortgage. Hence, our
calculation takes into account the slope of the yield curve that usually implies a lower

15-year mortgage rate than a 30-year rate.

   In order to evaluate possible benefits of saving in a TDA, we need to identify TDA-
eligible households and estimate the extent to which they can increase their TDA con-

tributions. An accurate measure of eligibility can be constructed from a number of
sequential responses to questions about features of employment-related pension cover-

age. We follow the methodology in Pence (2001) to identify households that are eligible

for (but don’t necessarily participate in) high-limit employer-sponsored defined contri-
bution retirement plans.

   Household contributions to employer-sponsored TDA plans are reported separately
for each household member. However, annual limits on household TDA contributions
are less straightforward, as they are determined by the individual’s wage income and

employer policies. In 2001, each TDA participant was limited to a before-tax contri-
bution of $10,500 (IRC 402(g) limit). In addition, the sum of employee and employer

contributions is subject to an additional restriction of the lesser of $35,000 or 25% of

compensation (IRC 415(c) limit). Moreover, many plans impose their own limits on
employee contributions in order to make it easier to pass non-discrimination tests. Since

the SCF has no information on employer-specific TDA plan features, we choose a con-

servative approach and define the contribution limit in 2001 for each household member
as the lesser of $10,500 or 10% of their reported wages. For 1995 and 1998, we use

the corresponding IRC 402(g) limits, which are $9,240 and $10,000, respectively. Next,
we compute the “TDA contribution gap” by differencing the actual contribution and



                                           15
the imputed limit for each eligible household member. Summing up these gaps for all

household members gives us a measure of the extent to which a given household can
increase its TDA contributions.

       A significant number of SCF respondents are self-employed and, under the current tax
code, they have the right to open IRA-type accounts with high contribution limits and

nearly unrestricted investment choices.16 However, since the actual TDA contributions

by the self-employed are unknown, we choose to restrict the definition of eligibility to
households with at least one member that can participate in an employer-sponsored

plan. We also ignore the role of IRAs in defining TDA eligibility. Although IRAs are
broadly available, their contribution limits are small and the SCF has no data on actual

IRA contributions. Both of these choices are conservative as they limit the universe

of households that can potentially benefit from modifying their savings choices and are
likely to bias the contribution gaps towards zero.

       For investments in the TDA we consider two scenarios in which households hold
either mortgage-backed securities (MBS) or Treasury bonds with the same maturity as
the remaining mortgage horizon. The yield on Treasury bonds for various maturities

is linearly interpolated between the 10-year yield and the 30-year yield reported by
Bloomberg for each of the three survey years. The MBS returns of different maturity

are also linearly interpolated using yields on 15- and 30-year current coupon agency

MBS (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) as reported by Bloomberg. Note that the average
yield on Treasury bonds is substantially lower than the average mortgage rate in our

sample, primarily because Treasury bonds do not have default and prepayment risks as

individual mortgages. The average investment rate on MBS assets is also lower than the
average mortgage borrowing rate, due to the transaction costs of processing mortgages

and constructing MBS assets. As discussed in Section 3.1, investing in Treasury securities
  16
    There are several such accounts - Keogh, SEP-IRA, etc. - all of which have high contribution limits.
For example, Keogh plans allow one to save up to $40,000 per year in combined employee and employer
contributions.


                                                  16
provides a lower bound on the tax-arbitrage profit, while investing in MBS provides a

better estimate of the magnitude of the tax benefit. We do not consider additional
asset classes (e.g. equities) in our main results, because we do not want to change the

aggregate risk level of the portfolio.
       In addition to the variables that describe mortgage characteristics and TDA sav-

ings choices, we include a number of controls that reflect household wealth, income,

demographics, measures of financial savvy, liquidity constraints, self-reported reasons
for savings, and levels of risk and debt aversion. All of these variables are available in

the SCF. Finally, our estimates of households marginal tax rates (MTR) are derived
from TAXSIM calculations based on SCF income data.17


5        Summary Statistics

Homeowners with mortgage debt face the decision of whether to save first by repaying

their mortgage early or by contributing to a tax-deferred retirement account. As dis-
cussed in Section 2, this decision depends on numerous individual characteristics, such
as the mortgage interest rate, the investment opportunities, the effective tax rate, the

saving horizon, and additional liquidity and borrowing constraints facing a household.

In this section we divide households into distinct groups on the basis of their TDA and

mortgage prepayment decisions and provide a high-level comparison of key characteris-

tics of these groups to set the stage for the subsequent analysis of their choices


5.1       Household Characteristics by Eligibility and Home Own-
          ership

Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of households according to their savings oppor-

tunities. The three columns display characteristics of all households (column 1), of
  17
   We are very grateful to Kevin Moore and Dan Feenberg for computing these marginal tax rates.
Additional information on this microsimulation model can be found in Feenberg and Coutts (1993).



                                              17
households that are eligible to contribute to employer-sponsored retirement accounts

(column 2), and of those eligible households that own houses and have fixed rate mort-
gage debt (column 3). Our complete sample over the three survey years includes 13,046

observations that are based on an average of 102.7 million households per year using
the population weights given in the SCF. Slightly less than half of the households are

eligible to contribute to an employer-sponsored TDA. Slightly less than half of these

eligible households have a fixed-rate mortgage on their home. Thus, the average sample
of households that face the TDA-mortgage prepayment tradeoff contains 22.8 million

households per survey.
      To describe the distribution of household characteristics in our paper, we summarize

the mean and the inter-quartile ranges (IQR) of the corresponding variables. Households

that are eligible to contribute to an employer-sponsored retirement account tend to be
younger primarily because retired households do not have the opportunity to save in

retirement accounts. Eligible households are better educated than non-eligible house-
holds: 43.4% of eligible households have a college degree, while only 24.0% of non-eligible
households have a college degree. This difference occurs because retirement plans tend

to be more prevalent in companies where a large fraction of employees are professionals.
Eligible households receive significantly higher incomes and are in higher tax brackets

than non-eligible households.

      The income and wealth distribution is highly skewed to the right, resulting in signif-
icantly higher means than medians. For example, the mean normal household income

level for the three survey years sample is $54,211, while the median income level is

just $35,977. The differences are much more pronounced for wealth levels. The mean
household net worth in the SCF sample is $280,689, which exceeds the 75 percentile of

$205,600. These results confirm the well-known observation that the aggregate wealth
is concentrated among a relatively small fraction of the population.18
 18
      See Poterba (2000) for a description of the wealth concentration in the U.S.


                                                   18
       Comparing the second and the third columns indicates that eligible homeowners with

outstanding mortgage debt tend to have higher income and wealth levels than all eligible
households. The following sections focus on this last group of households which have

the choice of saving by building up home equity or retirement assets.19
       In unreported analysis, we have divided our sample into the three waves of the Survey

of Consumer Finances. Most household characteristics and our main results remain the

same over the time periods. So we do not differentiate among the survey years in the
remainder of the paper.


5.2       Household Characteristics by Saving Behavior

We sort the sample of eligible households with fixed-rate mortgage debt into four dif-
ferent groups according to their TDA contribution and mortgage prepayment behavior.
Table 2 summarizes the characteristics of households for these four groups. The first

sorting criterion depends on the contribution to the employer-provided retirement ac-
count. We observe that 34.6% of eligible households with fixed-rate mortgages (7.9
million households per year) do not contribute at all. To economize on space, we aver-

age over prepaying and non-prepaying households to report household characteristics by

their contribution decisions. On average, non-contributing households could contribute

an additional $5,640 to their TDAs, while contributing households could increase their
contributions further by $2,814 before reaching the contribution limit.

       These results indicate that many households do not take full advantage of the tax-

qualified retirement savings opportunities. These households might relinquish substan-

tial tax benefits and matching contributions of their employers. This fact is particularly
puzzling as many of these households own substantial financial assets, which they could

effectively transfer to their retirement accounts. Non-contributing households in our
  19
    In our sample, 89% of households with mortgage debt have a fixed-rate mortgage. We focus on
fixed-rate mortgages because we do not know the exact adjustment pattern and frequency for adjustable-
rate mortgages. However, households using adjustable-rate mortgages can also use similar arbitrage
strategies as the ones described in our paper if they use floating-rate bonds instead of fixed-rate bonds.


                                                   19
sample own, on average, taxable financial assets with a total value of $73,375. This av-

erage financial wealth level is skewed to the right as a small number of households own
very large portfolios of liquid financial assets. However, 53.9% of these non-contributing

households own liquid financial assets exceeding $10,000.
   The second sorting criterion depends on whether a household accelerates its mortgage

payoff either by making additional discretionary payments or by choosing a short-term

mortgage. We quantify both types of prepayments using the methodology described in
the preceding section. Aggregating over different contribution groups, we find that 46.1%

of eligible households with fixed-rate mortgages (10.5 million households) accelerate their
payments. Prepaying households make, on average, total prepayments of $3,140 per year,

where average discretionary prepayments amount to $1,482 and additional prepayments

due to short-term mortgages amount to $1,658.
   Combining the findings between the mortgage prepayment and the non-contribution

decisions, we have identified a substantial group of households that face the tradeoff
between TDA contribution and mortgage prepayments. We can utilize the arguments
in Sections 2–3 to check whether they are acting efficiently. It is particularly interesting

to compare the characteristics of the households in columns two (prepay and not con-
tribute) and three (contribute and not prepay) of Table 2. These households tend to save

similar amounts through prepayments and retirement account contributions. However,

the characteristics of these two groups of households differ substantially. As shown in

Panel B, the prepayers tend to be in better financial shape than the partial contributors,

which makes liquidity and other concerns identified in Section 3 less relevant and their

decision to forgo the tax arbitrage all the more puzzling.
   Panel C summarizes the mortgage characteristics of the households. The mortgage

rate tends to be slightly lower for prepayers, because some prepayers have short-term
mortgages that tend to have lower interest rates. Not surprisingly, the prepayers tend



                                            20
to have lower loan-to-value ratios, because many of these households also prepayed their

mortgages in the past, which reduced their outstanding balance.
       Finally, Panel D provides information on household credit card balances. While

there exists a statistically significant difference in the share of prepayer and non-prepayer
households with revolving balances, credit card debt is still quite common among pre-

payers. Among households in the second column (prepay and not contribute) that carry

credit card debt, the median balance is $2,000 and the median annual interest rate
is 12 percent. These households would clearly benefit from curtailing prepayment of

lower-interest (and often tax-deductible) mortgage debt and using the funds to pay off
their credit cards. They could do even better by using some of their highly liquid funds

invested in low-yielding assets like savings and money market accounts. This puzzle,

highlighted by Gross and Souleles (2002) is intriguing, but it remains outside the scope
of this paper.20


6        Gains from the Tax Arbitrage Strategy

This section computes the gains that households may achieve by following the proper

trade-off between mortgage prepayments and contributions to tax-deferred accounts.

These computations are normative in nature, as they identify households that make

“suboptimal” choices and impute the magnitudes of likely losses. We show that many

households make costly errors with respect to two of their most common financial

decisions–saving in a tax-deferred account and building equity in their home.


6.1       Marginal Benefits of The Tax-Arbitrage Strategy

The data in Table 2 shows that many households face the TDA contribution-prepayment

tradeoff. As discussed in Section 2, whether these households could be made better off
  20
   See Haliassos and Reiter (2005) for a novel solution to this puzzle based on intra-household decision
making with heterogeneous preferences (the ”accountant-shopper” framework).



                                                  21
by decreasing their prepayments and increasing their contributions to the retirement

account depends on households characteristics like available mortgage rate, investment
opportunities, effective tax burden, time horizon, and so on. While the reshuffling of

savings choices may not be optimal for all households, we can estimate the fraction of
households that would be better off by changing their saving strategies.

   We start by computing the marginal tradeoffs between accelerating mortgage pay-

ments and saving for retirement in the tax-deferred account. This tradeoff is given by
the MAP measure as derived in equation (2). We use the actual mortgage rates of

the households for rB and the current interest rates on mortgage-backed securities or
Treasury bonds for the investment rates rL , as discussed in Section 4. Mortgage in-

terest is assumed to be deductible at the tax rate τ only if the households currently

itemize deductions. For non-itemizing households we assume that mortgage interest is
not deductible. The investment horizon T equals the remaining maturity of the current

mortgage. Finally, TDA withdrawals face a penalty of 10% if the retirement account
holder is younger than 59 21 years.
   Table 3 summarizes the measure of MAP for households in our sample. Panel A as-

sumes that the retirement account is invested in MBS with a remaining maturity equal
to that of the mortgage. We demonstrate that a significant share of prepaying house-

holds would benefit from our proposed tax arbitrage by transferring the prepayments

to mortgage-backed securities in their retirement accounts. For example, 43.4% of eligi-

ble households that make prepayments and do not contribute exhibit positive arbitrage

gains. The mean arbitrage gain from switching $100 from a mortgage prepayment to a

retirement account amounts to $17.20 for this group. The distribution of the benefits
is relatively broad and the inter-quartile range varies between 7.7 and 23.7%. We can

interpret the MAP as the extra return that households can earn on their savings by
simply choosing the proper saving channel. The 17.20% is the present value of extra



                                          22
future returns, which amounts to more than 1% of extra return per year given the aver-

age horizon of households of 17 years in our sample. Considering the difficulty for most
mutual funds to generate this level of abnormal performance, our return from the simply

tax-arbitrage strategy is rather impressive.
   We obtain very similar results for households that make discretionary prepayments

and contribute to their employer-sponsored retirement accounts. Note, however, that of

the 3.5 million households with positive MAPs in this group, only 2.5 million that are
not bound by the contribution limit would benefit from the proposed tax arbitrage. The

mean marginal gain for such households equals 16.6%.
   Panel B summarizes the distribution of the tax benefits if the retirement account

is invested in Treasury bonds instead. As discussed in Section 3.1, this conservative

approach provides a lower bound on the tax benefit. It is comforting that we still obtain
a MAP of about 11% for those households that prepay.


6.2    Total Benefits of The Tax-Arbitrage Strategy

To quantify the Total Arbitrage Profit (TAP) for each household, we multiply the

Marginal Arbitrage Profit (MAP) by the minimum of the total prepayment and the

contribution gap:


                    T APi = M APi × min(P repaymenti , ContrGapi ).                   (3)

The TAP is positive only if the household has a positive MAP and if it is prepaying and

not contributing the maximum possible to the TDA.

   In Table 3, we show that, on average, prepaying households that do not contribute
forgo a TAP of $394 per year. The TAP measures are, on average, slightly smaller

for prepaying households that already contribute to a retirement account. Overall, an
average contributing household forgoes a TAP amounting to $375 per year. With a total

of about 4 million households experiencing a positive TAP, we calculate that households

                                           23
can gain about 1.5 billion dollars in tax benefits by following our tax strategy.

   Households do not have an option to replace a short-term mortgage with a long-
term mortgage without refinancing. On the other hand, it is relatively easy to simply

discontinue the discretionary mortgage prepayments. Therefore, we also report the TAP
separately between the gains that occur from discretionary prepayments and short-term

mortgages. Since a small number of households prepay in both manners and face binding

constraints, the total TAP is slightly smaller than the sum of the two individual TAPs.
We find that the average TAP from discretionary prepayments is larger than the TAP

from short-term mortgages.
   In Panel B, we show that even under the most conservative assumption of investing

in Treasury bonds in TDA, we have 2.5 million households with positive TAPs, leaving

an aggregate of $637 million per year on the table by prepaying and not contributing to
the maximum extent.

6.3    Alternative Scenarios

In this subsection, we calculate the forgone arbitrage gains using alternative assumptions
about future tax rates, employer matches, withdrawal penalties, and state taxes.

   Our calculation of MAP in (2) has assumed a constant tax rate over time. As

discussed in Section 3.5, tax rates can change over time either due to frequent tax
reforms or due to the change in taxable income throughout the lifetime of a household,

which generally put households in lower tax brackets during retirement. A higher tax

rate in the future has two effects on the arbitrage profit: First, the mortgage interest
payments receive higher tax deduction over time, which improves the arbitrage profit.

Second, the withdrawal from the TDA on the terminal date is worth less after-tax, which

reduces the arbitrage profit. Hence, the least favorable tax situation for a household is

an increase in the tax rate only on the terminal date.

   In Table 4, we report the forgone arbitrage profit for several alternative scenarios

                                           24
in which tax rates at withdrawal (T ) and during the remaining mortgage term (T − t)

are allowed to vary from the current reported marginal tax rates. The first row repeats
the forgone arbitrage profits and the number of affected households for our base-case

scenario described in Table 3. We start by considering several scenarios in which the
marginal tax rate changes only at the time of withdrawal, which yields more extreme

results.21

       Rows (2) and (3) assume that marginal tax rates will increase or decrease by 25%
for all tax brackets at time T . For example, the marginal tax rate of a household in the

28% tax bracket would either increase to 35% or decrease to 21%. A future tax increase
reduces the number of households with positive MAPs from 3.9 million to 2.7 million and

reduces the average MAPs slightly. Thus, the aggregate forgone tax benefit decreases

from $1.52 billion to $0.86 billion. On the other hand, a reduction in the tax rates at
withdrawal would increase the aggregate subsidy to $2.36 billion. A more extreme 50%

increase in the tax rates across the board will reduce the number of affected households
to 1.5 million. Even in this worst-case tax scenario for our strategy, however, the forgone
tax benefit amounts to about $400 million.

       The following four scenarios (rows (6)-(9)), change the progressivity of the tax system
by increasing or decreasing the tax rates of only the top three tax brackets. This setup

is similar in spirit to the 1993 tax increase, which was motivated in part by mounting

budgetary pressures. Furthermore, the scenarios in rows (8) and (9) implement the
change in tax rates five years from the survey date. In the case of tax increases (8),

the negative effect of higher taxes at withdrawal is now counterbalanced by the greater

attractiveness of the mortgage interest deduction in the intervening years (from t + 5 to
T ). On net, the total forgone tax benefit declines to $1.37 billion.

       Many employers provide matching TDA contributions. With matches, a household
  21
    Admittedly, it is difficult to imagine implementation of such tax reform, since it would affect different
households at different points in time. We also consider a more realistic situation in which the tax rate
changes five years from the survey date and remain fixed until the terminal date.


                                                     25
can finance the arbitrage strategy by contributing less of each dollar saved from mortgage

repayment. Assuming an employer match of $m for each $1 in contributions, the amount
required to repay the extra mortgage balance at T decreases from X, defined in (1), to

X 0 = X/(1 + m), resulting in a new MAP of 1 − (1 − τ )X 0 , which is higher than
the existing MAP in (2). However, matches are nearly always capped at a certain

percentage of salary and both the cap and match vary across employers. Since the SCF

only reports the product of these two terms (i.e. the total employer match), we assume
a common match rate of 0.5 applied to contributions up to 6% of total salary. This

matching schedule mimics the most common practice of U.S. employers (Engelhardt
and Kumar, 2006). Row (10) of Table 4 shows this scenario applied to households that

report having an employer match component in their TDA. Contributions beyond the

assumed matching cap are valued using the MAP measure in (2).
   As conjectured, allowing employer matching substantially increases the attractiveness

of the arbitrage strategy. The mean marginal gain from a re-allocated dollar in mortgage
prepayment jumps to 38%, and the aggregate subsidy value increases to $2.64 billion.
The average gain rises more modestly, as many of the extra 1.7 million households with

positive MAP values find it optimal to contribute only up to the matching limit which
restricts their dollar gains from following the strategy.

   The table also reports scenarios that allow deductibility of TDA contributions and

mortgage interest payments from state taxes and eliminate early withdrawal penalties.

In particular, the gains would be significantly higher if households avoid withdrawing

TDA funds early to eliminate the 10% early withdrawal penalty. Since the public SCF

data do not include information on the households’ state of domicile, we do not include
state taxes in our computations. However, row (12) evaluates a hypothetical case of

mortgage interest and TDA deductions from a uniform 5% state tax. Doing so increases
the aggregate forgone tax benefit to $1.93 billion.



                                            26
6.4    Characteristics of Losers and Winners from Arbitrage

To set the stage for further analysis on why households leave money on the table, we
summarize the characteristics of households that benefit or lose from our proposed arbi-

trage in Table 5. Panel A summarizes the main determinants of the gains of the proposed

arbitrage. Households that gain from our proposed arbitrage tend to be slightly older,
primarily because older households are less likely to face the 10% early withdrawal

penalty. It is not surprising that the winners have lower mortgage interest rates and

lower mortgage spreads than the losers. Finally, arbitrage winners tend to be in higher

tax brackets than arbitrage losers.

    Panel B summarizes the wealth characteristics of winners and losers. The average

net worth of the households that currently do not contribute to an employer-sponsored

retirement account and that would gain from our proposed arbitrage amounts to $551,529
and more than 75% of these households have a total net worth exceeding $100,000.
A significant fraction of this net worth is held in liquid non-retirement assets and in

home equity. The average non-retirement liquid wealth equals $142,063. Moreover, only

10% of these households have current loan-to-value ratios exceeding 80%, which might

result in additional mortgage insurance premia. We obtain very similar results if we
focus on households that make partial contributions to their retirement accounts. This

indicates that it is unlikely that a large fraction of the winners face substantial liquidity

constraints, which would induce them to save by paying down their mortgage instead of

saving in a retirement account.


7     An Empirical Analysis of Prepayment and Retire-
      ment Saving Decisions

As shown in the preceding sections, a significant number of households fail to make

wealth-maximizing decisions with respect to two of their most significant assets–housing


                                             27
wealth and tax-deferred retirement accounts. In particular, we showed that when faced

with the trade-off between paying off an extra dollar of mortgage and saving that dollar
in a tax-deferred retirement account, households often choose an inferior strategy leading

to large aggregate losses.
       Our goal in this section is to provide some explanation for this seemingly inefficient

behavior. We focus on four non-exclusive possibilities–(a) households are constrained

by their liquidity and consumption needs; (b) information required for making a proper
choice is limited or costly; (c) household decisions are influenced by certain institutional

features, such as private mortgage insurance (PMI) and bankruptcy law;22 and (d)
household choices are distorted by specific preferences over the form of saving and per-

ceived differences in risk and liquidity characteristics between the two savings habitats.

A particular form of preferences in (d) is referred to as “debt aversion.” For example,
debt-averse households may find mortgage repayment that directly reduces their debt a

more appealing savings choice, even though it may result in lower net worth than TDA
contributions.
       The intuition for each of these classes of explanations is straightforward. Not having

enough current resources may curtail the ability of some households to make decisions on
the infra-marginal level. Moreover, liquidity-constrained households would put greater

emphasis on accessibility of saved assets, and would thus favor savings habitats that they

perceive as more liquid. Limited information may preclude an objective cost-benefit

analysis of the tradeoff.

       On the other hand, choosing to forgo the arbitrage strategy may be a rational re-

sponse to certain institutional factors. As described in Section 3.4, households in high
homestead-exemption states may choose to build up their home equity as a means to

shelter assets in the event of bankruptcy. Similarly, households may be accelerating
  22
    PMI is mortgage guarantee insurance offered by the private insurance market which protects the
lender from a loss in the event of default. Lenders typically require PMI on mortgages that have
loan-to-value ratios of greater than 80 percent.


                                               28
repayment to bring their loan-to-value ratios below the 80 percent threshold, thereby

obtaining an option to eliminate PMI payments.
   Turning to preferences, more risk-averse households may choose to forgo an increase

in expected wealth since the proposed exchange of a mortgage dollar for a TDA dollar
is risky when the latter is invested in, say, an MBS fund. Finally, being motivated by

a “socially acceptable” savings goal like debt-free home ownership may eliminate other

savings vehicles from the set of alternative investment choices.
   Our empirical analysis is structured as follows. First, we consider the determinants

of each of the savings choices - having a short maturity mortgage, making discretionary
mortgage prepayments, and contributing to TDA - and analyze whether these choices are

made jointly. We next look at the relative preference for retirement savings, by analyzing

the share of total TDA-mortgage savings that is attributable to TDA contributions. In
particular, we test the hypothesis that households understand the tradeoff between these

two forms of savings and tilt their choice towards TDA contributions when it is more
beneficial to do so (i.e., when MAP is higher). We further test whether the hypothesized
relationship between MAP and TDA-mortgage savings decision varies with household

preferences and knowledge.


7.1    Variable Definitions

Throughout this section, we will be using a vector of explanatory variables based on the
discussion in the preceding subsection. Taking the choice to hold a short mortgage as

an example, we estimate the following probit regression:


    ShortM ortgagei = β1 M AP Componentsi + β2 Liq.Constraintsi + β3 Inf ormationi (4)

      + β4 Institutionsi + β5 P ref erencesi + β6 EmployerM atchi + β7 Demographicsi + ui


   Regressors that make up the vector of MAP components include (a) the spread

between the existing mortgage rate and the MBS rate at the time of the survey, in-

                                           29
terpolated over the remaining mortgage term (rB − rL ), (b) the federal tax bracket in

the year preceding the survey, and (c) an indicator variable for households that itemize
deductions.

       We define liquidity constraints by combining information from several survey ques-
tions. Liquidity-constrained households are defined as those that satisfy at least one of

the following conditions: (i) they were turned down for credit at least once during the

past five years, (ii) were not able to obtain this credit later or were discouraged from
applying again, or (iii) have credit card balances in excess of 75% of their total credit

card borrowing limit. Household wealth is another indicator of liquidity constraints,
measured by the logarithm of household net worth.
       We use two binary variables to gauge how easy it is to acquire and to analyze informa-

tion necessary for making financial decisions. The first is a simple indicator variable for
having a college degree. The second takes on a value of one for households that consult

a professional in “making savings and investment decisions”. The list of suitably knowl-
edgeable professionals includes accountants, bankers, brokers, and financial planners.
About 49% of households in our sample relied on advice from such professionals.

       Residence in a high homestead exemption state and presence of PMI serve to de-
scribe the institutional setting. About 19% of households in our sample reside in “High

Homestead Exemption”states (defined as states with a statutory homestead exemption

of at least $100,000), and about 22% report carrying PMI.23

       One of the measures of preference heterogeneity is the self-reported willingness to take

on financial risk which ranges from 1 to 4, with the value of 4 indicating “unwillingness

to take any financial risks.” Our measure of household tolerance for debt is based on
reported behavior with respect to paying off credit card debt. This binary variable is set
  23
    High Homestead Exemption states include FL, IA, KS, OK, SD, and TX, which have no limits,
and AZ, MA, MN, NV, and RI, which have exemptions above $100,000. Restricting ”high exemption”
states to those with no limits does not affect the results. We are indebted to Kevin Moore of the Board
of Governors for estimating regression specifications with state-specific variables using internal SCF
data.



                                                  30
to one for those that report paying off their balances in full “always or almost always”.

Arguably, such payment behavior reflects not only the household’s ability to pay but
also its determination to restrict its spending to what it can afford. Consequently, we

interpret this variable as an indicator of debt aversion.
      The vector of regressors is rounded out by a measure of attractiveness of TDA contri-

butions and simple demographics. We would expect the magnitude of employer match

to affect mortgage prepayment choice only if this form of savings is a substitute or a
complement of TDA contributions.24 The vector of demographic characteristics contains

the number of children in the household, as well as age and marital status. Finally, we
also include survey year and mortgage origination year dummies, where the latter con-

trol for exogenous changes in the structure of mortgage markets. Table 6 contains the

moments and the pairwise correlations between the various explanatory variables.


7.2      What Influences Prepayment and Contribution Behavior?

From the outset, we limit the sample to home owners with outstanding fixed-rate mort-
gages who are eligible to participate in employer-sponsored tax-deferred plans. These

households face an active choice between prepayment and TDA contributions.

      Table 7 presents the results of estimating probit regressions (4) for each of the three

savings choices separately. The leftmost column shows the estimated marginal effects of
the regressors on the choice of a short-maturity mortgage. We find that variables pointing
to a higher MAP are associated with a lower likelihood of prepayment, as suggested by

the argument in Section 2. In particular, the likelihood of holding a short mortgage

decreases with the borrowing-lending spread. A lower spread implies that it is more
attractive to decrease monthly mortgage payments by switching to a 30-year mortgage

and to invest the difference in TDA. Of the two tax variables, itemization (which is
 24
    We also conduct a more formal test of independence between the mortgage prepayment and TDA
contribution decisions, which is discussed later in this section.




                                              31
a necessary condition for writing off mortgage interest expense) has a strong negative

effect, with itemizers being 8 percentage points less likely to hold a short mortgage.
       Taking out a short mortgage requires a commitment to higher monthly cash pay-

ments. Consequently, we find strong effects for variables that indicate availability of
financial resources. In particular, liquidity-constrained households are found to be 9

percentage points less likely to have a short mortgage. Household net worth is another

key factor behind this decision. The estimated coefficient suggests that each percentage
point increase in net worth leads to about a 5% rise in the probability of prepayment

via a short mortgage. In a similar vein, we find that households making PMI payments
are less likely to take out short-term mortgages. On the other hand, there is no evidence

that residing in a high-exemption state affects the term of the mortgage significantly.

       We further find that more risk-averse households are marginally more likely to hold
short mortgages. One of the frequently told stories for mortgage prepayment is the

desire to be “free of debt,” even if it entails sacrificing current consumption to achieve
this goal. Thus, we would expect households that strive to be debt-free to make natural
candidates for committed prepayment in the form of a short mortgage. Consistent with

this conjecture, we find that debt averse households are more likely to choose short
mortgages (and, as shown later, make discretionary prepayments).25

       In sum, the decision to have a short maturity mortgage is affected by a number of

variables that conform to rational models of financial decision-making. There is some

evidence that households making such choice have less to gain from the interest rate

deduction, have the financial wherewithal for higher payments (higher net worth and no

liquidity constraints), and are more debt-averse.
  25
    One could make a case for the endogeneity of our measure of debt aversion, since the decision
to pay off a credit card and make an extra mortgage payment are made simultaneously. However,
as argued earlier, paying off credit card balances in full is an indicator of household consumption and
savings tastes. As such, this variable provides useful information of what otherwise would be an omitted
measure of household heterogeneity, and it is kept in reported regression specifications. For robustness,
we re-estimated all regressions without this variable. Omitting debt aversion makes the effect of net
worth more positive and raises its statistical significance. There are no qualitative changes in any of
the other coefficients.


                                                   32
   It is more difficult to find influence of such rational factors on the decision to make

discretionary prepayments, however. As shown in the middle column of Table 7, few
factors have statistically significant explanatory power for the household choice to write

additional checks to their mortgage company. We still find that being subject to liquidity
constraints serves as a barrier to making mortgage prepayments, even when such prepay-

ments do not require the commitment associated with short maturity mortgages. Also,

debt aversion increases the likelihood of discretionary prepayments. However, there is
no evidence that a household’s financial position (whether in the form of net worth or

current income as proxied by the tax variables) plays a role in this decision. Nor is there
much support for the motive to eliminate PMI or build up more home equity for pos-

sible bankruptcy. Moreover, the estimated coefficient on the borrowing-lending spread

is negative, implying that households for whom the current investment opportunities
are poor (high spread) are nevertheless less likely to pay off their expensive mortgage

obligations.
   For completeness, we model the TDA contribution decision as a function of the same
set of factors. The estimation results are shown in the rightmost column of Table 7. We

find that households with high current income (i.e. those in high tax brackets) and those
itemizing tax deductions are more likely to contribute. Once again, we find evidence

of the importance of liquidity constraints, as liquidity constrained households shy away

from making TDA contributions. There is also a strong negative cohort effect in TDA
participation.

   Interestingly, more risk averse households are less likely to contribute to TDAs, al-

though risk aversion affects the prepayment decision only marginally. Debt aversion, on
the other hand, fails to show up in TDA contributions even though it features promi-

nently in prepayment decisions. The TDA contribution decision is also strongly posi-
tively affected by the size of the employer match, which plays no role in the prepayment



                                            33
decision. These results raise the possibility that the two types of decisions are somewhat

separable.
   A better way to assess this hypothesis is to evaluate the likelihood of prepayment

and TDA contributions jointly, by allowing the error terms of these decisions to be
correlated. There may well be some unobserved factors that influence each of these

decisions, biasing the single-equation coefficients. To account for this possibility, we

estimate an unreported bivariate probit model of contribution and prepayment decisions.
Each equation contains one unique regressor to help with identification. The size of

the TDA match is excluded from the prepayment equation, while a dummy variable
identifying PMI-paying households is excluded from the contribution equation. Each of

the excluded variables is conjectured to influence one of the decisions without having a

direct effect on the other.
   We cannot reject the hypothesis of independence between the two savings decisions

regardless of the way mortgage repayment is defined. To check whether some households
follow the explicit tradeoff implied by the MAP measure and whether their preference
and knowledge affect this decision, we turn to the analysis of the composition of savings

in the next section.

7.3      Relative Preference for Contributions vs. Prepayments

The dependent variable in this subsection, T DAF raction, captures the fraction of rel-

evant savings that is directed towards tax-deferred contributions rather than prepay-

ments.

                                           T DAContribution
                  T DAF raction ≡                                  ,
                                    P repayment + T DAContribution

where P repayment is defined in turn as (i) the imputed prepayment from holding a

short mortgage, and (ii) the discretionary prepayment, and T DAContribution is the

total dollar contribution of all household members. T DAF raction is continuous by

                                           34
construction, with values ranging from 0 to 1.

   We proceed to estimate a variant of equation (4) using T DAF raction as the depen-
dent variable and modifying the vector of explanatory variables in two ways. First, we

replace M AP components with the M AP itself. Since we are now looking explicitly at
the relative taste for TDA contributions versus prepayments, M AP is the proper mea-

sure for capturing the influence of “rational ” factors, in spite of its inherent nonlinearity.

In other words, if households are aware of the tax-arbitrage strategy, the M AP measure
should explain part of the cross-sectional differences in T DAF raction.

   Recall that in theory higher M AP values indicate larger tax benefits for substituting
mortgage prepayments for TDA contributions. It is possible that the degree to which

households relate MAP to this tradeoff varies with certain household characteristics. For

instance, debt-averse households may be pre-occupied by the motive to reduce mortgage
debt and thus pay less attention to MAP, leading to a weaker positive relationship

with T DAF raction. To test this, we add interactions of M AP with preference and
information variables to the vector of regressors.
   Note that T DAF raction cannot be defined for households that make no TDA con-

tributions and no mortgage prepayments (henceforth, 0-0 households). The resulting
sample truncation opens up the possibility of selection bias. Therefore, prior to esti-

mating a Tobit version of (4) for T DAF raction, we test for sample selection using a

standard Heckman two-step estimator (Heckman, 1976). We use self-reported saving

habits as instruments for identifying the choice to make at least one of the two savings

decisions and thus to be excluded from the 0-0 group. We find that households that save

regularly are indeed more likely to make prepayments or TDA contributions. However,
the estimated inverse Mills ratio is not statistically different from zero, and we there-

fore proceed to estimate regressions for T DAF raction on the truncated sample without
making adjustments for sample selection bias.



                                              35
   Table 8 presents the results for both definitions of prepayments. The comparison of

estimated M AP coefficients across the two prepayment types is quite jarring. Recall
that the intuition for M AP was derived from a hypothetical conversion of a dollar in

discretionary prepayments to a dollar in TDA contributions. Yet, although the tradeoff
between discretionary prepayments and TDA contributions is ideally suited to be made

on the basis of M AP , the estimated coefficient is of the wrong sign. It is surprising

that, on average, households for whom it is more advantageous to channel discretionary
prepayments into TDA contributions do precisely the opposite. In contrast, the revealed

taste for contributions is substantially higher for short-mortgage households with high
M AP values.
   Specifications in columns (2) and (4) further decompose the effects of M AP on this

tradeoff. In the case of short mortgage prepayments, having access to better financial
information (either through a financial advisor or through a better education) substan-

tially increases the likelihood of making the right choice, as both M AP interaction terms
on these variables are strongly positive. However, we fail to detect any moderating effect
of better information on making the correct choice in the case of discretionary prepay-

ments. For both types of prepayments we find little evidence that household preferences
influence the mortgage-TDA tradeoff through M AP . There is also no measurable dif-

ference for households not subject to TDA withdrawal penalties, for whom TDA savings

have few drawbacks. In the case of discretionary prepayments, this means that non-
penalized households are just as likely to be forgoing the arbitrage, reminiscent of the

results in Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2005).

   Similar to the results in Table 7, we find that characteristics other than M AP influ-
ence households’ relative preferences towards mortgage prepayment or TDA savings. As

argued earlier in section 3.3, it is difficult to claim that home equity is unambiguously
more liquid that TDA assets. The results in Table 8 are consistent with this view. In



                                           36
only one of the specifications the liquidity-constrained households are found to have dif-

ferent relative preferences. Even in this case, they display a greater taste for retirement
contributions, contrary to the common view that home equity provides better liquidity.

Notwithstanding the relative strength of the effects of liquidity constraints on prepay-
ments and TDA contributions (see Table 7), both of these forms of savings appear to be

negatively affected by liquidity considerations. This suggests that liquidity-constrained

households may prefer to first build up wealth in liquid taxable accounts instead.
    Preference heterogeneity shows up consistently in each of the specifications. We find

that households that are more risk- and debt-averse generally favor mortgage prepay-
ments over TDA contributions. The finding that debt-averse households focus on paying

off their debt obligations is consistent with the hypothesis that preferences for specific

forms of wealth may override the goal of maximizing the overall wealth level.


8     Conclusion

We characterize the optimal tradeoff between contributing an extra dollar of savings
towards accelerating mortgage payments and saving that extra dollar in tax-qualified

retirement accounts. We show that it is often a tax-arbitrage to reduce prepayments

and increase TDA contributions. We document actual household behavior using data

from the Survey of Consumer Finances, and conclude that about 38% of households who

prepay their mortgages could benefit from our proposed arbitrage strategy. Depending

on the choice of the investment asset in the TDA, the median gain from such a real-

location ranges between 11 and 17 cents per dollar of “mis-allocated savings”. Finally,
we show empirically that this inefficient behavior is unlikely to be driven by liquidity or

other constraints, and that self-reported debt aversion and risk aversion variables explain

to some extent the household preference for paying off their debt obligations early and

hence the propensity to forgo our tax arbitrage.



                                            37
References

[1] Agnew, Julie, Pierluigi Balduzzi, and Annika Sunden, 2003, Portfolio Choice and

   Trading in a Large 401(k) Plan, American Economic Review, 93 (1), 193-215.

[2] Amromin, Gene, 2004, Portfolio Allocation Choices in Taxable and Tax-Deferred

   Accounts: An Empirical Analysis of Tax Efficiency, Board of Governors of the

   Federal Reserve System Working Paper.

[3] Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2003, Are Individual Investors Tax Savvy? Ev-
   idence from Retail and Discount Brokerage Accounts, Journal of Public Economics,

   88, 419-442.

[4] Bergstresser, Daniel, and James M. Poterba, 2004, Asset Allocation and Asset
   Location: Household Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances, Journal of

   Public Economics, 88, 1893-1915.

[5] Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler, 2001, Naive Diversification Strategies in
   Defined Contribution Saving Plans, American Economic Review, 91 (1), 79-98.

[6] Bodie, Zvi, and Dwight B. Crane, 1997, Personal Investing: Advice, Theory, and

   Evidence, Financial Analysts Journal, 13-23.

[7] Brown, Jeffrey R., Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner, 2006, Individual Account

   Investment Options and Portfolio Choice: Behavioral Lessons from 401(k) Plans,

   University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Working Paper.

[8] Campbell, John Y., 2006, Household Finance, Forthcoming: Journal of Finance.

[9] Campbell, John Y. and Joao F. Cocco, 2003, Household Risk Management and

   Optimal Mortgage Choice, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (4), 1449-1494.



                                         38
[10] Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2004, Plan Design and

    401(k) Savings Outcomes, National Tax Journal, 57 (2), 275-298.

[11] Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2005, $100 Bills on the

    Sidewalk: Suboptimal Saving in 401(k) Plans, Yale University Working Paper.

[12] Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004, For

    Better or for Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior, In Perspectives

    on the Economics of Aging, edited by David A. Wise. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press
    (for NBER).

[13] Choi, James J. David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2002,
    Defined Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participation Choices, and the Path of
    Least Resistence, Tax Policy and the Economy, 16, 67-113.

[14] Cunningham, Christopher R. and Gary V. Engelhardt, 2002, Federal Tax Policy,
    Employer Matching, and 401(k) Saving: Evidence from HRS W-2 Records, National

    Tax Journal, 55 (3), 617-645.

[15] Dammon, Robert M., Chester S. Spatt, and Harold H. Zhang, 2004, Optimal As-
    set Location and Allocation with Taxable and Tax-Deferred Investing, Journal of

    Finance, 59, 999-1037.

[16] Duflo, Esther, William Gale, Jeffrey Liebman, Peter Orszag, and Emmanuel Saez,

    2006, Saving Incentives for Low- and Middle-Income Families: Evidence from a

    Field Experiment with H&R Block, Forthcoming: Quarterly Journal of Economics.

[17] Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez, 2003, The Role of Information and Social Inter-

    actions in Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,

    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (3), 815-842.



                                         39
[18] Engelhardt, Gary V. and Anil Kumar, 2006, Employer Matching and 401(k) Sav-

    ing: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study, Syracuse University Working
    Paper.

[19] Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst, and Michelle J. White, 2002, The Household Bankruptcy

    Decision, American Economic Review, 92 (3), 706-718.

[20] Feenberg, Daniel R. and Elisabeth Coutts, 1993, An introduction to the TAXSIM

    model, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12 (1), 189-194.

[21] Fu, Qiang, Michael Lacour-Little, and Kerry Vandell, 1997, Retiring Early: an

    Empirical Analysis of the Mortgage Curtailment Decision, University of Wisconsin
    Center for Urban Land Economic Research Working Paper 97-09.

[22] Garlappi, Lorenzo, and Jennifer Huang, 2006, Are Stocks Desirable in Tax-Deferred

    Accounts? Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

[23] Graham, John R., 2000, How Big Are the Tax Benefits of Debt? Journal of Finance,
    55 (5), 1901-1942.

[24] Gross, David B. and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2002, Do Liquidity Constraints and In-
    terest Rates Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data

    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117 (1), 149-185.

[25] Heckman, James J., 1976, The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Trunca-

    tion, Sample Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and A Simple Estimator

    for Such Models, Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, 5, 475-492.

[26] Haliassos, Michael and Michael Reiter, 2005, Credit Card Debt Puzzles, University
    of Frankfurt Working Paper 2005/26.




                                          40
[27] Hoynes, Hilary W. and Daniel McFadden, 1997, The Impact of Demographics on

    Housing and Nonhousing Wealth in the United States, In M. Hurd and N. Yashiro
    (Eds.), The Economic Effects of Aging in the United States and Japan, University

    of Chicago Press: Chicago, 153-194.

[28] Huang, Jennifer, 2005, Portfolio Decisions with Taxable and Tax-Deferred Ac-

    counts: A Tax-Arbitrage Approach, University of Texas at Austin Working Paper.

[29] Huberman, Gur and Wei Jiang, 2006, Offering vs. Choice in 401(k) Plans: Equity
    Exposure and Number of Funds, Journal of Finance, 61 (2), 763-801.

[30] Hurst, Erik and Frank Stafford, 2004, Home Is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage
    Refinancing and Household, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 36 (6), 985-
    1014.

[31] Kennickell, Arthur B. and Martha Starr-McCluer, 1994, Changes in Family Fi-
    nances from 1989 to 1992: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances, Federal

    Reserve Bulletin, 80, 861-882.

[32] Madrian, Brigitte C. and Dennis F. Shea, 2001, The Power of Suggestion: Inertia
    in 401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116

    (4), 1149-1187.

[33] Mitchell, Olivia S., Stephen P. Utkus, and Tongxuan (Stella) Yang, 2005, Better

    Plans for the Better-Paid: Determinants and Effects of 401(k) Plan Design, Uni-

    versity of Pennsylvania Working Paper.

[34] Pence, Karen M., 2001, 401(k)s and Household Saving: New Evidence from the

    Survey of Consumer Finances, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

    Working Paper.



                                          41
[35] Poterba, James M., 2000, Stock Market Wealth and Consumption, Journal of Eco-

    nomic Perspectives, 14 (2), 99-118.

[36] Poterba, James M., John B. Shoven, and Clemens Sialm, 2004, Asset Location for

    Retirement Savers, In William G. Gale et al. (Editors). Private Pensions and Public
    Policies, Washington: Brookings Institution, 290-331.

[37] Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise, 1995, Do 401(K) Con-

    tributions Crowd Out Other Personal Saving? Journal of Public Economics, 58,
    1-32.

[38] Quigley, John M., 2002, Homeowner Mobility and Mortgage Interest Rates: New
    Evidence from the 1990s, Real Estate Economics, 30 (3), 345-364.

[39] Shoven, John B., and Clemens Sialm, 2004, Asset Location in Tax-Deferred and

    Conventional Savings Accounts, Journal of Public Economics, 88, 23-38.

[40] Sialm, Clemens, 2006, Investment Taxes and Equity Returns, NBER Working Paper
    No. 12146.

[41] Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002, Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of
    Intertemporal Substitution, Journal of Political Economy, 110, 825-853.

[42] White, Michelle J., 1998, Why Don’t More Households File for Bankruptcy? Jour-

    nal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 14 (2), 205-231.
Table 1: Characteristics of All Households
This table summarizes some characteristics of households from the 1995, 1998, and
2001 Surveys of Consumer Finances. The first column summarizes the characteristics
of all households, the second column summarizes the characteristics of households that
are eligible to contribute to an employer-sponsored retirement account, and the third
column summarizes the characteristics of households that are eligible to contribute to an
employer-sponsored retirement account and that currently have a fixed-rate mortgage
outstanding. The number in the first row of each characteristic corresponds to the
weighted mean, where the weights are the population weights provided by the Survey
of Consumer Finances. The two numbers in brackets correspond to the interquartile
ranges of the characteristics.

 Variable                                      All               All Eligible         All Eligible
                                            Households           Households           Households
                                                                                      with Fixed
                                                                                       Mortgage
 Number of Observations                         13,046                8,569                 2,684
 Number of Households                           102.7M                46.6M                22.8M
 Age                                              48.7                 42.5                 43.6
                                               [35 - 61]            [34 - 50]            [37 - 50]
 Proportion Married (in %)                        59.2                 71.9                 82.4
 Proportion with College (in %)                   32.8                 43.4                 49.0
 Proportion with High School (in %)               83.2                 93.0                  95.1
 Risk-Aversion Score                               3.2                  2.9                  2.8
                                                 [3 - 4]              [2 - 4]              [2 - 3]
 Proportion that are Debt Averse (in %)           39.2                 40.6                 37.9
 Proportion with Liquidity Constraints            28.9                 29.7                  22.4
 Normal Income                                  54,211               71,887                85,174
                                          [19,267 - 61,675]    [34,949 - 79,149]    [45,069 - 92,512]
 Federal Tax Bracket                              16.5                 22.2                 24.1
                                               [15 - 28]            [15 - 28]            [15 - 28]
 Liquid Financial Wealth                        85,276               78,061                81,399
                                            [870 - 36,720]      [2,100 -40,800]      [4,200 - 58,000]
 Retirement Wealth                              36,216               54,075               66,673
                                             [0 - 18,100]        [80 - 43,000]       [2,200 - 65,000]
 Credit Card Balance                             1,699                2,362                 2,572
                                              [0 - 1,300]          [0 - 2,650]          [0 - 3,100]
 Net Worth                                     280,689               285,841              314,458
                                          [9,700 - 205,600]   [24,600 - 222,980]   [58,080 - 287,800]
Table 2: Characteristics of Households According to Prepayment and Contri-
bution Behavior
This table summarizes some characteristics of households from the 1995, 1998, and 2001
Surveys of Consumer Finances according to their prepayment and contribution behav-
ior. The sample consists of households that have fixed-rate mortgages and are eligible
for employer-sponsored TDAs. The number in the first row of each characteristic cor-
responds to the weighted mean, where the weights are the population weights provided
by the Survey of Consumer Finances. The two numbers in brackets correspond to the
interquartile ranges of the characteristics.

 Variable                           No Contributions                           Contributions
                              No Prepay           Prepay                No Prepay           Prepay
 Panel A: Prepayment and Contribution Behavior

 Number of Observations           482                  425                  867                  908
 Number of Households            4.5M                 3.4M                 7.8M                 7.1M
 Contribution                                                              4,966                5,506
                                                                      [1,680 - 6,400]      [1,800 - 7,400]
 Contribution Gap                5,257                6,149                2,770                2,864
                            [3,000 - 6,700]      [3,400 - 8,600]       [180 - 4,200]        [200 - 4,260]
 Total Prepayments                                    2,712                                     3,345
                                                  [728 - 2,782]                             [858 - 3,386]
 Discretionary                                         953                                      1,735
 Prepayments                                        [0 - 826]                                [0 - 1,271]
 Short Mortgage                                       1,759                                     1,610
 Prepayments                                       [0 - 1,947]                               [0 - 2,107]
 Panel B: Wealth Levels

 Liquid Financial Wealth          60,775              90,051                67,515              105,348
                             [2,101 - 32,500]    [5,000 - 72,650]      [3,600 - 42,000]     [8,000 - 87,700]
 Retirement Wealth                22,943              56,101                71,344               94,393
                               [0 - 11,000]        [0 - 36,000]        [7,000 - 73,000]    [12,500 -105,000]
 Home Equity                      61,593              93,190                63,464               90,580
                            [16,000 - 77,000]   [28,000 - 113,000]    [17,000 - 75,000]   [31,000 - 111,000]
 Net Worth                       210,508             363,152               265,282              411,311
                           [35,300 - 163,800]   [65,200 - 367,600]   [51,200 - 258,400]   [91,350 - 387,240]
 Panel C: Mortgage Characteristics (in %)

 Mortgage Rate                   8.00                 7.81                 7.87                 7.59
                             [7.00 - 8.50]        [7.00 - 8.30]        [7.00 - 8.50]        [6.95 - 8.00]
 Loan/Value Ratio                58.5                 45.9                 61.8                 50.1
                             [35.6 - 80.0]        [25.7 - 64.1]        [45.4 - 80.0]        [32.3 - 68.4]
 Federal Tax Bracket             21.7                 23.8                 24.2                 25.7
                               [15 - 28]            [15 - 28]            [15 - 28]            [15 - 28]
 Panel D: Households with Credit Card Debt

 Proportion with Debt             53.0                 44.7                 52.8                 43.9
 Median Balance                  2,400                2,000                3,000                3,000
 Median Interest Rate             14.3                12.0                  14.0                 12.5
 Median Liquid Assets            3,000                3,700                3,200                4,500
Table 3: Forgone Arbitrage Opportunities
This table summarizes the marginal (MAP) and the total arbitrage profits (TAP) for
households which have positive MAPs based on the 1995, 1998, and 2001 Surveys of
Consumer Finances. The number in the first row of each characteristic corresponds to
the weighted mean, where the weights are the population weights provided by the Survey
of Consumer Finances. The two numbers in brackets correspond to the interquartile
ranges of the characteristics. Panels A and B correspond to the MAP and TAP computed
using the investment rates from Mortgage-Backed Securities and from Treasury Bonds,
respectively.


                                                  No Contributions                Contributions
                                               No Prepay     Prepay           No Prepay     Prepay
 Panel A: Using MBS Rate for TDA investments

 Number of Households with MAP> 0                  2.2M            1.5M           4.5M            3.5M
 Proportion of Households with MAP> 0 (in %)       48.9            43.4           58.2            48.8
 MAP (in %)                                        21.4            17.2           22.9            16.6
                                               [10.0 - 31.2]   [7.7 - 23.7]   [11.9 - 33.7]   [7.9 - 24.8]
 Number of Households with TAP> 0                    0             1.5M             0             2.5M
 TAP from All Prepayments                                           394                            375
                                                                [77 - 403]                     [54 - 471]
 TAP from Discretionary Prepayments                                 265                            280
                                                                 [0 - 223]                      [0 - 326]
 TAP from Short Mortgage                                            151                            107
                                                                 [0 - 156]                      [0 - 137]
 Aggregate TAP = $1.528 Billion
 Panel B: Using T-Bond Rate for TDA investments

 Number of Households with MAP> 0                 1.1M             0.9M          2.7M             2.1M
 Proportion of Households with MAP> 0 (in %)       26.3             28.6          35.1             30.0
 MAP (in %)                                        16.0             10.9          14.6             10.4
                                               [6.9 - 25.0]    [2.3 - 14.8]   [6.2 - 20.9]    [4.4 - 14.9]
 Number of Households with TAP> 0                    0             0.9M            0              1.6M
 TAP from All Prepayments                                           281                            240
                                                                [28 - 338]                     [41 - 289]
 TAP from Discretionary Prepayments                                 188                            164
                                                                  [0 - 93]                      [0 - 210]
 TAP from Short Mortgage                                            112                             82
                                                                 [0 - 116]                       [0 - 83]
 Aggregate TAP = $0.637 Billion
Table 4: Alternative Scenarios for Evaluating Forgone Arbitrage Opportunities
This table summarizes the marginal (MAP) and the total arbitrage profit (TAP) under a number of alternative scenarios.
The sample is limited to households that have not exhausted their allowed TDA contributions. In all “time-T-only” scenarios,
we assume that only the MTR at withdrawal is affected; the current tax rates are used in valuing the tax deduction from
additional TDA contributions and deductibility of mortgage interest payments for tax itemizers. In the “employer match”
scenario, we assume an employer contribution of 50 cents per each $1 in TDA contributions, up to 6% of total salary.

  Scenario                                                         Households      Mean MAP       Mean TAP     Aggregate Forgone
                                                                   if MAP> 0    if MAP> 0 (in %) with MAP> 0        Subsidy
  (1)    Base Case Scenario                                           3.9M            17.2           $385           $1.52B
  (2)    25% Increase in Tax Rates Across the Board at T             2.7M            14.7           $321            $0.87B
  (3)    25% Decrease in Tax Rates Across the Board at T             5.3M            19.8           $447            $2.36B
  (4)    50% Increase in Tax Rates Across the Board at T             1.5M            12.9           $275            $0.40B
  (5)    50% Decrease in Tax Rates Across the Board at T             6.3M            22.8           $513            $3.23B
  (6)    25% Increase in Tax Rates For Top 3 Brackets at T           3.6M            16.6           $341            $1.23B
  (7)    25% Decrease in Tax Rates For Top 3 Brackets at T           5.1M            20.1           $459            $2.32B
  (8)    25% Increase in Tax Rates For Top 3 Brackets in 5 Years     3.7M            17.1           $366            $1.37B
  (9)    25% Decrease in Tax Rates For Top 3 Brackets in 5 Years     4.8M            17.0           $393            $1.89B
  (10)   Including Employer Match for Households Reporting Match     5.6M            38.1           $468            $2.64B
  (11)   Excluding Early Withdrawal Penalty                          5.5M            16.3           $365            $2.01B
  (12)   Including State Tax Deductibility for Itemizers             5.6M            19.4           $421            $1.93B
Table 5: Characteristics of Households Which Prepay Mortgage
This table summarizes the characteristics of households from the 1995, 1998, and 2001
Surveys of Consumer Finances depending on whether they have positive or negative
MAPs. Prepayments include both discretionary prepayments and prepayments due to a
short-term mortgage. The number in the first row of each characteristic corresponds to
the weighted mean, where the weights are the population weights provided by the Survey
of Consumer Finances. The two numbers in brackets correspond to the interquartile
ranges of the characteristics.

 Variable                                  No Contributions                     Partial Contributions
                                       Gain                   Loss             Gain               Loss
 Panel A: Main Determinants of Total Benefits
 Number of Households                  1.5M                   1.9M              2.5M                 3.0M
 Age                                   48.3                   44.5              44.6                 41.0
                                     [41 - 54]             [37 - 52]          [38 - 51]            [34 - 48]
 Mortgage Rate (in %)                  7.22                   8.26              7.20                 7.97
                                   [6.75 - 7.50]         [7.25 - 9.00]      [6.75 - 7.58]        [7.00 - 8.50]
 Mortgage Spread (in %)                -0.19                  0.84              -0.10                0.52
                                  [-0.80 - 0.43]        [-0.20 - 1.45]     [-0.64 - 0.49]       [-0.25 - 1.01]
 Federal Tax Bracket (in %)            27.3                   21.1              27.3                 23.1
                                     [28 - 31]             [15 - 28]          [28 - 28]            [15 - 28]
 Panel B: Financial Characteristics
 Liquid Financial Wealth              142,063                51,609            92,145               56,980
                               [13,000 - 144,700]     [2,970 - 41,500]    [11,420 - 78,000]    [4,750 - 56,400]
 Retirement Wealth                    93,869                 27,151            87,401               58,091
                                   [0 - 98,000]          [0 - 15,000]    [12,650 - 102,000]    [6,500 - 64,000]
 Home Equity                         125,490                68,463             93,058               72,056
                               [42,000 - 151,000]    [25,000 - 79,000]   [34,000 - 113,000]   [23,000 - 100,000]
 Loan to Value Ratio (in %)            48.9                   43.5              53.6                 48.8
                                   [30.5 - 66.1]         [22.3 - 63.3]      [37.9 - 71.7]        [30.0 - 70.5]
 Net Worth                           551,529                220,216            371,231             250,537
                              [117,480 - 510,850] [46,410 - 203,820]     [97,200 - 381,790]   [60,800 - 275,000]
Table 6: Correlations Between Explanatory Variables
This table summarizes the means, standard deviations and the correlations between the main explanatory variables of
mortgage prepayments and retirement account contributions. The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: ‘***’
corresponds to a 1% confidence level; ‘**’ corresponds to a 5% confidence level; and ‘*’ corresponds to a 10% confidence level.
  Variable                       Mean    Std.                                           Correlation
                                         Dev.    (1)      (2)      (3)     (4)     (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)     (9)    (10)   (11)     (12) (13)
  (1) Mortgage Spread             1.41   1.29    1
  (2) Federal Tax Bracket        26.77   8.58   −0.11∗∗∗ 1
  (3) Itemize Deductions          0.82   0.38   −0.12∗∗∗ 0.29∗∗∗ 1
  (4) Mortgage Insurance          0.22   0.41    0.00 −0.04∗ −0.00         1
  (5) High Homestead Exemption    0.19   0.39    0.02 −0.01 −0.08∗∗∗ 0.02          1
  (6) Liquidity Constrained       0.18   0.39    0.13∗∗∗ −0.23∗∗∗ −0.15∗∗∗ 0.01    0.04∗    1
  (7) Log of Net Worth           12.38   2.31   −0.09∗∗∗ 0.55∗∗∗ 0.28∗∗∗ −0.09∗∗∗ −0.04∗ −0.31∗∗∗ 1
  (8) Risk Aversion               2.74   0.80    0.12∗∗∗ −0.25∗∗∗ −0.17∗∗∗ 0.04∗ −0.00      0.12∗∗∗ −0.21∗∗∗ 1
  (9) Debt Averse                 0.56   0.50   −0.15∗∗∗ 0.32∗∗∗ 0.17∗∗∗ −0.02 −0.03∗ −0.35∗∗∗ 0.40∗∗∗ −0.16∗∗∗ 1
  (10) Employer TDA match         3.50   5.14   −0.02     0.07∗∗∗ 0.02∗∗∗ 0.00 −0.00 −0.03           0.07∗∗∗ −0.06∗∗∗ 0.04∗∗ 1
  (11) College Education          0.58   0.49   −0.13∗∗∗ 0.37∗∗∗ 0.23∗∗∗ −0.02 −0.02 −0.18∗∗∗ 0.33∗∗∗ −0.21∗∗∗ 0.27∗∗∗ 0.04∗∗ 1
  (12) Age                       45.08   9.83    0.13∗∗∗ 0.26∗∗∗ 0.13∗∗∗ −0.10∗∗∗ 0.00 −0.12∗∗∗ 0.36∗∗∗ 0.05∗∗ 0.13∗∗∗ −0.03         0.12∗∗∗ 1
  (13) Number of Children         1.25   1.20   −0.04∗∗ −0.08∗∗∗ 0.00      0.03 −0.04∗∗ 0.09∗∗∗ −0.02         0.02 −0.06∗∗∗ −0.01 −0.02 −0.26∗∗∗ 1
  (14) Married                    0.85   0.35   −0.03     0.12∗∗∗ 0.11∗∗∗ 0.03     0.01 −0.07∗∗∗ 0.17∗∗∗ −0.02        0.09∗   0.04∗  0.03 −0.01   0.23∗∗∗
Table 7: Determinants of Prepayment and Contribution Behavior
This table summarizes the determinants of the prepayment and contribution behavior
for households from the 1995, 1998, and 2001 Surveys of Consumer Finances. The depen-
dent variables are indicator variables of (1) whether households have a short mortgage,
(2) whether they make discretionary prepayments, and (3) whether they contribute to a
TDA. The table summarizes the marginal effects of the probit regressions. The regres-
sions also include unreported mortgage origination year fixed effects. The changes in
the probabilities are expressed in percent. The robust standard errors are summarized
in parentheses. The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: ‘***’, ‘**’, and
‘*’ correspond to a 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels, respectively.

           Variable                        Short     Discretionary    Retirement
                                          Mortgage   Prepayments     Contributions
           Mortgage Spread (in ppt)        8.78∗∗∗     −1.59∗∗          −0.76
                                          (1.02)       (0.73)            (0.80)
           Federal Tax Bracket (in ppt)    0.08         0.03              0.34∗∗
                                          (0.16)       (0.13)            (0.14)
           Itemize Deductions             −8.29∗∗∗      1.03              6.55∗∗
                                          (2.93)       (2.26)            (2.72)
           Mortgage Insurance             −8.19∗∗∗     −1.76              1.19
                                          (2.39)       (1.89)            (2.24)
           High Homestead Exemption        0.01         1.52              3.05
                                          (2.57)       (2.05)            (2.33)
           Liquidity Constrained          −9.11∗∗∗     −6.16∗∗∗         −5.32∗∗
                                          (2.80)       (2.14)            (2.71)
           Log of Net Worth                4.72∗∗∗      0.19              0.05
                                          (0.91)       (0.65)            (0.82)
           Risk Aversion                   2.39∗       −1.60            −5.40∗∗∗
                                          (1.35)       (1.06)            (1.28)
           Debt Averse                     6.06∗∗∗      8.82∗∗∗           0.10
                                          (2.31)       (1.79)            (2.19)
           College Education              −3.71        −0.71              1.13
                                          (2.29)       (1.82)            (2.11)
           Use Professional Advice        −0.78         1.85            −2.27
                                          (2.04)       (1.62)            (1.95)
           Employer TDA match (in ppt)     0.13        −0.08              2.20∗∗∗
                                          (0.20)       (0.16)            (0.39)
           Age (in yrs)                    0.83∗∗∗     −0.23∗∗          −0.44∗∗∗
                                          (0.15)       (0.11)            (0.14)
           Not Subject to TDA Penalty     −9.04∗∗       2.62            −8.70∗
                                          (4.36)       (3.92)            (4.60)
           Number of Children              1.57∗       −1.71∗∗          −1.30
                                          (0.90)       (0.70)            (0.85)
           Married                         2.90        −0.40              0.94
                                          (2.98)       (2.41)            (2.79)
           Year 1995                      15.33∗∗∗     −4.36∗           −2.52
                                          (3.18)       (2.31)            (2.93)
           Year 1998                       6.91∗∗      −4.61∗∗            0.33
                                          (2.79)       (2.00)            (2.56)
           Number of Observations           2,647       2,647            2,647
           Pseudo R-Squared                0.095         0.045            0.077
Table 8: Determinants of the Relative Propensity to Contribute vs. Prepay
This table summarizes the determinants of the relative preference for retirement contri-
butions relative to mortgage prepayments for households from the 1995, 1998, and 2001
Surveys of Consumer Finances. The dependent variables are ratios of contributions to
the sum of prepayments and contributions. The prepayments are defined as: (1) the dif-
ference between the actual payment on short mortgage and that on a 30-year mortgage,
and (2) dollar amount of discretionary prepayments. The table summarizes the esti-
mated coefficients of Tobit regressions, with robust standard errors in parentheses. The
regressions also include unreported survey and mortgage origination year fixed effects.
The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: ‘***’, ‘**’, and ‘*’ correspond to
a 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels, respectively.

    Variable                             Short       Short    Discretionary   Discretionary
                                       Mortgage    Mortgage   Prepayments     Prepayments
    MAP                                 1.04∗∗∗     0.70∗∗       −0.26∗∗         −1.03∗∗
                                       (0.08)      (0.32)         (0.12)          (0.49)
    MAP*College                                     0.75∗∗∗                        0.22
                                                   (0.15)                         (0.24)
    MAP*Prof. Advice                                0.62∗∗∗                      −0.21
                                                   (0.15)                         (0.23)
    MAP*Risk Aversion                              −0.12                           0.18
                                                   (0.09)                         (0.14)
    MAP*Debt Averse                                 0.27∗                          0.32
                                                   (0.15)                         (0.23)
    MAP*No TDA Penalty                              0.22                           0.002
                                                   (0.35)                         (0.52)
    Liquidity Constrained                0.14∗∗     0.10          0.14             0.13
                                        (0.07)     (0.07)       (0.10)            (0.14)
    Log of Net Worth                   −0.08∗∗∗    −0.08∗∗∗       0.01             0.004
                                        (0.02)     (0.02)       (0.02)            (0.02)
    Risk Aversion                      −0.10∗∗∗    −0.10∗∗∗     −0.05            −0.05
                                        (0.03)     (0.03)       (0.04)            (0.04)
    Debt Averse                        −0.12∗∗     −0.13∗∗      −0.35∗∗∗         −0.36∗∗∗
                                        (0.05)     (0.05)       (0.08)            (0.08)
    College Education                    0.08       0.08          0.10             0.07
                                        (0.05)     (0.05)       (0.07)            (0.07)
    Use Professional Advice            −0.001      −0.004       −0.07            −0.06
                                        (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.06)            (0.07)
    Employer TDA match (ppt)             0.02∗∗∗    0.02∗∗∗       0.03∗∗∗          0.03∗∗∗
                                        (0.004)    (0.004)      (0.007)           (0.007)
    Age (in years)                     −0.03∗∗∗    −0.03∗∗∗       0.004            0.01
                                        (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.004)           (0.005)
    Not Subject to TDA penalty           0.06       0.04        −0.31∗∗          −0.34∗∗
                                        (0.10)     (0.10)       (0.15)            (0.16)
    Number of Children                 −0.05∗∗     −0.05∗∗        0.02             0.02
                                        (0.02)     (0.02)       (0.03)            (0.03)
    Married                            −0.04       −0.05          0.03             0.03
                                        (0.07)     (0.07)       (0.10)            (0.10)
    Mortgage Insurance                   0.11∗∗     0.11∗∗        0.06             0.05
                                        (0.05)     (0.05)       (0.08)            (0.08)
    High Homestead Exemption             0.04       0.05          0.01             0.01
                                        (0.06)     (0.06)       (0.08)            (0.08)
    Number of Observations                2,078      2,078       1,924            1,924

    Number of Non-limit Observations      668        668          398             398

    Pseudo R-Squared                    0.133       0.149         0.034           0.035
