                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              LOOK AT ME NOW: WHAT ATTRACTS U.S. SHAREHOLDERS?

                                              John Ammer
                                             Sara B. Holland
                                             David C. Smith
                                           Francis E. Warnock

                                         Working Paper 12500
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12500


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2006




The authors thank Mark Carey, Laura Field, Charles Hadlock, Andrew Karolyi, Christian Leuz, Ross Levine,
Michelle Lowry, Darius Miller, Greg Nini, Bent Sorensen, Mark Spiegel, Michael Weisbach, and seminar
participants at the 2004 EFA Meetings, 2006 AFA Meetings, Binghamton University (SUNY), College of
William and Mary, European Central Bank, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve System SCIEA
Meetings, ISCTE Business School, Michigan State University, NYSE, Penn State University, Stockholm
Institute for Financial Research, Universidad Catolica Portuguesa, Universidade do Porto, University of
Houston, University of Minnesota, and University of Virginia for helpful comments. Nathanael Clinton
provided exceptional research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of
the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System or of any other employee of the Federal Reserve System. The statistical analysis of
security-level data on U.S. investors holdings reported in this study was conducted at the International
Finance Division of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under arrangements that
maintained legal confidentiality requirements. Warnock thanks the Darden School Foundation for generous
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by John Ammer, Sara B. Holland, David C. Smith and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Look at Me Now: What Attracts U.S. Shareholders?
John Ammer, Sara B. Holland, David C. Smith and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 12500
August 2006
JEL No. G11, G15, G3, M4

                                            ABSTRACT


This paper investigates the underlying determinants of home bias using a comprehensive data set on
U.S. investors’ aggregate holdings of every foreign stock. Among those foreign stocks that are not
listed on U.S. exchanges, which account for more than 96 percent of our usable data sample, we find
that U.S. investors prefer firms with characteristics associated with greater information transparency,
such as stronger home-country accounting standards. We document that a U.S. cross-listing is
economically important, as U.S. ownership of a foreign firm roughly doubles upon cross-listing in
the United States. We explore the cross-sectional variation in this “cross-listing effect” and find that
the increase in U.S. investment is greatest for firms that are from weak accounting backgrounds and
are otherwise informationally opaque, suggesting that the key effect of cross-listing is improvements
in disclosure that are valued by U.S. investors. By contrast, cross-listing does not increase the appeal
of stocks from countries with weak shareholder rights, suggesting that U.S. cross-listing cannot
substitute for legal protections in the home country. Nor does the cross-listing effect appear to be
driven simply by increased “familiarity” with the stock or lowered cross-border transactions costs.


John Ammer                                             David C. Smith
Federal Reserve Board of Governors                     McIntire School of Commerce
john.ammer@frb.gov                                     University of Virginia
                                                       Charlottesville, VA 22904
                                                       dcs8f@comm.virginia.edu

Sara B. Holland                                        Francis E. Warnock
Finance Department                                     Darden Business School
Haas School of Business                                University of Virginia
UC Berkeley                                            Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
Berkeley, CA 94720-1902                                and NBER
holland@haas.berkeley.edu                              warnockf@darden.virginia.edu
1. Introduction

        This paper uses a comprehensive dataset to examine the characteristics that make foreign stocks

attractive to U.S. investors. Such a study is important because researchers continue to puzzle over the fact

that U.S. investors exhibit a strong “home bias” for stocks in their own country. Currently, scholars tend to

favor four explanations for the home bias: (1) Investors demand a level of informational transparency,

including high-quality accounting standards, beyond that of the typical non-U.S. stock; (2) Investors value

the strong legal protections provided by U.S. securities regulations and law; (3) Investors gravitate towards

stocks that that are most “familiar”; or (4) Investors are inhibited from trading across borders because of

high transactions costs. We present evidence that supports the first explanation – that transparency is

important to U.S. investors – and casts doubt on the other three hypotheses.

        Our dataset is derived from security-level U.S. Treasury/Federal Reserve Board surveys of foreign

equity holdings of U.S. residents, which contains snapshots of all U.S. portfolio holdings of foreign

equities at specific points in time. We match holdings data from the 1994 and 1997 surveys to firm-specific

information on publicly traded firms from Worldscope and Datastream, resulting in information on 12,236

companies domiciled outside of the United States. Using these data, we concentrate on the connection

between a foreign firm’s decision to cross list on a U.S. stock exchange and U.S. investor interest in

holding that firm’s stock. Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock [2004], among others, have demonstrated that

U.S. investors show a distinct preference for holding foreign stocks that are cross-listed in the United

States, a phenomenon we term the “cross-listing effect.”1 Our estimates indicate that U.S. ownership in a

foreign firm doubles upon cross listing.

        We exploit this phenomenon along two dimensions. First, we explore the variation in U.S.

investment across foreign stocks that are not cross-listed on a U.S. exchange. These firms represent the

bulk of traded firms outside the United States, and of the 11,755 non cross-listed firms in our sample, more

than one-quarter attract no U.S. investment. Yet U.S. investors hold at least 20 percent of the market


1
 See also Bradshaw, Bushee, and Miller [2004], Edison and Warnock [2004], and Aggarwal, Klapper, and Wysocki
[2005].
capitalization in more than 200 non cross-listed firms, and exhibit clear preferences for stocks with certain

characteristics. For instance, they tend to hold relatively large stakes in informationally transparent

companies, including non-financial enterprises, dividend-paying firms, and members of the Morgan

Stanley Capital International (MSCI) World index. More distinctly, U.S. investors favor non cross-listed

stocks from countries with high average accounting standards and stocks backed by strong accounting

practices (according to our proxy) at the firm level. Meanwhile, U.S. investors show no preference for

firms from countries with strong minority investor protections. If anything, they take relatively larger

positions in firms from countries with weak investor protections, controlling for accounting quality.

Moreover, U.S. investors show no preference for foreign stocks that are more “familiar,” as measured by

the company’s degree of international presence.

        Second, we examine directly the reasons why U.S. investors look afresh at cross-listed firms. We

use the following intuition: If cross listing reduces impediments to U.S. investment, then firms with the

greatest impediments prior to listing should experience the largest jump in U.S. investment. We find that

firms that use poor accounting practices, or that come from countries with poor average accounting

standards, experience a statistically larger cross-listing effect than do firms from strong accounting

backgrounds. This result is consistent with the idea that requisite reconciliations to U.S. GAAP, along with

other mandated disclosures, make cross-listing firms more attractive to U.S. investors, particularly among

firms that previously followed poor accounting practices.2 By contrast, firms with previously weak

investor protections do not increase their attractiveness by adopting U.S. securities laws. Holding all else

constant, U.S. investment actually increases more upon cross-listing for firms that are (i) diffusely held and

(ii) from countries with strong shareholder laws, as if U.S. investors viewed a cross-listing as a complement




2
  Foreign firms listed on U.S. exchanges are required to annually file SEC form 20-F, which contains a reconciliation
of the firm’s net income and shareholders’ equity figures with U.S. GAAP. Researchers have questioned the value of
these reconciliations relative to the reporting of U.S. firms (e.g., Rees and Elgers [1997], Pownall and Schipper
[1999], and Lang, Ready, and Wilson [2006]), but have generally found the reporting of cross-listed firms to be more
informative than that of their non cross-listed peers (e.g., Lang, Raedy, and Yetman [2003], Lang, Lins, and Miller
[2003], Leuz, Nanda, and Wysocki [2003], and Barth, Landsman, Lang, and Williams [2006]).


                                                          2
to other protections for minority shareholders, rather than a substitute.3 These results have interesting

implications for “bonding” theories of cross-listing (Stulz [1999] and Coffee [1999, 2002]), which we

return to below. Holding all else constant, we also observe no difference in investor interest in less-familiar

versus more-familiar stocks upon cross-listing.

        Finally, cross-border trading costs are unable to explain differences in U.S. interest across foreign

stocks. U.S. investors hold about the same proportion of foreign stocks that are traded over-the-counter

(OTC) in the United States as they do in peers not traded in the United States. Foreign firms whose stocks

trade OTC are interesting because they save the U.S. investor the cost of a cross-border transaction but are

not compelled to register with the SEC or reconcile financials with U.S. GAAP. More compellingly, we

find that U.S. investors acquire a majority of their shares in cross-listed firms directly in the firm’s home

market, rather than through purchases of American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) on a U.S. exchange. Thus,

the availability of foreign shares for trading within U.S. borders, by itself, is neither necessary nor

sufficient for explaining the cross-listing effect.

        We obtain our results using econometric methodologies that account for the underlying

endogeneity between U.S. holdings behavior and the decision to cross-list on a U.S. exchange. We first

jointly model the cross-listing and holding decisions as a system of simultaneous equations, using the

methodology from the study of unionization and wages by Lee [1978]. This framework not only allows us

to correct for the effects of selection bias, but also produces structural estimates of the relation between

holding and listing. But because no single econometric methodology can be expected to perfectly account

for endogeneity (Larcker and Rusticus [2005]), we buttress the parametric results with semi-parametric

propensity score matching and non-parametric “difference-in-differences” methods for selection-bias

adjustment.

        Our paper is related to recent work examining the decision to cross-list, and the benefits that accrue

from cross-listing. Lang, Lins, and Miller [2003] document increases in forecast accuracy and analyst

3
  Our results do not imply that American investors favor companies with poor firm-level investor protections. Indeed,
Leuz, Lins, and Warnock [2006] show that where country-level investor protections are poor, U.S. holdings are lower
in companies with poor corporate governance.


                                                          3
coverage of firms following a cross-listing, and show that these firms are valued more highly, on average,

than their non cross-listed peers. They attribute the valuation gains to the improved information

environment following the cross-listing.4 Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz [2004] study cross-listed firms’

market-to-book ratios and find the valuation changes around a U.S. cross-listing to be higher for firms

domiciled in countries with weak investor protections. They argue that the higher valuations are a result of

improved legal protections. Doidge [2004] studies changes in control premiums around U.S. cross-listings

and attributes a decline in the average premium to reductions in private benefits of control associated with

improved legal protections.5 In contrast to these studies, our paper focuses on holdings of foreign stocks,

and changes in the quantity of holdings around a cross-listing, which may yield insights unavailable from

stock price data. U.S. investors are unlikely to be the marginal investor in many of the firms in our sample,

so their portfolio decisions are likely to have limited influence on the firm’s stock price. Yet, observing

how they change their positions in these firms might provide important guidance on how foreign firms

attract outside capital.

         The paper most closely related to our own is Bradshaw, Bushee, and Miller [BBM, 2004]. BBM

use U.S. institutional holdings of foreign companies as reported in SEC 13(f) filings to examine the relation

between investor interest in foreign companies and accounting choice. Utilizing both cross-sectional and

time-series methods, they find that foreign firms with greater conformity to U.S. GAAP attract more U.S.

institutional interest. Our paper builds on the results of BBM in two important ways. First, our sample is

drawn from a survey covering all U.S. portfolio holdings of foreign equities. By contrast, SEC 13(f)

requires only the reporting of U.S. holdings in foreign securities that trade on U.S. exchanges. This

excludes holdings in all non-cross listed stocks as well as in the home-traded stocks underlying cross-listed



4
  See also Foerster and Karolyi [1999], Miller [1999], and Errunza and Miller [2000], who document positive stock
price reactions to firms that cross-list on a U.S. exchange.
5
  Gozzi , Levine, and Schmukler [2005] question the relation between stock valuations and motivations for cross-
listing, with a particular emphasis on interpretations related to legal protections. They show that the increases in
valuation occur well before the cross-listing and decline in the year after the cross-listing, and find no relation between
valuation changes around cross-listing and country-level investor protections. They argue that the observed pattern is
more consistent with valuation increases leading to corporate expansions through cross-listing than changes in legal
protections.


                                                            4
ADRs. Thus, the BBM sample covers only a small segment of the securities available to U.S. investors, and

understates U.S. holdings in the firms covered in their sample. Second, our investigation attempts to

disentangle the information-transparency explanation for U.S. investor interest from competing (but

correlated) explanations of the home bias. Specifically, our paper distinguishes between two dimensions of

the theory popularly known as the “bonding” hypothesis (Stulz [1999]; Coffee [1999, 2002]).

        Bonding theories assert that international firms can improve corporate their governance standards

by cross listing in the United States in order to bond themselves to U.S. accounting, disclosure, and legal

practices. The first dimension of the bonding hypothesis relates to the perception that accounting and

disclosure practices within the Unites States provide valuable information to investors at a lower cost than

systems in other countries (Ball [2001]; Bushman, Piotrowski, and Smith [2004]). The second dimension is

associated with the relatively strong legal protections investors receive in the United States through the

enforcement of corporate and securities laws that protect minority investors, and backed by extensive

property rights and contract law (Coffee [2002]; Levine [2005]). The two dimensions are likely to be

correlated because countries with sound accounting and disclosure systems are likely to also have strong

legal institutions in place to enforce compliance with the systems. However, valuable information

production does not require strong legal backing; competitive concerns or reputation may be incentive

enough to maintain compliance with a given level of reporting standards (Ball, Robin, and Wu [2003];

Leuz, Nanda, and Wysocki [2003]; Siegel [2005]). Our results suggest that U.S. investors value the

production of high-quality information without necessarily putting weight on explicit protections provided

through the U.S. legal system.

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the data used in the paper. Section 3

presents and estimates a simultaneous equations model of the cross-listing and holdings decisions. Section

4 describes the methodologies we use for estimating the average cross-listing effect and reports results,

both for the average cross-listing effect and the firm-level regressions used to explore what drives the

cross-listing effect. Section 5 concludes.




                                                      5
2. Data

2.1 Benchmark Survey Data

          Our investigation begins with comprehensive security-level data on U.S. holdings of foreign stocks

as of December 31, 1997, obtained confidentially through benchmark surveys conducted jointly by the U.S.

Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve Board. Later, we also use data from the predecessor March

1994 survey. The survey must be completed by all U.S. financial institutions, both within the United States

and abroad, that are entrusted with the management or safekeeping of client equity holdings. Institutions

covered include all U.S. custodian banks, other commercial and investment banks, mutual funds, pension

funds, insurance companies, endowments, and foundations. Respondents are required to report the foreign

stock and bond holdings of all their clients that are U.S. residents, and are subject to penalty under law for

noncompliance.6

          The survey is the source for official U.S. data on cross-border portfolio investment.7 It is designed

to pick up all recorded U.S. resident portfolio holdings of foreign equities. The only portfolio investments

missed by the survey are “uncountable” holdings – i.e., those that evade detection because the U.S. resident

used a foreign custodian, provided a foreign home address, or instructed the custodian not to employ a U.S.

sub-custodian. Federal Reserve cross-checks with non-U.S. data collectors suggest that the number of

uncountable holdings is small.

          Other data sources are necessarily more limited. For example, data on U.S. institutional investors’

holdings as reported to the SEC on Form 13(f), and used by BBM, exclude holdings in securities that do

not trade in U.S. markets, and in foreign securities that underlie ADRs. A small fraction of publicly traded

firms domiciled outside of the United States actually trade in U.S. markets (3.5 percent in 1997, according

6
  Custodians are the main source of information, covering 97 percent of the market value of the securities in the 1997
survey. Institutional investors report in detail on their ownership of foreign securities only if they do not entrust the
safekeeping of these securities to U.S.-resident custodians. If they do use U.S.-resident custodians, institutional
investors report only the names of the custodians and the amounts entrusted.
7
  “Portfolio investments” exclude holdings for control purposes, defined to be individual holdings of 10 percent or
more of shares outstanding. Excluding these large holdings is likely to have little impact in our sample because it is
relatively uncommon for a single U.S. investor to hold more than 10 percent of a publicly traded foreign company.
Griever, Lee, and Warnock [2001] provide a primer on the survey. Complete details of the 1997 survey, including
forms, instructions, and data, are available from http://www.ustreas.gov/tic/fpis.html.


                                                            6
to the U.S. Treasury/Federal Reserve survey), and among those that do trade within U.S. borders, U.S.

investors hold more than half of their ownership in the underlying security, not through ADRs. Thus, Form

13(f) filings cover only a small segment of the securities available to U.S. investors, and underestimate U.S.

holdings in the firms covered in their sample. By simple comparison, 13(f) data appear to suggest that U.S.

investors have holdings in only 5 percent of non-U.S. firms (see Table 2 of BBM), whereas our data

registers U.S. ownership in over 70 percent of non-U.S. firms. An additional problem with the 13(f) data is

that holdings of foreigners can be intermingled with U.S. holdings because the SEC permits (but does not

encourage) institutions to consolidate their 13(f) holdings across subsidiaries, including foreign ones.

2.2 Sample Selection

        We limit our investigation to U.S. holdings of non-U.S. companies tracked by Worldscope. This

enables us to utilize the company financial and accounting information reported in Worldscope, and

provides us with International Securities Identification Numbers (ISINs) for each of the company’s

outstanding securities. Obtaining the ISINs allows us to link more easily with other electronic databases,

such as Datastream. We use the May 1999 release of Worldscope, which contains 1997 data on 13,445

non-U.S. companies domiciled in 52 different countries.

        In our tests, we normalize firm-level U.S. holdings by measures of the market capitalization

(market value of equity) of the company. Datastream, which provides the broadest international coverage

of market price data, is our primary source for firm-level market capitalizations. When a value is missing in

Datastream, we turn to reports from Morgan Stanley, which provide reliable market data for companies

included in the MSCI All-country World index, or Worldscope, which provides December market

capitalizations for those companies that complete their fiscal year at the calendar year-end. We also use

Morgan Stanley and Worldscope to cross-check the Datastream numbers for recording errors. In total, we

are able to calculate market capitalization figures for 12,236 of the original 13,445 Worldscope firms.

        We define two different measures of firm-level U.S. investor holdings. The first measure is

constructed as the ratio of dollar holdings in a stock to the firm’s market capitalization, and is thus

equivalent to the proportion of shares held by U.S. residents. Our second measure uses a different


                                                       7
denominator, an estimate of the stock’s “market float,” the market value of shares that are not closely held

by insiders. Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson [2003] argue that such closely held shares are

unlikely to be made available to outside investors, because insiders receive benefits from control that are

not reflected in a stock’s price. We calculate market float by scaling market capitalization down by the

figure given in Worldscope’s “closely held share” field, which reports the fraction of equity owned by

corporate officers, directors and their family members, individual shareholders with more than 5 percent

holdings, other corporations, and by the firm’s own pension funds and trusts. However, we first adjust these

Worldscope figures to exclude the value of depositary institution holdings, which are sometimes

mistakenly counted in the closely held fields.8 Because of missing data on insider holdings, we can

calculate market float for only 8,528 of our original observations.

2.3 Summary Statistics

         Table 1 reports the aggregate U.S. holdings share for firms in each of the 46 countries represented

in our sample.9 Even at the national level, U.S. holdings shares vary considerably. As of the end of 1997,

U.S. investors owned nearly a quarter of the market capitalization of Argentine firms, and about a fifth of

the market in Finland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Hungary, and Mexico.10 Meanwhile, Americans held just 9

percent of the market capitalization for the 46 countries in aggregate, and less than 5 percent of Belgium,

Greece, China, Colombia, and Taiwan. U.S. investor holdings also were relatively dispersed within the 46

countries, with non-zero stakes in 8,785 of the 12,236 stocks in the sample, ranging from very small firms

to the world’s largest non-U.S. companies.

         Table 2 reports summary statistics for our market capitalization and market float samples. The


8
  Specifically, we exclude holdings by the Bank of New York, Morgan Guarantee Trust, and Citibank, because these
shares are likely to be holdings for ADR programs, and the New Zealand Central Securities Depositary. There are
other reasons to believe that the Worldscope measure of insider holdings contains measurement error. Worldscope
coverage of the “closely held shares” field is uneven, and reporting requirements differ across countries. Moreover, it
is unclear whether the classifications within Worldscope of what constitutes a closely held share conform well to
theory on who gains private benefits from control and who would be willing to sell to a U.S. investor. For example,
the measure includes holdings of large, unaffiliated blockholders.
9
   We exclude six countries with some Worldscope coverage but minimal U.S. holdings: Egypt, Jordan, Morocco,
Slovakia, Sri Lanka, and Zimbabwe. Worldscope has 1997 data for a total of 42 firms from these countries.
10
   Countries that have a high share of U.S. ownership tend to have more cross-listed firms (Ahearne, Griever, and
Warnock [2004]) and less pervasive insider holdings (Kho, Stulz, and Warnock [2006]).


                                                           8
Worldscope-based sample of 12,236 firms had an end-1997 market capitalization of $11,080 billion,

representing more than 90 percent of the value of all non-U.S. equity (International Finance Corporation,

[1998]). U.S. investors’ $1,020 billion stake in these companies accounted for 88 percent of total U.S.

foreign equity holdings and 9.2 percent of the market capitalization of the companies. On a market float-

adjusted basis, U.S. investors held 13.5 percent of the Worldscope companies. As noted by Dahlquist,

Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson [2003], the market-float adjustment can account for part of the observed

home bias in U.S. holdings.

         Table 2 also breaks down the sample according to whether or not the sample firms are cross-listed

on a U.S. exchange, defined to include both direct listings and ADRs listed on the New York Stock

Exchange (NYSE), NASDAQ, or American Stock Exchange.11 Of the 12,236 sample firms, 498 were

cross-listed on a U.S. exchange at the end of 1997. U.S. investors held an (equal-weighted) average of 17.5

percent of the market capitalization (26.3 percent of market float) of these firms, compared to an average

stake of just 2.9 percent (5.6 percent of market float) of the 11,738 foreign companies that were not cross-

listed. This large difference in U.S. holdings of cross-listed and non cross-listed foreign firms forms the

basis for what we term the “cross-listing” effect.

         Among cross-listed firms, U.S. investors held the bulk of their holdings (11.1 percent of market

capitalization) in the underlying security purchased in the foreign home market. This fact has an important

implication. ADRs enable U.S. investors to forego concerns about trading in other currencies, dealing

directly with foreign regulatory authorities, and potentially high execution costs on foreign stock markets.

If investors were responding merely to the convenience of being able to trade these stocks in the United

States we would expect most of the cross-listed holdings to be in the form of ADRs. In contrast, most U.S.

holdings in cross-listed firms are in the underlying foreign security.


11
  An ADR is a traded financial claim backed by a set number of equity shares in the underlying company. ADRs are
created when firm initiates a relationship with a broker that buys the firm’s shares and instructs a U.S. financial
institution, called a “depositary,” to hold the shares in custody and issue negotiable securities backed by the shares, the
“receipts,” to an interested investor. Only “Level II” and “Level III” ADRs list and trade on one of the major U.S.
stock exchanges.



                                                            9
        The bottom of Table 2 includes information on U.S. ownership in foreign equities that trade as

“Level 1” ADRs. These shares are traded in dollars in the United States, but over-the-counter. Because they

are not listed on a major U.S. exchange, Level 1 ADRs are not required to reconcile financial statements

with U.S. GAAP, or to disclose regularly with the SEC, and are not liable under most U.S. securities laws.

For much of our analysis, we treat these firms as non cross-listed firms. U.S. investors do hold a greater

proportion of shares in a Level 1 ADR-firm (8.1 percent of market capitalization, 14.6% of market float)

than in the average foreign firm not traded in the United States, mostly in the form of the underlying

foreign security. However, as discussed at the end of Section 4, most of the difference between the holdings

of foreign companies with Level 1 ADRs and non U.S.-traded foreign companies can be explained by

selection bias.12



3. Simultaneous model of the cross-listing and holdings decisions

        To examine more closely the characteristics that make foreign stocks attractive to U.S. investors,

we estimate a simultaneous system of three structural equations that separately model: (1) U.S. holdings in

cross-listed firms, (2) U.S. holdings in non cross-listed firms, and (3) a foreign firm’s decision to cross-list

in the United States. We use the system to control for potential endogeneity problems that might bias the

holdings estimates. For instance, estimates relating firm characteristics to U.S. holdings will be biased by

selection if a firm’s propensity to cross-list on a U.S. exchange is correlated with other characteristics of the

firm that affect U.S. investors’ holding decisions. Moreover, firms might cross-list in the United States for

the specific purpose of increasing U.S. investor interest; thus the causation between cross-listing and U.S.

holdings could run in both directions.

3.1 Modeling the holdings and cross-listing decisions

        We adapt the structural framework developed originally by Lee [1978] for a study of unionization

and wages, which extends the Heckman [1979] selection-bias correction to a simultaneous system that

12
   Indeed, many Level 1 ADR programs have been initiated by U.S. investors or depository banks, not by the foreign
companies themselves. Thus, it is not surprising that sample selection adjustments account for most of the increased
holdings in the Level 1 ADRs.


                                                         10
allows feedback from bias-adjusted holdings equations to the cross-listing decision.

          Conceptually, estimation begins with a model of U.S investor preferences for holding foreign

equity:

          H iL = α L + Z Li   L   + ε iL                                                         (1)

          H iU = α U + Z Ui   U   + ε iU .                                                       (2)

          We separately model the holdings of cross-listed ( H Li ) and non-cross listed stocks ( H iU ) to

recognize that decisions to hold these two types of stocks can be fundamentally different. This not only

provides more flexibility in estimation, but also can help identify the structural parameters. Note that

observations of H Li are H iU are truncated by selection since, at a given point in time, we can only observe a

firm as cross-listed or not. That is, we cannot observe the counterfactual holdings in firm i. One way to

think about our structural framework is that it fills in these gaps by estimating the counterfactual

observations.

          The instrument sets Z Li and Z iU contain firm- and country-level proxies for a variety of factors that

could influence the willingness of U.S. investors to invest in a foreign firm. We divide the variables into

three groups, and relate the groupings to prevailing theories of international investment.

          First, U.S investors may want fundamental information about a foreign stock before deciding to

purchase it. The ability to obtain information about a company will depend, among other things, on the

accounting and disclosure practices of the company. Therefore, U.S. investors may favor companies that

provide an accurate and timely accounting of their financial performance (Leuz and Verrecchia [2004];

BBM), and may be attracted to foreign stocks domiciled in countries with forthright accounting practices

(Lang, Lins, and Miller [2003]).

          To measure these effects, we first consider five proxies for information transparency. The first

proxy is the logarithm of total (book) assets. Larger firms are generally believed to be more transparent

than smaller firms, in part because they tend to get more coverage both from the press and from securities

analysts. The second is a financial firm dummy. Financial firms hold assets that could be more difficult to


                                                         11
value than those of non-financial firms, are subject to more regulatory, rather than public disclosure, and

may view public information disclosures as potentially risky to their business.13 Third, we add a Canada

dummy. Institutional similarities and ties within North America may make Canadian firms more

transparent to U.S. investors. Fourth, we include a MSCI member dummy. MSCI index members are

selected on the basis of liquidity, size, and market representation. Illiquidity can reflect asymmetric

information (e.g., Easley and O’Hara [2004]) that would put U.S. investors at a disadvantage. Our fifth

proxy is an English home language dummy. U.S. investors may find it easier to process information from

companies that are guaranteed to disclose information in English.

           As more direct measures of the ability to obtain information about a company, we include two

measures of accounting quality. The first measure is the national accounting quality index compiled by the

Center for Financial Analysis and Research (CIFAR). As reported by Bushman, Piotroski, and Smith

[2004], the index averages across firms within a given country the number of items, out of a possible

maximum of 90, that are included as part of a firm’s financial statements. The second measure is a firm-

level accounting quality index, constructed as the sum of four indicator criteria: The first criterion takes the

value of one if a company uses a Big Six auditor; the second criterion equals one if the company received a

clean audit report. The third takes a value of one if the firm used international accounting standards or US

GAAP. And the fourth equals one if the firm reported consolidated statements. This variable measures

variation in firm-specific accounting quality not picked up by the national accounting quality variable.

           Second, U.S. investors may care about the safety of their investment in the hands of managers who

operate outside U.S. borders. LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny [1999, 2002] document

substantial cross-country variation in how well legal systems protect outside shareholders from

expropriation by firm insiders. Durnev and Kim [2005], among others, show that the quality of corporate

governance within a country can vary greatly across firms. Thus, U.S. investors could tilt their investments

toward countries with strong legal protections of minority investors and seek out firms with a reputation for

good corporate governance. We include three measures that capture governance/legality issues. The first is

13
     For evidence on the opaqueness of financial firms, see Morgan [2002].


                                                           12
the proportion of shares held by insiders. Investors may shy away from firms that are closely held, fearing

the power of insiders to expropriate firm resources at the expense of minority shareholders.14 The second is

a dummy for dividend-paying firms. A company’s dividend-paying record can be viewed as a commitment

device, with the willingness to dispense cash signaling a commitment not to expropriate funds from

minority shareholders.15 The third is the country’s shareholder rights index. U.S. investors may choose to

underweight firms from markets with weak protections of minority shareholders.16

         Third, U.S. investors in foreign stocks may gravitate toward firms with products that are familiar.

Huberman [2001], Barber and Odean [2003], Ackert, Church, Tomkins, and Zhang [2003], Kaniel, Li, and

Starks [2003], and Grullon, Kanatas, and Weston [2004] present evidence suggesting that investor

purchases of equity can depend on simple name recognition arising through product endorsements and

branding, advertising, news coverage, or even abnormal trading volume. These papers attribute investment

in familiar stocks to a behavioral motivation that is distinct from seeking better information about stock

fundamentals.17 To proxy for familiarity we use foreign sales (as a proportion of total sales). Companies

that do substantial foreign business might be more recognizable to U.S. investors through advertising, the

media, and direct consumer purchases.

         Some of our variables can serve dual roles. For example, size and the MSCI and Canada dummies,

which we present as information variables, also proxy for familiarity. In addition, we also include some

more general control variables. We include the firm’s market-to-book value. We take low market value to

be a rough indicator of financial distress, which tends to increase conflicts of interests among stakeholders

in the firm in a way that might be particularly problematic for cross-border minority investors. We also

14
   For evidence demonstrating that outside investors avoid ownership in closely held companies, see La Porta, Lopez-
de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny [1999], Johnson, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer [2000], and Leuz, Lins,
and Warnock [2006].
15
   See Faccio, Lang, and Young [2001], Kalcheva and Lins [2004], Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson [2006],
Easterbrook [1984], and Jensen [1986].
16
   See La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny [1998].
17
   However, the term “familiar” has also been used to refer to how well-informed investors are about particular stocks.
Merton’s [1987] paper on expanding investor base required that new investors “learn” the first two moments of a
stock’s return. Moreover, Coval and Moskowitz [1999, 2001] and Ivkovic and Weisbenner [2005] study geographic
preferences for holding stock and argue that investors “buy local” because they are better informed about companies
that are close to where they live. In this context, familiarity implies that rational investors select stocks for which they
have good information.


                                                            13
include a country’s dividend tax withholding rate faced by U.S. investors. Withholding taxes can cause

U.S. investors to face higher tax rates on dividends originating from a given foreign country than on U.S.

stock dividends. This would make stocks from the foreign country less attractive to U.S. investors,

particularly if other potential investors in stocks from the two countries did not face the same tax rate

differential (otherwise, prices could adjust to equilibrate after-tax expected returns). Often a U.S. investor

can obtain a tax credit that fully offsets a dividend tax that has been withheld by a foreign government.

However, U.S. pension funds are not taxed directly on dividends, so tax credits are of no use to them, and

thus taxes charged on foreign dividends generally will represent a differential between the foreign and

domestic dividend tax rates that U.S. pensions face (the domestic rate is zero). Thus at least one important

investor group is clearly affected by dividend withholding tax rates.

        The second part of the simultaneous system involves a firm’s decision to cross-list on a U.S.

exchange. We motivate the decision by considering the potential benefits and costs of cross-listing.

Let X *i represent the net benefits that flow to firm i from cross-listing on a U.S exchange. We assume that

these benefits can be described by the following relation,

         X *i =   x   +   0   [H   L
                                   i        ]
                                       − H iU +   1   H iU + Z iX   x   −   X
                                                                            i   ,     (3)

where H iL and H iU are the endogenously determined proportion of firm i’s equity that would be held by

U.S. investors if the firm were cross-listed (L) in the United States or not cross-listed (U), respectively.

The difference H iL - H iU models the anticipated impact of listing on U.S. holdings. It is included in (3) to

allow for foreign firms to cross-list in the United States precisely because it attracts greater U.S. investor

interest. H iU also enters equation (3) independently to allow the level of U.S. holdings prior to cross-listing

to affect a firm’s decision to cross-list. We posit that firms with large pre-existing U.S. shareholdings could

cross-list on a U.S. exchange to reduce trading costs for their shareholder base.

        The vector Z iX contains other firm- and country-specific variables that are associated with benefits

and costs of cross-listing, but that are taken to be exogenous. There are both direct and indirect costs

associated with listing in the United States that could make firms reluctant to cross-list. Most cross-listed


                                                                            14
firms face a host of direct registration, disclosure, and compliance costs. They must register with the U.S.

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and submit periodic filings that are in English and include

financial statements reconciled to U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). They must meet

the listing requirements of the U.S. exchange, which are often stricter than those in the firms’ home

country, and pay both listing fees to the exchange and filing fees to the SEC. Firms that cross-list to raise

new capital must also register their securities under the SEC 1933 Securities Act and the 1934 Exchange

Act. Indirect costs include the commitments that cross-listed firms make to abide by U.S. regulations and

law. Firms that violate exchange regulations risk fines and the threat of delisting. Those that violate SEC

regulations face potential shareholder lawsuits and civil or criminal penalties under U.S. law. Closely held

firms may be especially reluctant to cross-list if the increased level of disclosure and legal oversight gives

more power to minority shareholders.

        The benefits of cross-listing varies across firms and can include product market considerations (to

the extent that listing on the NYSE can help make a foreign company a household name in the United

States), employee compensation (to the extent that it includes grants of options or stock), and takeover

strategy (where a cross-listed stock can serve as a takeover currency). One potential benefit that both

practitioners and theorists cite as a reason for cross-listing is to increase the set of investors that can, at low

cost, access information and trade shares in the firm. That is, cross-listing reduces “receiver” costs

associated with expanding the shareholder base (Merton, [1987]).18 This in turn may improve risk sharing,

pricing, and the liquidity of a firm’s stock. Accordingly, firms seeking to expand their shareholder base

through increased U.S. ownership might have the strongest incentive to cross-list. Firms may also list in the

U.S. to reduce institutional frictions associated with maintaining their existing investor base. For example,

if a firm already has U.S. investors, it may cross-list to make it easier for those investors to manage their


18
  Lang, Lins, and Miller [2003] argue that foreign firms may cross-list simply to expand their “shareholder base”, the
set of investors available to purchase a given firms’ shares. See also Merton [1987], Miller [1999], Foerster and
Karolyi [1999], Karolyi and Stulz [2003], and Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz [2004]. The argument is also popular among
U.S. practitioners who encourage foreign clients to cross list. See Fanto and Karmel [1997], and the ADR websites at
JPMorgan (www.adr.com/research/about_types.html) and the Bank of New York (www.adrbny.com).



                                                         15
stock portfolios. But the other considerations (product market, compensation, takeover currency) might be

more important: Any consideration that involves expanding the shareholder base must be weighed against

that of relinquishing any private benefits of control.

         Some of the variables that impact holdings decisions are already included in our system because

they also likely influence the cross-listing decision. The proportion of shares held by insiders proxies for

the cost of relinquishing private control benefits through increased disclosure and monitoring associated

with cross-listing (Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz [2004]). Firm size will be important for the listing decision if

there are economies of scale in the direct costs of listing, including regulatory compliance and accounting

disclosure. We include the financial firm dummy for two reasons. First, the direct costs of cross-listing for

financial firms may be higher, because accounting principles for financial instruments and contracts tend to

be among the most complicated and contentious. Second, indirect costs may also be greater, if financial

firms are wary of the impact of public information disclosures on their businesses, and so they might be

less eager to cross-list. We include the Canada dummy because cross-listing should be less costly for

Canadian firms because Canadian firms enjoy an exemption from most SEC reporting requirements.19

Finally, we posit that firms from countries with weak accounting standards will find it more costly to

prepare financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP.

         In addition, we include two variables that are unique to the cross-listing specification: home-

country trading volume/GDP (because the benefits from cross-listing might be particularly high for firms

that quickly “outgrow” their underdeveloped home equity markets) and a Germanic language dummy

(because the direct costs of complying with U.S. regulations may be lower for managers who are more

comfortable with the English language).

3.2 Estimating the model

     We do not observe X *i in equation (3). Instead, we observe realizations of the indicator variable Xi,



19
 Under the Multi-Jurisdictional Disclosure System (MJDS) agreement between the SEC and the Canadian Securities
Administration, Canadian firms can cross-list on a U.S. exchange without conforming to U.S. GAAP and with only
minimal reporting to the SEC.


                                                         16
         X i = 0 if X *i < 0                                                                                (4)

         X i = 1 if X *i ≥ 0 .                                                                              (5)

Xi equals one when firm i is cross-listed on a U.S. exchange, and zero otherwise. Note that equations (3),

(4), and (5), coupled with an assumption that the error term ε iX is normally distributed, imply that the

listing decision can be estimated using a probit model.

        Taking into account selectivity adjustments, U.S investor preferences for holding cross-listed and

non cross-listed stocks become:

                                   φ (αˆ R + Z iR βˆ R )
         H iL = α L + Z iL β L −                           λ L + η iL                                       (6)
                                   Φ (αˆ R + Z βˆ R )
                                                 i
                                                  R


and
                                      φ (αˆ R + Z iR βˆ R )
         H iU = α U + Z iU β U +                                λU + η iU .                                 (7)
                                   1 − Φ (αˆ R + Z βˆ R )
                                                      i
                                                       R




Now H iL and H iU take on the additional interpretation of being the estimated holdings in firm i when the

firm is cross-listed and when it is not, while                and       denote the probability density and cumulative density

functions of the standard normal distribution. Equations (3), (6), and (7) now constitute a system of

equations which can be estimated with maximum likelihood techniques. The estimation procedure is

discussed in the appendix. We note here only that the coefficients on in (6) and (7) are the inverse Mills

ratio, which forms the basis for standard corrections for selectivity bias when inclusion in an estimation

sample is contingent on a discrete outcome (see Heckman [1979] or Maddala [1983]), and a similar but less

frequently used correction for selectivity bias for the non-selected observations.

        Importantly, the estimates αˆ L , βˆ L and αˆ U , βˆ U from (6) and (7) are used to calculate fitted

values Ĥ iL and Ĥ iU , which can then be plugged into the structural probit specification, (3). Because

H iL and H iU are scaled (by market capitalization or market float) to only take on values between zero and

one, we work off of transformations of equations (6) and (7). These transformations, along with other

details of the estimation process, are described in the appendix.



                                                                        17
         Identification of the model parameters depends on our ability to find at least some variables that

directly determine one of the two endogenous variables, but not the other. We hypothesize that the two

unique variables in the cross-listing equation, home-country trading volume/GDP and the Germanic

language dummy importance of a stock market within a country, uniquely identify the cross-listing

decision. A firm’s trading volume in its home market, measured relative to the country’s size, should not

influence U.S. investor preferences for holding stocks from that country. However, a company operating

within a country may “outgrow” its home market if that market is relatively small, meaning that the size or

activity of the home market could directly influence a firm’s incentives to cross-list. A firm from a

Germanic-language country should find it easier to produce documents in English, but U.S. investors

should show no strong distinct preference for investing in these firms.

         Conversely, a country’s dividend tax policy, or whether or not it has a tax treaty with the United

States, should not influence a firm’s decision to list here, beyond the implied impact that the policy would

have on holdings. Thus, excluding the tax treaty withholding rate from the listing equation, aids in

separately identifying the holdings equations.


3.2 Results from the model

         Table 4 reports estimates of our structural model of cross-listing and U.S. holdings.20 The reported

estimates are scaled to reflect the median percentage impact on the dependent variable of a one-unit change

in the explanatory variable (the rescaling procedure is described in the appendix). In the baseline

specification reported in Panel A, holdings are scaled by market capitalization. Panel B reports the results

when holdings are scaled by market float. For both of these panels, we estimate the simultaneous model

using the cross-section of 8,067 stocks for which data on all instruments are available. Panel C of Table 4

reports results for a specification that is similar to the baseline, except that it includes as a variable the

20
  To make our results more readily interpretable, we report rescaled functions of the estimates. Specifically, for the
coefficients on instruments in the listing decision equation, we calculate the marginal effect of a one-unit change in
the instrument on the percentage point probability of cross-listing. Similarly, the coefficients in the holdings equations
are scaled to reflect the marginal effect of a change in the instrument on the holdings share of U.S. investors
(measured in percentage points). See the appendix for complete details on transformations and on the estimation
technique.


                                                           18
proportion of a firm’s sales that are foreign. Because this variable is missing from Worldscope in many

cases, including for most of the financial firms, the results in Panel C exclude these missing cases and omit

the few remaining financial firms. A total of 5,155 usable observations remain for estimation in Panel C.

3.2.1 What drives holdings in firms that are not cross-listed?

        Results for the holdings equations (4) and (5) appear in the middle columns, starting with the

estimates from the equation of firms that are not cross-listed. Among firms that are not cross-listed, most of

the explanatory variables are significant, often with signs that accord with intuition. U.S investors prefer

firms that are larger, non-financial, included in the MSCI World index, have high market-to-book ratios,

and pay dividends. They are also attracted to firms from countries that use English as an official language,

particularly Canadian firms, and firms with low dividend tax withholding rates. The latter result indicates

that an additional reason that a home bias might exist is that U.S. investors shy away from international

investments when cross-border dividend withholding rates are high.

        A number of the non cross-listed holdings estimates indicate that U.S. investors are sensitive to the

amount and quality of information available on foreign-traded firms. Most prominently, the positive and

statistically significant signs on the accounting variables, measured at both the firm and country level,

suggest that U.S. investors value high-quality disclosure when choosing a foreign firm in which to invest.

These findings are consistent with BBM, who show that U.S. investment is higher in firms with greater

conformity to U.S. GAAP. Our estimates in Panel A of Table 4 suggest that an increase of 20 points in a

country’s national accounting quality index (CIFAR score), a move on the scale equivalent from going

from an Austrian firm to a Swedish firm, increases U.S. investment by 0.75 percent of market

capitalization, holding all else constant. Moving from a value of 2 to 4 on the firm-level accounting quality

scale increases U.S. investment by a similar account. Given that U.S. investment averages 3 percent of the

market capitalization of non-listed firms, these estimates are economically significant.

        Other findings are also consistent with the importance of information quality. The size of the firm

could proxy for information quality because efficiencies in information production, high regulatory

oversight, and frequent press coverage are likely to increase the amount of reliable information available on


                                                      19
large firms. Information on companies in English is more readily accessible to the English-speaking U.S.

public, making them more transparent to U.S. investors.21 Finally, the tendency to avoid foreign financial

firms is consistent with a preference for transparency, since evidence suggests that financial firms are less

transparent than others (Morgan [2002]).

        Some of our estimated coefficients are also consistent with the idea that U.S. investors tend to

favor familiar foreign stocks. Perhaps the most convincing evidence appears in Panel C, where we find

larger U.S. holdings for companies with higher foreign sales. However, the economic significance of the

estimate is small, implying that U.S investors holds 0.009 percentage points (i.e., 0.0018 × 0.5) more in a

firm with half of its sales abroad, compared with a firm with no foreign sales.

        One puzzling finding is the negative association between holdings and the level of shareholder

rights protection provided by a firm’s home country. This result holds whether we use the LaPorta, Lopez-

de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny [1998] index of anti-director rights (as reported), or country-level

estimates of the blockholder premium in share prices from Dyck and Zingales [2004] (not reported). The

willingness of American investors to undertake relatively large positions in countries in which minority

shareholders are vulnerable suggests a relative lack of concern about institutional enforcement of their

property rights, at least at the time of the 1997 survey.

        The negative sign on the proportion of shares held by insiders is difficult to interpret. It is

consistent with both a relatively mechanical effect by which closely-held insider shares reduce the supply

of available float, and with the idea that investors avoid firms in which resources are more likely to be

diverted to the private benefit of the insiders (Leuz, Lins, and Warnock [2006]). One way to separate the

two effects—the supply effect and the corporate governance effect—would be to include the insider

holdings variable in the float-adjusted specifications in Panel B. But doing so induces measurement error




21
  Our English-language dummy variable could also capture cross-country institutional differences associated with
legal origin because the legal system of most English-speaking countries grew out of English common law (see
LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny [1998] and Rajan and Zingales [2003]).


                                                        20
with a positive bias, rendering an estimate that is difficult to interpret.22 This bias, along with the fact that

our insider holdings variable is a blunt measure that includes the holdings of large, unaffiliated

shareholders, leads us to exclude insider holdings from the right-hand-side variables in Panel B.

           Finally, the selectivity correction variable most often enters with a statistically insignificant

estimate. This low significance does not imply that the holdings estimates are free from selection bias.

Indeed, as documented in Section 4, selection bias can explain 3 to 5 percentage points of the observed

ownership in cross-listed firms. The lack of significance does suggest that our simultaneous model has low

power to detect biases associated with unobserved correlation between the holdings and cross-listing

decisions. When the selectivity correction is significant, as in Panel B, the negative sign implies that the set

of firms that are unlisted have unobservable characteristics that make their stock less likely to be held by

U.S. investors. In other words, holding all else constant, the mean holdings of the unlisted sample would be

higher if the sample were drawn randomly from a group of firms with the same observable characteristics.

3.2.2 The cross-listing decision and U.S. holdings

           In accordance with our intuition about factors that reduce the costs of cross-listing, the estimates in

Panels A - C reveal that firms are more likely to cross-list on a U.S. exchange if they are large, have better

home-country accounting standards, or are domiciled in Canada. The two variables that uniquely identify

the listing equation enter strongly with estimated signs that are in line with our expectations. Turning to the

impact of holdings on the cross-listing decision, our evidence is mixed. The Panel B (float-adjusted)

estimates imply that both the expected increase in U.S. investment from cross-listing and the level of U.S.

holdings prior to listing can positively influence the cross-listing probability. These results are consistent

22
     To see this, let F̂i represent our market-float adjusted holdings, Û i represent the market capitalization (unadjusted)
holdings, and Î i be our measurement of the proportion of shares held by insiders. Then, by definition,
                      Û i
            F̂i =              .
                    1 − Î i
Suppose that the insider stake is measured with some error so that Î i = I i + η i , where Ii is the insiders’ true stake and
 i is some white-noise error. Then, cov(F̂i − Fi , Î i − I i ) > 0. In other words, measurement error in the proportion of
insider holdings imparts a positive bias on the coefficient estimate in the holdings model when scaled by market float.
Intuitively, a positive measurement error shock increase the right-hand-side variable (measured proportion of shares
held by insiders) as it also increases the dependent variable (holdings, by reducing the denominator).


                                                               21
with the idea that firms cross-list to both expand their investor base and service their existing U.S. investor

base. But the statistical certainty of the positive sign is more tenuous for the estimates in Panels A and C,

which creates some doubt about the robustness of the results. To some extent, the imprecision in the

estimates arise because of uncertainty about ( Ĥ L), given that the cross-listed holdings equation (4) is

estimated with relatively few observations.

         Only a few estimates are significant in the listed holdings equation (4), and our adjusted R2 ranges

from 5 to 15 percent. This suggests that U.S. investors have relatively indistinct preferences among cross-

listed firms; among these firms the most important attribute is that they have cross-listed. Only the

proportion of shares held by insiders, which mainly captures an arithmetic supply effect on the denominator

of the U.S. holdings share, is significantly different from zero at the 5 percent level in the baseline

specification. Across the other specifications, U.S. investors appear to shy away from financial firms and

favor high market-to-book firms and firms with extensive foreign sales, even after they have cross-listed.



4. The Cross-Listing Effect

        The remainder of the paper has two goals. First, we estimate the average effect of cross-listing on

U.S. shareholdings, taking account of the fact that the cross-listing decision represents an endogenous

choice that cannot be assumed to be independent of investors’ portfolio preferences. Second, we explore

how the cross-listing effect varies across firms across different types, so that we can make inferences about

why cross-listing matters. Because the association between cross-listing and U.S. holdings is so strong,

pinning down the underlying causes of this relationship should offer significant insight into the ultimate

sources of home bias in investor portfolios.

4.1 Methodologies to measure the cross-listing effect

        The cross-listing effect cannot be accurately computed using simple comparisons between average

U.S. holdings of cross-listed firms and non cross-listed firms, because such comparisons are likely to

overstate the magnitude of the cross-listing effect because of selection bias. Selection bias will exist if, as is




                                                       22
likely, a firm’s propensity to cross-list on a U.S. exchange is correlated with other characteristics of the

firm that affect U.S. investors’ holding decisions. In particular, firms that cross-list in the United States

may tend to be the types that U.S. investors would hold anyway, whether they cross-listed or not.

        Our goal in correctly measuring the cross-listing effect is to first estimate the unobservable

counterfactual of what U.S. holdings would have been in cross-listed firms had they not cross-listed. In this

case, the average cross-listing effect is an estimate of

     E (H iL | X = 1) − E(H iL | X = 0) ,                                                        (8)

where X is an indicator variable set to one when a firm has cross-listed on a U.S. exchange, E (H iL | X = 1)

is the expected level of U.S. holdings in cross-listed firm i conditional on it being listed, and E (H iL | X = 0)

is the expected level of holdings in cross-listed firm i if it had not cross-listed.23 Statisticians refer to

equation (8) as a “treatment effect” estimator because it measures the expected effect of treatment X on the

unit i drawn from some population.

        Corrections for selection bias are themselves subject to specification error (Larcker and Rusticus

[2005]; Heckman, Ichimura, Smith, and Todd [1998]; Lalonde [1986]). Therefore, we incorporate three

different estimators from the labor econometrics literature to robustly measure the average cross-listing

effect. These estimators also generate firm-specific estimates of the cross-listing effect, which can then be

used for more in-depth analysis.

        The first estimator is the Heckman [1979]-like estimator from our structural model from Section 3.

After estimating that model, we estimate E (H iL | X = 0) by inserting cross-listed firm observations into the

estimated non cross-listed holdings equation (7) and then averaging over the resulting fitted holdings.

        Our second estimator uses the propensity-score method of matching, also termed “p-matching,”

originally developed by Rosenbaum and Rubin [1983].24 P-matching uses fitted cross-listing probabilities

(“propensity scores”) generated from estimates of equation (3) to match each cross-listed firm with a non

23
   One could also estimate the listing impact from the non cross-listed firms, E(HU|X=1) - E(HU|X=0), or from both
cross-listed and non cross-listed firms to generate an unconditional listing impact, E(H|X=1) - E(H|X=0). Heckman,
Ichimura, Smith, and Todd [1998] provide a nice overview of issues relating to the different measures.
24
   See Imbens [2004] and Stuart [2004] for recent reviews of matching applications to treatment effect estimators.


                                                         23
cross-listed firm.25 The idea is that the holdings of p-matched non cross-listed firms are likely to be similar

to what a listed firm’s holdings would have been if unlisted, so the average holdings of p-matched firms

can be used to estimate E (H iL | X = 0) . The p-matching estimator requires no explicit model of holdings,

which reduces the risk of specification error (Drake [1993]; Dehejia and Wahba [2002]; and Zhao [2004]).

The estimator has also been shown to outperform the Heckman [1979] correction in experimental studies of

selection bias (Glazerman, Levy, and Myers [2004]). One drawback to the p-matching estimator is that it

does not account for unobserved correlation between the holdings and cross-listing decisions.

         We generate our third estimate of the average cross-listing effect using the “difference-in-

differences” estimator (Heckman and Robb [1985]; Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith [1999]). This estimator

requires holdings observations on cross-listed firms prior to their cross-listing. For this, we draw upon U.S.

holdings data from the earlier March 31, 1994 survey. The difference-in-differences estimator compares the

change in holdings of a firm that was not cross-listed in 1994 but cross-listed by 1997 to firms that

remained non cross-listed between 1994 and 1997. That is, the cross-listing effect is given by

     E (H iL | X = 1) − E (H iL | X = 0) = ( H iL,1997 − H iU ,1994 ) − ( H Uj ,1997 − H Uj ,1994 ),   (9)

where i indexes a firm that cross-lists between the 1994 and 1997 surveys, j indexes a firm that remains non

cross-listed in both surveys, and bars over the variables reflect sample means across the i and j categories.

The difference-in-differences estimator incorporates many of the advantages of the p-matching estimator.

Moreover, unlike the p-matching estimator, the difference-in-differences estimator accounts for

unobservable components of selection bias, assuming that the characteristics of a type-i firm do not change

in a way that is left uncontrolled by the type-j firms.26 For our application, the key drawback of the

difference-in-differences estimator is that it relies on a relatively narrow subset of firms (129) that were




25
   The asymmetry in our data makes p-matching a particularly attractive method because we have a large set of firms
from which to select a match (roughly 30 non cross-listed firms for each of our cross-listed firms).
26
   Heckman, Ichimura, Todd, and Smith [1998] provide experimental evidence that difference-in-differences
estimators outperform both standard Heckman [1979] corrections and p-matching estimators.


                                                                      24
traded only in their home market in 1994, but cross-listed by 1997.27

4.2 The average cross-listing effect

         Estimates of the average cross-listing effect are summarized in Table 5. Requiring a complete set

of explanatory variables for the Heckman [1979]-based and p-matching estimators reduces our sample to

8,067 firms, 279 of which cross-listed on a U.S. exchange. As reported in row 1 of Table 5, at the end of

1997 U.S. investors held an average of 16.4 percent of the market capitalization of these 279 cross-listed

firms, an average that is slightly less than for the somewhat larger sample in Table 2. Accordingly, for our

Heckman-based and p-matching (cross-sectoinal) estimates of the average cross-listing effect, we use 16.4

percent as our estimate of E (H iL | X = 1) .

         Shown in row 2 of Table 5, the Heckman [1979]-based estimate of E (H iL | X = 0) is 5.6 percent of

market capitalization. Consistent with selection-bias intuition, the estimate implies that U.S. investors

would have held a larger mean share of these firms had they not cross-listed than the 2.9 percent average

holding in firms that were not actually cross-listed (Table 2). Nonetheless, the estimate implies a

statistically significant, and economically large, average cross-listing effect of 10.8 percent of market

capitalization (14.7 percent in terms of a firm’s measured float).28 In other words, the Heckman [1979]-

corrected estimates imply that U.S. holdings in a typical cross-listed stock are 10.8 percentage points higher

than they would be without the U.S. listing.

         The p-matching and difference-in-differences methodologies produce results that are close to the

Heckman [1979]-based estimates. As shown in row 4 of Table 5, p-matching produces an estimate of

E (H iL | X = 0) equal to 6.4 percent of market capitalization (9.0 percent of market float), which is higher

than the corresponding Heckman [1979] estimate, but which still implies a statistically significant listing

effect equivalent to 10.0 percent of market capitalization (16.3 percent of market float). The bottom panel

of Table 5 reports U.S. holdings of firms in March 1994 that were not cross-listed but that cross-listed by

27
   Because the sample size would be reduced to an even greater extent by requiring insider holdings information, we
do not report difference-in-differences estimates using the market float measure.
28
   The standard error for the listing effect estimate is calculated as the observation-weighted standard deviation of the
279 paired differences.


                                                           25
December 1997, amounting to 8.6 percent of market capitalization for the 132 cases in which we had

holdings data for the earlier period. Adding the 0.6 percentage increase in the holdings of non cross-listed

firms over the period 1994-1997 yields our highest estimate of E (H iL | X = 0) -- 9.2 percent of market

capitalization. Nonetheless, with U.S. investors holding 17.1 percent of these firms by the end of 1997, this

still implies an average cross-listing effect of 7.9 percent. 29 Overall, the three techniques estimate the

average cross-listing effect to range from 8 to 11 percent.

         In results not reported in the tables, we also estimate the average difference between U.S. holdings

in companies with U.S. Level 1 ADRs and foreign companies not trading in the United States, analogous to

the average cross-listing effect. Recall from Table 2 that U.S. investors held 8.1 percent of the market

capitalization of Level 1 ADR-firms. According to the selection-bias estimators, U.S. investors would have

held between 5 and 6 percent of the shares in these firms anyway, implying a small “Level 1” effect of 2 to

3 percent of market capitalization. Thus, the greater part of the average cross-listing effect derives from

benefits associated with the exchange listing itself.

4.3 Determinants of the cross-listing effect.

          We conjecture that firms experiencing the largest cross-listing effect are those for which cross-

listing most sharply reduces frictions to investment. If theories linking the importance of cross-listing to

improved information flow, protection under U.S. laws, and increased familiarity are to have some

descriptive power, then the largest cross-listing effect should be experienced by firms that (i) have weak

accounting standards prior to cross-listing, or are financially opaque, (ii) poorly protect outside investors, or

are from countries with weak investor rights protections, and (iii) have low name-recognition in the United

States. To explore these implications, we regress firm-level measures of the cross-listing effect on our

measures of information quality, accounting quality, investor protection, and familiarity.

29
   In our sample, 23 of the 129 firms that cross-listed between the two survey dates also undertook seasoned equity
offerings (SEOs). It is plausible that the combination of a SEO and cross-listing has different implications for U.S.
holdings than a cross-listing alone, particularly if the issue targets U.S. investors. However, when we compare the
change in U.S. holdings for cross-listing stocks with and without these SEOs, we find no statistically significant
difference. Accordingly, we do not treat cross-listing firms that raise public equity differently from other cross-listing
firms. For further evidence on the capital-raising behavior of cross-listed firms, see Reese and Weisbach [2002] and
Henderson, Jegadeesh, and Weisbach [2004].


                                                            26
           Our first set of regressions uses cross-listing estimates generated by the Heckman [1979] model.

The first two columns in Table 6, under the label “Heckman [1979]-based”, report estimates of the

marginal impact of each instrument on the cross-listing effect. These figures are calculated as the difference

in the estimates ( βˆ L − βˆU ) from equations (1) and (2).30 Estimated p-values of a test that the cross-listed

and non cross-listed parameters are the same (i.e., their difference is zero) are from bootstrapped

distributions and are reported in parentheses below the estimates. For the three variables—national

accounting quality index, firm-level accounting quality index, and English home language home dummy—

that are included in the non cross-listed holdings equation but excluded from the cross-listed holdings, we

report the bootstrapped p-value and the negative of the estimate from the non cross-listed equation (i.e., we

assume the coefficient on the excluded variables is the scalar zero).

        The third and fourth columns of Table 6 report the results from regressions using the difference-in-

differences setup to generate firm-level estimates of the cross-listing effect. Specifically, we regress the

1994 to 1997 change in holdings of stocks that were not cross-listed in 1994 on a cross-listing dummy, its

interactions with instruments measured as of 1994 and 1997, and the change in the value of instruments

over the 1994 to 1997 period,

        ∆H i = α D + X i γ D + X i Z 1994
                                     i         D     (
                                                   + Z 1997
                                                       i    - Z 1994
                                                                i     )
                                                                     θ D + Z 1994
                                                                             i    ϕ D + ε iD ,   (10)

where Xi equals one if the firm cross-lists in 1997, and zero otherwise. We include changes and first-period

levels of the instruments in the regression as controls for changes in firm characteristics and in U.S.

investor preferences, respectively. For brevity, we report only the interaction estimates (      D   ) in Table 6

which, like the marginal sensitivity estimates from the structural model, identify the marginal influence of

the instruments on the cross-listing effect.

           Data peculiarities handicap our chances of finding statistically strong relations in the cross-section.

The parameters of the structural cross-listed holdings equation are measured imprecisely (see Table 4),

making it difficult to confidently distinguish the signs on the conditional cross-listing effects in the first two

30
     The estimates of   L   and u are separately reported in Table 4.


                                                                 27
columns. Moreover, 1994 firm-level data requirements further reduce the number of cross-listed firms

available for analysis in the third and fourth columns of the table.

        Nonetheless, several interesting patterns emerge in Table 6. First and foremost, the results are

consistent with the notion that improvement in the availability and quality of value-relevant information

about a firm is a key aspect of cross-listing in U.S. markets. In particular, we obtain negative and

statistically significant coefficient estimates for the firm-level accounting quality index in our difference-in-

differences specifications, implying that improved accounting practices linked to cross-listing spurs U.S.

investment in firms with previously weak accounting standards. Our model-based estimates also imply that

opacity arising from either weak national accounting standards or uninformative disclosure choices at the

firm level is a deterrent to U.S. investment in foreign stocks that are not cross-listed.

        Further evidence for the importance of transparency comes in the smaller difference-in-differences

estimate of the listing effect for Canadian firms. Because Canadian firms are not required to reconcile to

U.S. GAAP or increase disclosures as much upon cross-listing, cross-listing should have less impact on

U.S. investors’ willingness to hold Canadian stocks. We also find U.S. holdings react less to cross-listing

by firms from other English-speaking countries, for which information in English is likely more readily

available at low cost. One further bit of evidence favoring an information explanation is the reduced listing

effect for the more liquid stocks that are included in the MSCI World index. To the extent that illiquidity

reflects asymmetric information between company insiders and other potential traders, as in the models of

Diamond and Verrecchia [1991] and Easley and O’Hara [2004], the enhanced disclosure requirements

associated with cross-listing will tend to matter more for less liquid stocks.

        Second, we do not find that U.S. investors respond to the enhanced protections of U.S. securities

laws in the manner that has been suggested by some proponents of the investor-protection hypothesis. In

particular, the positive coefficients on the shareholder rights index in the difference-in-differences exercise

indicate that, all else equal, cross-listing has a smaller impact on U.S. investors’ holdings for firms from

countries with weaker shareholder protection. Our result here does not imply that U.S. investors fail to

value shareholder protection provided by other countries’ legal systems, but is consistent with cross-listing


                                                       28
complementing such legal rights. In fact, to the extent that cross-listing in the United States makes a firm

more transparent, legal protections provided to minority shareholders in the home country may become

more effective. (Furthermore, the disclosure requirements accompanying a U.S. listing typically include

information about home-country legal risks that may leave some U.S. investors better informed about their

rights.) What our results do suggest is that cross-listing in the United States is not a substitute for adequate

protection of minority shareholders under the home-country legal system.

        Finally, the results in Table 6 provide relatively little support for the idea that U.S. investors

increase their weighting in foreign stocks merely because cross-listing makes the names of the underlying

companies more familiar to the investors. Firms with limited international sales experience no greater

increase in U.S. holdings than firms with extensive international sales, all else equal. Furthermore, we do

not find a statistically robust relationship between total firm assets and the cross-listing listing effect.

4.4 More on trading costs and the cross-listing effect

        The fact that U.S. investors hold large proportions of their shares in the underlying foreign security,

and that trading in the United States alone (as an over-the-counter stock) does not greatly increase U.S.

investor interest, indicate that home-market trading costs are unlikely to explain the cross-listing effect.

Nevertheless, we run several other tests (not reported in tables) to explore whether variation in home-

market transactions costs could impact the cross-listing effect. Specifically, we incorporate into our cross-

sectional regressions proxies for trade and market openness including home-country GDP, home country

stock market capitalization, a dummy variable separating emerging and industrialized markets, and

measures of bilateral U.S. trade. None of these variables are statistically related to the cross-listing effect.31



5. Conclusion

        We use a comprehensive 1997 survey of U.S. investor holdings in non-U.S. companies to

document that cross-listing on a U.S. exchange substantially increases U.S. investor holdings of a foreign


31
  These findings are consistent with Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock [2004], who show that measures of barriers-to-
investment explain little of the cross-country holdings patterns of U.S. investors.


                                                        29
stock, a phenomenon we term the “cross-listing effect.” Our selection bias-corrected estimates imply that

firms can increase their U.S. holdings by 8 to 11 percent of their market capitalization by cross-listing in

the United States, doubling or more the amount prior to cross-listing. Of course, this does not imply that

every firm in the world could obtain a cross-listing effect of this magnitude, but our results suggest that our

estimates were applicable to at least several hundred firms that were not yet cross-listed.

        We find a smaller U.S. holdings increase from cross-listing for firms with more transparent

financial accounting. This result is consistent with requisite financial disclosure being a key element of

cross-listing, from the point of view of U.S. investors. We do not find strong evidence that adopting U.S.

legal protections is an important aspect of a U.S. listing, but this may be because variation in shareholder

protection is more difficult to measure in our cross-section of firms than variation in transparency.

However, our findings are generally consistent with Siegel [2005], who shows that, in practice, U.S.

securities law enforcement does not extend to cross-listed companies, and Gozzi, Levine, and Schmukler

[2005], who demonstrate that cross-listing does not improve the valuation of companies from poor

investor-protection countries.

        Despite the large average cross-listing effect on U.S. holdings, results from our simultaneous

model of the cross-listing and holdings decisions offer only weak support for the idea that prospects for an

expanded shareholder base are a key motive for cross-listing. We find some evidence that foreign firms are

more likely to cross-list in the United States when they already have a large base of U.S. shareholders,

suggesting that some firms cross-list to service their shareholder clientele.

        Our analysis also has policy implications. Firms that voluntarily commit to increased disclosure

appear to attract more outside investment, and governments can promote and enforce disclosure to attract

capital flows to their countries. Accordingly, the U.S. cross-listing effect should diminish for firms from

countries that improve disclosure standards for publicly traded firms.32 Our results also suggest that legal

protections for small shareholders may be more effective in an environment that also ensures transparency.


32
  Similarly, Armstrong et al. [2006] find that European markets reacted positively to events associated with the 2005
adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) in Europe.


                                                         30
Appendix: Estimating the Structural Model

        Because the holdings variables H iL and H iU are measured as shares of a firm’s equity value, they are
well-defined only over the range from zero to one. This implies that (6) and (7) cannot be estimated
consistently using ordinary least squares because the limited range induces dependence between the
instruments Zi and the residual.33 We circumvent this problem by transforming the holdings data by the
inverse of the logistic function. However, because the inverse logistic is defined only on the open interval
from zero to one, and we have a number of firms in our sample with no reported U.S. holdings, we shift the
domain of the inverse logistic to the left by a small fixed amount, S,

         F −1 ( H ) = ln( H + S ) − ln(1 − H − S ).                                               (A-1)

Figure A-1 graphs the “shifted” F-1 assuming a shift parameter (S) of 10 percent. A disadvantage of this
function is that it is only defined for holdings (H) below 90 percent. But it has the favorable property of
being nearly linear in H between 0 and 80 percent, the range in which most of our observations fall. The
smoothness of the function reduces the chance that our results will be significantly distorted by some quirk
of the chosen functional form. After incorporating the inverse shifted logistic transformation, we rewrite
our holdings equations as

                ( )
         F −1 H iL = α L + Z Li         L   + ε iL                                                 (A-2)
         F −1   (H ) = α
                  U
                  i        U   + Z iU   U   + ε iU .                                               (A-3)

         Lee [1978] proposes a multi-stage method for consistently estimating a system like ours in which a
first-stage, reduced-form probit generates Heckman [1979]-type correction terms for the holdings equations
(A-2) and (A-3). The corrected second-stage estimation of the holdings equations produces consistent
estimates of the relation between the instruments and (transformed) holdings, and makes it possible to
calculate fitted holdings values as a function of the instruments. The final stage of estimation involves
using the fitted holdings for estimation of the structural probit in equation (7).
         In order to implement the Lee [1978] estimation framework, we need to make a few additional
assumptions and a slight modification to our specification. Both of these issues relate to the joint statistical
distribution of the residuals in the three equations. First, the error terms from the listing equation ( ε iX ) and
the two holdings equations ( ε iL , ε iU ) must be jointly normally distributed,
         (ε iX , ε iL , ε iU ) ~ N(0, Ω),                                                    (A-4)
where is a 3 x 3 variance covariance matrix. The second issue arises because the first step in the original
Lee [1978] procedure involves estimating a reduced form probit for the binary variable into which the
linear equations for the other dependent variable have been substituted. In our model, equations (A-2) and
(A-3) are not linear in holdings, thus we must recast the interaction elements in our listing decision
equation in terms of the transformed holdings variable so that our reduced-form listing equation will be
tractable. In particular,

                           [ ( )                       ( )]        ( )
         X i* = α x + γ 0 F −1 H iL − F −1 H iU + γ 1 F −1 H iU + Z iX      x   + ε iX .          (A-5)

Under assumption (A-4), the probit model implied by equations (A-5), (8), and (9) can be estimated jointly
with the linear specifications in equations (A-2) and (A-3), as long as certain identification restrictions are

33
  See, for example, the introductory discussion of truncated variables in Maddala [1983]. In principal, U.S. holdings
could be negative, but in practice, short positions are not reflected in the holdings survey. Similarly, with short
positions held by others, it is conceivable that H could exceed 1, but in practice it is below 0.9.


                                                              31
met. Lee [1978] has shown that multi-stage estimation will produce estimates of structural parameters that
are consistent in the presence of selection bias.
        One advantage of this framework is that although we only observe H iL for firms that have a U.S.
listing and H iU for firms that do not, we can use our parameter estimates to make inferences about what U.S.
holdings of a firm’s stock would have been had the firm made the counterfactual choice about whether to
cross-list. Furthermore, we can generate estimates of the cross-listing effect—i.e., the impact of cross-
listing on U.S. holdings ( H iL - H iU )—either unconditionally or conditional on specific firm characteristics.
         In the first stage of the Lee [1978] methodology, the two holdings equations (A-2) and (A-3) are
substituted into the listing probit (A-5) to form a reduced-form listing equation that can be estimated on a
stand-alone basis by numerical maximum likelihood. The set of independent variables (ZR) for the first-
stage reduced-form probit specification consists of all of the instruments in the structural equations for
listing and holdings:

         ZR = ZX ∪ ZL ∪ ZU .                                                                  (A-6)

We can write the first-stage equation as

         X i* = α R + Z iR β R − ε iR ,                                                       (A-7)
where
        ε iR = γ 0ε iL + Z iR (γ 0 − γ 1 )ε iU + ε iX .                                       (A-8)

The estimates from the probit model embodied in equations (A-7), (A-8), and (A-9) can be used to
construct the selectivity-bias correction in the holdings-equations residuals ( L and U). It can be shown that
for listed firms (X* = 0),

                                                    φ(α R + Z iR β R )
         E (ε iL | X * ≥ 0) = − cov(ε iX , ε iL )                       ,                     (A-9)
                                                    Φ (α R + Z iR β R )

where the variance of X has been normalized to one and and denote the probability density function
and cumulative density function, respectively, of the standard normal distribution. The ratio

         φ(α R + Z iR β R )
                                                                                              (A-10)
         Φ (α R + Z iR β R )

is often referred to as the “inverse Mills ratio”. Estimates of the ratio form the basis for standard corrections
for selectivity bias when inclusion in an estimation sample is contingent on a discrete outcome (see
Heckman [1979] or Maddala [1983]). Intuitively, the inverse Mills ratio accounts for the unobserved
correlation between the listing decision and holdings. There is also a similar, but less frequently used
correction for selectivity bias for the non-selected observations,

                                                    φ(α R + Z iR β R )
         E (ε iU | X * < 0) = cov(ε iX , ε iU )                           .                   (A-11)
                                                  1 − Φ (α R + Z iR β R )

The second stage of the Lee procedure involves estimating the holdings equations by ordinary least squares
by rewriting them as




                                                                     32
                                           φ(α R + Z iR β R )
         F −1 (H iL ) = α L + Z iL β L −                       λ L + η iL                         (A-12)
                                           Φ (α R + Z iR β R )
and
                                              φ(α R + Z iR β R )
         F −1 ( H iU ) = α U + Z iU β U +                          λ U + η iU .                   (A-13)
                                            1 − Φ (α R + Z i β R )
                                                            R




Note that λ k = cov(ε iX , ε ik ) for k = L, U and E (η iL | X * ≥ 0) = E (η iU | X * < 0) = 0. We use our first-stage
estimates of the parameters R and R in (A-12) to construct the selectivity variables, and then substitute
these variables into equations (A-12) and (A-13). The coefficient associated with the selectivity adjustment
provides an estimate of the unobserved covariance between the listing decision and each of the holding
equations. The final stage of the Lee procedure involves using the consistent estimates of L, U, L, and U
from (A-12) and (A-13) to construct fitted values of (F-1) using the original holdings equations (A-12) and
(A-13). The fitted holdings are inserted back into the structural listing decision equation (A-5), which is
then estimated as a probit model via numerical likelihood maximization.
         As noted by Lee [1978], it is possible to construct consistent standard errors for equations (A-12)
and (A-13) after making a correction for heteroscedasticity associated with the selectivity terms. However,
inferences about the distribution of the estimated parameters in the listing decision equation (A-5) are
complicated by the use of the generated variables E(F-1|Z) in the final-stage probit estimation. Furthermore,
for judgments about how the cross-listing effect on U.S. holdings varies across different types of firms (i.e.,
the conditional cross-listing effect), we construct statistics that involve parameter estimates from more than
one equation. Accordingly, we opt to estimate the distribution of the full set of model parameters via non-
parametric bootstrap simulations. Specifically, for each of the three versions of the model we estimated, we
randomly drew 1,000 hypothetical samples with the same number of observations (with replacement), re-
estimating the full model and computing the statistics of interest with each simulation.
         Because our structural equations (A-5), (A-12), and (A-13) are nonlinear, the estimated parameters
of the model are difficult to interpret. Therefore, we report rescaled functions of the estimates that are more
readily interpretable. Specifically, for the coefficients on instruments in the listing decision equation, we
calculate the marginal effect of a one-unit change in the instrument on the percentage point probability of
cross-listing, estimated using each of 8,067 firms in the sample (or the 5,155 firms used in Panel C),

         100 ∗ Φ ˆ ′i ∗ ˆ ,                           where                                       (A-14)
         Φ          (         [ ( )                   ( )]                  ( )
          ˆ ′i ≡ Φ ′ αˆ + γˆ0 F −1 Hˆ iL − F −1 Hˆ iU + γˆ1 F −1 Hˆ iU + Z i ˆ X .)               (A-15)

We then report in Table 6 the median of the marginal effect estimates. The formulae for scaling the
estimated impact of holdings on the cross- listing decision are somewhat more complicated:

           Φˆ ′i
                  ∗ γˆ0 ;
            ( )
         F ′ Hˆ L
                i
                                                                                                  (A-16)

            Φˆ′              Φˆ′          Φˆ′
               i
                   ∗ γˆ  +      i
                                     −       i
                                                            ∗ γˆ0 .
            ( )
         F ′ Hˆ iU     1
                           F ′ Hˆ i( )
                                   L
                                       F ′ Hˆ iU   ( )                                            (A-17)


The reported figures represent the median marginal impact on the cross-listing probability of changes in
(HL-HU ) and in (HU), all else equal. The extra term in (22) reflects the fact that a unit change in (HU ) with
(HL-HU ) held constant implies a unit change in (HL).
       Similarly, the coefficients ( ˆ ) in the holdings equations are scaled to reflect the marginal effect of



                                                                      33
a change in the instrument on the holdings share of U.S. investors (measured in percentage points),

                 (             )
        100 ∗ F′ αˆ C + Z i ˆ C ∗ ˆ C ,   F′(• ) > 0,        C ∈ {L, U} .                 (A-18)

We then report the median estimated effect, which varies with the slope of the logistic transformation
function (F).




                                                        34
References

Ackert, L., B. Church, J. Tomkins, and P. Zhang, 2003. What’s in a name? An experimental examiniation
of investment behavior. College of Business, Georgia Institute of Technology.

Aggarwal, R., L. Klapper, and P. Wysocki, 2005. Portfolio preferences of foreign institutional investors.
Journal of Banking and Finance 29, 2919-2946.

Ahearne, A., W. Griever, and F. Warnock, 2004. Information costs and home bias: an analysis of U.S.
holdings of foreign equities. Journal of International Economics 62, 313-336.

Armstrong, C., M. Barth, A. Jagolinzer, and E. Riedl, 2006. Market Reaction to Events Surrounding the
Adoption of IFRS in Europe. Working paper.

Ball, R., 2001. Infrastructure Requirements for an Economically Efficient System of Public Financial
Reporting and Disclosure. Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services, 127–169.

Ball, R., Robin, A., Wu, J., 2003. Incentives versus Standards: Properties of Accounting Income in Four
East Asian Countries, and Implications for Acceptance of IAS. Journal of Accounting and Economics 36,
235-270.

Barber, B. M. and T. Odean, 2003. All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on the buying
behavior of individuals and institutional investors. University of California at Davis working paper.

Barth, M., W. Landsman, M. Lang, C. Williams, 2006. Accounting Quality: International Accounting
Standards and US GAAP. UNC Working paper.

Bradshaw, M. T., B. J. Bushee, and G. S. Miller, 2004. Accounting choice, home bias, and U.S. investment
in non-U.S. firms. Journal of Accounting Research 42(5), 795-841.

Bushman, R., J. Piotroski, and A. Smith, 2004. What determines corporate transparency? Journal of
Accounting Research 42(2), 207-251.

Coffee, J., 1999. The Future as History: The Prospects for Global Convergence in Corporate Governance
and Its Implications. Columbia Law School Center for Law and Economic Studies Working Paper No. 144.

Coffee, J., 2002. Racing towards the top? The impact of cross-listings and stock market competition and its
implications. Northwestern University Law Review 93, 641-708.

Coval, J., and T. Moskowitz, 1999. Home bias at home: Local equity preference in domestic portfolios.
Journal of Finance 54, 2045-2073.

Coval, J., and T. Moskowitz, 2001. The geography of investment: Informed trading and asset prices.
Journal of Political Economy 109, 811-841.

Dahlquist, M., L. Pinkowitz, R. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2003. Corporate governance and the home bias.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 87-110.

Dehejia, R. and S. Wahba, 2002. Propensity score matching methods for non-experimental causal studies.
Review of Economics and Statistics 84, 151–161.



                                                     35
Diamond, D. and R. Verrecchia, 1991. Disclosure, liquidity, and the cost of capital. Journal of Finance 46,
1325-1359.

Doidge, C., 2004. U.S. cross-listings and the private benefit of control: evidence from dual-class firms.
Journal of Financial Economics 72, 519-553.

Doidge, C., G.A. Karolyi, and R. Stulz, 2004. Why are foreign firms listed in the U.S. worth more? Journal
of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.

Drake, C., 1993. Effects of misspecification of the propensity score on estimators of treatment effects.
Biometrics 49, 1231–1236.

Durnev, A. and H. Kim, 2005. To Steal or Not to Steal: Firm Attributes, Legal Environment, and
Valuation. Journal of Finance 60(3): 1461-1493.

Dyck, A.and L. Zingales, 2004. Private Benefits of Control: An International Comparison. Journal of
Finance 59(2), 537-600.

Easley, D., and M. O'
                    Hara, 2004. Information and the Cost of Capital. Journal of Finance 59(4), 1553-
1583.

Easterbrook, F., 1984. Two Agency Cost Explanations of Dividends. American Economic Review 74(4),
650-659.

Edison, H. J., and F. Warnock, 2004. U.S. Investors’ Emerging Market Equity Portfolios: A Security-Level
Analysis. Review of Economics and Statistics 84(3), 691-704.

Errunza, V., and D. Miller, 2000. Market Segmentation and the Cost of Capital in International Equity
Markets. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35(4), 577-600.

Faccio, M., L. Lang, and L. Young, 2001. Dividends and Expropriation. American Economic Review 91(1),
54-78.

Fanto, J., and R. Karmel, 1997. A report on the attitudes of foreign companies regarding a U.S. listing.
Stanford Journal of Law, Business and Finance 24, 763-812.

Foerster, S. R., and G. A. Karolyi, 1999. The effects of market segmentation and investor recognition on
asset prices: Evidence from foreign stocks listing in the United States. Journal of Finance 54, 981-1013.

Glazerman, S., D. Levy, and D. Myers, 2003. Nonexperimental versus experimental estimates of earnings
impacts. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 589, 63–93.

Gozzi, J., R. Levine, and S. Schmukler, 2005. Internationalization and the evolution of corporate valuation.
NBER Working Paper 11023.

Griever, W., G. Lee, and F. E. Warnock, 2001. The U.S. system for measuring cross-border investment in
securities: a primer with a discussion of recent developments. Federal Reserve Bulletin, 87(10): 633-650.

Grullon, G., G. Kanatas, and J. P. Weston, 2004. Advertising, breath of ownership, and liquidity. Review of
Financial Studies 17: 439-461.



                                                     36
Heckman, J. J., 1979. Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica 47, 153-161.

Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, J. Smith, and P. Todd, 1998, Characterizing selection bias using experimental
data. Econometrica, 66, 1017-1098.

Heckman, J., R. LaLonde, and J. Smith, 1999. The economics and econometrics of active labor market
programs, in O. Ashefelter and D. Card, eds, Handbook of Labor Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Heckman, J. and R. Robb Jr., 1985, Alternative methods for evaluating the impact of interventions. in
Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Markets Data, ed. By J. Heckman and B. Singer. New York: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 156-245.

Henderson, B., N. Jegadeesh, and M. Weisbach, 2004, World markets for raising new capital. Journal of
Financial Economics (forthcoming).

Huberman, G., 2001. Familiarity breeds investment. Review of Financial Studies, 14(3):659-680.

Imbens, G. W. 2004. Nonparametric estimation of average treatment effects under exogeneity: a review.
Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 1, 4–29.

International Finance Corportation, 1998. Emerging Stock Markets Factbook.

Ivkovic, Z., and S. Weisbenner, 2005. Local does as local is: information content of the geography of
individual investors’ common stock investments. Journal of Finance 60: 267-306.

Jensen, M., 1986. Agency Cost of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers. American Economic
Review (Papers and Proceedings) 76(2), 323-329.

Johnson, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 2000. Tunneling. American Economic
Review (Papers and Proceedings) 90, 22-27.

Kalcheva, I., and K. Lins, 2004. International evidence on cash holdings and expected managerial agency
problems. University of Utah working paper.

Kaniel, R., D. Li, and L. T. Starks, 2003. The investor recognition hypothesis: International evidence and
determinants. Duke University, Fuqua School working paper.

Karolyi, A. and R. Stulz, 2003. Are assets priced locally or globally?, in G. Constantinides, M. Harris and
R. Stulz, eds.: The Handbook of the Economics of Finance, North-Holland Publishers, New York, NY.

Kho, B., R. Stulz, and F. Warnock, 2006. Financial globalization, governance, and the evolution of the
home bias. NBER Working Paper 12389.

Lalonde, R., 1986. Evaluating the econometric evaluations of job training programs with experimental data,
American Economic Review 76, 604-620.

Lang, M., K. Lins, and D. Miller, 2003. ADRs, analysts, and accuracy: Does cross listing in the U.S.
improve a firm’s information environment and increase market value? Journal of Accounting Research
41(2), 317-345.




                                                     37
Lang, M., J. Ready, W. Wilson, 2006. Earnings management and cross listing: Are reconciled earnings
comparable to US earnings? UNC Working paper.

Lang, M., J. Raedy, M. Yetman, 2003. How Representative are Firms that are Cross Listed in the United
States? An Analysis of Accounting Quality. Journal of Accounting Research 41, 363-386.

La Porta, R. F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998. Law and finance. Journal of Political
Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, R. F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1999. Corporate ownership around the
world. Journal of Finance 54, 471-515.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2002, Investor Protection and Corporate
Valuation, Journal of Finance, Vol. 57, No. 3, 1147-1170.

Larcker, D., T. Rusticus, 2005. On the Use of Instrumental Variables in Accounting Research. Wharton
working paper.

Lee, L.F., 1978, Unionism and wage rates: A simultaneous equations model with qualitative and limited
dependent variables, International Economic Review, 19, 415-433.

Leuz, C., Lins, K., and F. Warnock, 2006. Do foreigners invest less in poorly governed firms? NBER
Working Paper 12222.

Leuz, C., Nanda, D., Wysocki, P., 2003. Earnings Management and Investor Protection: an International
Comparison. Journal of Financial Economics 69, 505-527.

Leuz, C., and R. Verrechia, 2004. The Economic Consequences of Increased Disclosure. Journal of
Accounting Research 38: 91-124.

Levine, R., 2005. Law, Endowments, and Property Rights. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(3), 61-88.

Maddala, G., 1983. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics. Cambridge Press.

Merton, R. C., 1987. A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information. Journal of
Finance 42, 483-510.

Miller, D., 1999. The market reaction to international cross-listings: evidence from depositary receipts.
Journal of Financial Economics 51, 103-123.

Morgan, D. P., 2002. Rating banks: Risk and uncertainty in an opaque industry. American Economic
Review 92, 874-888.

Pinkowitz, L., R. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2006. Does the Contribution of Corporate Cash Holdings and
Dividends to Firm Value Depend on Governance? A Cross-Country Analysis. Journal of Finance
(forthcoming).

Pownall, G., and K. Schipper, 1999. Implications of Accounting research for the SEC’s consideration of
International Accounting Standards for U.S. securities. Accounting Horizons 13 (September): 259–280.




                                                     38
Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales, 2002. The great reversals: the politics of financial development in the
twentieth century. Journal of Financial Economics 65, 5-50.

Rees, L. Elgers, P., 1997. The market’s valuation of non-reported accounting measures: retrospective
reconciliations of non-US and US GAAP. Journal of Accounting Research 35(1), 15-127.

Reese, W., and M. Weisbach, 2002. Protection of minority shareholders interests, cross-listings in the
United States, and subsequent equity offerings. Journal of Financial Economics, 66(1): 65-104.

Rosenbaum, P. R. and D. B. Rubin. 1983. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies
for causal effects. Biometrika 70, 41–55.

Siegel, J., 2005. Can foreign firms bond themselves effectively by renting U.S. securities laws? Journal of
Financial Economics 75(2).

Stuart, E., 2004. Matching methods for causal inference: Designing observational studies. Harvard
University Department of Statistics mimeo.

Stulz, R., 1999. Globalization of equity markets and the cost of capital. Paper prepared for the SBF/NYSE
Conference on Global Equity Markets.

Zhao, Z., 2004. Using matching to estimate treatment effects: data requirements, matching metrics, and
Monte Carlo evidence. Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 1, 91–107.




                                                     39
                        Table 1: U.S. Holdings by Country, December 31, 1997

The table shows the proportion of market capitalization held by U.S. investors and the number of firms
with positive U.S. holdings among the 12,236 non-U.S. stocks in our sample, sorted by country. Data on
the value of U.S. holdings are from the U.S. Treasury/Federal Reserve Board survey of U.S. holdings of
foreign securities. Market capitalization data are from Worldscope.
                       Percent of                                          Percent of
                        Market           Number of                           Market        Number of
                     Capitalization      Firms with                      Capitalization    Firms with
                     Held by U.S.       Positive U.S.                     Held by U.S.    Positive U.S.
 Country               Investors          Holdings     Country              Investors       Holdings
Argentina                24              38          Korea                    10            248
Australia                10             268          Luxembourg                8               8
Austria                   8              54          Malaysia                  5            348
Belgium                   4              66          Mexico                   19             83
Brazil                   13             128          Netherlands              19            136
Canada                   11             484          New Zealand              14             47
Chile                     7              63          Norway                   13            120
China                     4              85          Pakistan                 12             42
Colombia                  4              17          Peru                     18             20
Czech Republic            5              41          Philippines               9             96
Denmark                   8              88          Poland                   17             39
Finland                  21              74          Portugal                 13             50
France                   11             403          Russia                    9             20
Germany                   6             271          Singapore                 7            162
Greece                    4              64          South Africa              5            150
Hong Kong                 7             332          Spain                    11            104
Hungary                  21              19          Sweden                   14            153
India                     6             186          Switzerland              11            144
Indonesia                 8             107          Taiwan                    1            174
Ireland                  21              56          Thailand                  9            192
Israel                   11              49          Turkey                    9             77
                                                     United
Italy                    10             143                                   10          1,446
                                                     Kingdom
Japan                     6           1,876          Venezuela                14             14
                                                     Total                     9          8,785


                                                   40
                      Table 2: Summary Statistics for Sample, December 31, 1997

The table reports aggregate U.S. holdings, the number and market capitalization of the sample firms, and
U.S. holdings in cross-listed and non cross-listed firms. Data on the value of U.S. holdings are from the
U.S. Treasury/Federal Reserve Board survey of U.S. holdings of foreign securities. Market capitalization
figures and are from Worldscope. We calculate market float by scaling market capitalization down by the
figure given in Worldscope’s “closely held share” field. We label a non-U.S. firm as cross-listed if its
shares are listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ. Level 1 ADRs trade only on over-the-counter
markets and are not considered to be cross-listed on a U.S. exchange.


                                                                Firm Market Firm Market
                                                               Capitalization     Float
                                                                 Available      Available
                                                               (46 countries) (46 countries)
              Number of Firms Available                           12,236           8,528

              Total market value of equity (billions of US$)      $11,080         $5,927

              Value of U.S. holdings (billions of US$)            $1,020           $802

              Implicit share held by U.S. investors                9.2%            13.5%



              Firms Cross-Listed on a U.S. Exchange                 498             293

              Average share held by U.S. investors                17.5%            26.3%

              Average share held in ADR form                       6.4%            12.4%


              All Firms Not Cross-Listed on U.S. Exchange         11,738           8,235

              Average share held by U.S. investors                 2.9%            5.6%



              Memo:
                Firms underlying Level 1 ADRs                       672             524
                Average share held by U.S. investors               8.1%            14.6%
                Average share held in ADR form                     1.7%            2.8%




                                                      41
                                                Table 3
                                       Variables and Instruments

This table provides definitions and sources for the explanatory variables used in the sample selection
corrections, the cross-sectional regressions, and the simultaneous model of U.S. holdings and the cross-
listing decision.

Variable                              Definition                                        Included in:

Firm-level variables
Total assets                          Logarithm of the 1997 book value of a firm’s       Z iR , Z iX , Z Li , Z iU
                                      assets from Worldscope, included as a
                                      measure of firm size.

Financial firm dummy                  Dummy variable that takes on the value of          Z iR , Z iX , Z Li , Z iU
                                      one when a firm is identified by Worldscope
                                      as belonging to industry SIC Codes 60-69 in
                                      1997.

Proportion of shares held by          Worldscope’s 1997 value for the number of          Z iR , Z iX , Z Li , Z iU
insiders (%)                          closely held shares as a percentage of
                                      common shares outstanding, adjusted to
                                      remove those stakes mistakenly counted as
                                      insider ownership by Worldscope. These
                                      include holdings by the Bank of New York,
                                      Morgan Guarantee Trust, and Citibank,
                                      because these shares are holdings for ADR
                                      programs, and the New Zealand Central
                                      Securities Depository.

MSCI index membership dummy           Dummy variable equal to one when a firm is         Z iR , Z Li , Z iU
                                      included as a member of the MSCI All-
                                      country World index at the end of 1997.

Dummy for dividend-paying firm        Dummy variable equal to one when a firm            Z iR , Z Li , Z iU
                                      pays a dividend in 1997, as reported by
                                      Worldscope.

Market-to-book value ratio            Year-end closing share price divided by the        Z iR , Z Li , Z iU
                                      per-share book value of equity in 1997, as
                                      reported by Worldscope.

Foreign sales as a proportion of      Proportion of sales generated from operations      Z iR , Z Li , Z iU
total sales (%)                       in foreign countries relative to total sales in
                                      1997, as reported by Worldscope.




                                                    42
 Table 3 (continued): Variables and Instruments.
Variable                 Definition                                          Included in:
Canada dummy             Dummy variable set equal to one for                  Z iR , Z iX , Z Li , Z iU
                         Canadian firms.

Firm-level accounting     Index ranging from zero to four, calculated         Z iR , Z iU
quality index             using criteria from Aggarwal, Klapper, and
                          Wysocki [2003]. Four components takes a
                          value of one if the firm (1) used a BigSix
                          auditor, (2) received a clean audit report, (3)
                          used international accounting standards or US
                          GAAP, and (4) reported consolidated
                          statements. The index is the sum of the four
                          components.

Country-level variables
Home-country trading      1997 dollar volume of trading in the home           Z iR , Z iX
value/GDP(%)              market of a firm, normalized by the dollar
                          value of the country’s 1997 gross domestic
                          product (GDP). The volume data are
                          obtained from the International Finance
                          Corporation [1998] and the GDP figures are
                          collected from the International Monetary
                          Fund’s International Financial Statistics.

Home-country dividend     For countries maintaining a bilateral tax treaty    Z iR , Z Li , Z iU
withholding tax rate      with the United States, we use the treaty tax
faced by U.S. investors   rate, as reported in the IRS publication 901,
                          U.S. Tax Treaties. For countries with no U.S.
                          tax treaty, we calculate dividend withholding
                          rates from 1997 gross and net dividend
                          payments to holders of ADRs, as reported in
                          Bloomberg’s Corporate Action Calendar.

Germanic home language    Dummy variable set equal to one for firms           Z iR , Z iX
dummy                     domiciled in a country in which a Germanic
                          language—Danish, Dutch, English, German,
                          Norwegian, or Swedish—is an official
                          language.

English home language     Dummy variable that equals one if the               Z iR , Z iU
dummy                     company’s domicile is a country in which
                          English is an official language.




                                                    43
    Table 3 (continued): Variables and Instruments.
Variable                     Definition                                        Included in:
National accounting quality  Values for 1995 reported by Bushman,               Z iR , Z iX , Z iU
index                        Piotroski, and Smith [2004]. Compiled by the
                             Center for Financial Analysis and Research,
                             the index averages across firms within a given
                             country the number of items, out of a possible
                             maximum of 90, that are included as part of a
                             firm’s financial statements.

Shareholder rights index      Calculated by La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,         Z iR , Z Li , Z iU
                              Shleifer, and Vishny [1998]. Index takes on a
                              value between 0 and 6 depending on how
                              many of the following applies to a country’s
                              equity market: percentage of outstanding
                              shares required to call an extraordinary
                              meeting less than or equal to 10 percent,
                              cumulative voting or proportional
                              representation of minority interests on board,
                              voting by mail permitted, mechanisms in
                              place for oppressed minority investors,
                              preemptive right that can only be waived by a
                              shareholder vote, and protection of
                              shareholders from requirements that shares be
                              deposited before a shareholder meeting.




                                                       44
Table 4: Jointly Estimating U.S. Holdings Behavior and Cross-listing Decision

The table reports estimates of a simultaneous system that includes a probit specification of a firm’s decision
to cross-list and two equations that determine the holdings by U.S. investors—one conditional on cross-
listing on a U.S. exchange as of December 31, 1997, and one conditional on not cross-listing. The
dependent variable in the latter two equations is a nonlinear transformation of U.S. holdings in a given
company, scaled by either the company’s market capitalization or market float (the appendix describes the
transformation). For ease of exposition, the estimated slope coefficients are rescaled as follows: (1) For the
cross-listing equation, the reported figures are scaled to reflect the marginal impact on the percent
probability of listing of a unit change in the variable in question. The marginal impact reported is the
median impact over the firms in the sample; (2) For the U.S. holdings equations, the reported figures are
scaled to reflect the marginal impact on the percent of shares held of a unit change in the variable in
question. Again, the marginal impact reported is the median impact over the firms in the sample (whether
listed or not). The Gain in U.S. Holdings Share from Cross-Listing (%) is the endogenously estimated
forecast of the change in holdings resulting from cross-listing. The U.S. Holdings Share without Cross-
Listing (%) is the endogenously determined estimate of what U.S. holdings would be if a firm does not
cross-list. The other variables, which are assumed exogenous to the system, are defined in Table 3.
Bootstrapped p-values corresponding to a null hypothesis of a zero median impact appear in parentheses
below each reported figure.




                                                     45
      Table 4 (continued): Jointly Estimating U.S. Holdings Behavior and Cross-listing Decision

Panel A: Baseline                     Cross-Listing U.S. Holdings Share (%) of Market Cap. If:
                                      % Probability Not Cross-Listed     Cross-Listed    Difference
Gain in U.S. Holdings Share               0.210
from Cross-Listing (%)                   (0.212)
U.S. Holdings Share                      0.555
without Cross-Listing (%)               (0.054)
Home-country trading volume/GDP          -0.811
                                        (0.004)
Germanic home language dummy             0.541
                                        (0.020)
Proportion of Shares Held                0.034            -0.024            -0.155          -0.131
by Insiders (%)                         (0.225)          (0.000)           (0.000)         (0.000)
Financial firm dummy                     -1.851           -0.964            -0.163          0.801
                                        (0.008)          (0.000)           (0.523)         (0.351)
Canada dummy                             3.729            0.483             -0.324          -0.811
                                        (0.002)          (0.186)           (0.449)         (0.379)
Log2 of total assets                     0.466            0.261             -0.164          -0.427
                                        (0.007)          (0.000)           (0.332)         (0.144)
National accounting quality index        0.117            0.036
                                        (0.001)          (0.001)
Market value/Book value                                   0.008             0.060           0.052
                                                         (0.020)           (0.133)         (0.189)
MSCI member dummy                                         3.202             -1.358          -4.575
                                                         (0.000)           (0.232)         (0.002)
Shareholder rights index                                  -0.419            -0.679          -0.254
                                                         (0.000)           (0.084)         (0.271)
Dummy for dividend-paying firms                           0.631             -1.947          -2.600
                                                         (0.000)           (0.307)         (0.234)
Home-country dividend withholding                         -0.056            -0.006          0.050
tax rate faced by U.S. investors                         (0.000)           (0.464)         (0.315)
Firm-level accounting quality index                       0.379
                                                         (0.000)
English home language dummy                               0.904
                                                         (0.000)
Selectivity correction (normalized                        0.105             -0.125
by its own standard deviation)                           (0.130)           (0.515)
Adjusted R-squared                        0.26            0.26               0.10
Number of observations                   8067             7788               279




                                                  46
      Table 4 (continued): Jointly Estimating U.S. Holdings Behavior and Cross-listing Decision

Panel B: Float-Adjusted               Cross-Listing U.S. Holdings Share (%) of Market Float if:
                                      % Probability   Not Cross-        Cross-Listed     Difference
                                                         Listed
Gain in U.S. Holdings Share               0.152
From Cross-Listing (%)                   (0.035)
U.S. Holdings Share                       0.375
without Cross-Listing (%)                (0.011)
Home-country trading volume/GDP           -0.805
                                         (0.002)
Germanic home language dummy              0.482
                                         (0.074)
Proportion of Share Held                 -0.006
by Insiders (%)                          (0.057
Financial firm dummy                     -0.768           -1.968            -5.819         -3.773
                                         (0.111          (0.000)           (0.069)        (0.146)
Canada dummy                              2.576           2.431             -0.180         -2.613
                                         (0.001)         (0.021)           (0.443)        (0.209)
Log2 of total assets                      0.253           0.602             0.806          0.183
                                         (0.018)         (0.000)           (0.177)        (0.460)
National accounting quality index         0.101           0.000
                                         (0.000)         (0.546)
Market value/Book value                                   0.017             0.091          0.073
                                                         (0.006)           (0.032)        (0.098)
MSCI member dummy                                         5.395             -2.321         -7.772
                                                         (0.000)           (0.157)        (0.000)
Shareholder rights index                                  -0.717            0.006          0.723
                                                         (0.000)           (0.590)        (0.303)
Dummy for dividend-paying firms                           0.974             -6.431         -7.478
                                                         (0.000)           (0.066)        (0.037)
Home-country dividend withholding                         -0.077            0.041          0.119
tax rate faced by U.S. investors                         (0.000)           (0.407)        (0.266)
Firm-level accounting quality index                       0.803
                                                         (0.000)
English home language dummy                               2.555
                                                         (0.000)
Selectivity correction (normalized                        -0.368            -3.438
by its own standard deviation)                           (0.037)           (0.102)
Adjusted R-squared                        0.28            0.20              0.05
Number of observations                    8067            7788              279




                                                   47
Table 4 (continued): Jointly Estimating U.S. Holdings Behavior and Cross-listing Decision

Panel C: Non-financial                   Cross-Listing U.S. Holdings Share (%) of Market Cap. if:
                                         % Probability Not Cross-Listed     Cross-Listed    Difference
Gain in U.S. Holdings Share                  0.109
from Cross-Listing (%)                      (0.174)
U.S. Holdings Share                         0.229
without Cross-Listing (%)                  (0.129)
Home-country trading volume/GDP             -0.839
                                           (0.002)
Germanic home language dummy                0.977
                                           (0.001)
Proportion of Share Held                    0.012            -0.027            -0.137         -0.109
By Insiders (%)                            (0.265)          (0.000)           (0.000)        (0.002)
Foreign sales as a proportion of total      0.007            0.018             0.051          0.033
sales (%)                                  (0.193)          (0.000)           (0.050)        (0.117)
Canada dummy                                2.592            0.394             1.013          -0.607
                                           (0.016)          (0.315)           (0.410)        (0.453)
Log2 of total assets                        0.432            0.338             0.090          -0.248
                                           (0.010)          (0.000)           (0.479)        (0.282)
National accounting quality index           0.055            0.025
                                           (0.012)          (0.036)
Market value/Book value                                      0.008             0.115          0.108
                                                            (0.031)           (0.101)        (0.123)
MSCI member dummy                                            3.178             -2.165         -5.364
                                                            (0.000)           (0.186)        (0.003)
Shareholder rights index                                     -0.408            0.139          0.548
                                                            (0.000)           (0.439)        (0.256)
Dummy for dividend-paying firms                              0.703             -1.057         -1.770
                                                            (0.000)           (0.406)        (0.323)
Home-country dividend withholding                            -0.039            -0.276         -0.235
tax rate faced by U.S. investors                            (0.000)           (0.095)        (0.128)
Firm-level accounting quality index                          0.204
                                                            (0.001)
English home language dummy                                  1.029
                                                            (0.000)
Selectivity correction (normalized                           -0.062            -0.199
By its own standard deviation)                              (0.313)           (0.496)
Adjusted R-squared                           0.30            0.26              0.14
Number of observations                      5155             4970              185




                                                     48
                     Table 5: Average Cross-Listing Effect for Cross-Listed Stocks

The table reports estimates of the average cross-listing effect across 279 cross-listed firms using three
alternative treatment estimators. The “Heckman-based” estimates (rows 2 and 3 of Panel A) are based on
fitted holdings from the non cross-listed holdings equation (4) using data on the cross-listed firms.
Parameter estimates for these equations appear in the second column of the first two panels of Table 4. The
“p-matching” estimates (rows 4 and 5) are U.S. holdings of a sample of non cross-listed firms that have
been paired with the cross-listed sample on the basis of fitted probabilities from a reduced-from probit
model of the cross-listing decision. Panel B presents “differences-in-differences” estimates using data on
U.S. holdings for March 31, 1994 and December 31, 1997. The sample in Panel B is restricted to stocks
that were not cross-listed in U.S. markets in the earlier period, with the columns distinguishing between
stocks that cross-listed before the second period and those that did not. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses.

Panel A: Heckman-based and P-Matching Methods               U.S. investors’ aggregate holdings as percentage of:
                                                            Market capitalization           Market Float
1. Mean holdings of cross-listed stocks,                            16.4                        25.3
E ( H iL | X = 1)

2. Heckman-based estimate of E (H iL | X = 0)                        5.6                          10.5

3. Heckman-based estimate of cross-listing effect,                  10.8                          14.7
E ( H | X = 1) − E ( H | X = 0)
      L                   L                                         (0.7)                         (1.2)
     i                   i


4. P-matching estimate of E (H iL | X = 0)                           6.4                           9.0

5. P-Matching estimate of cross-listing effect,                     10.0                          16.3
E ( H | X = 1) − E ( H | X = 0)
      L                   L                                         (0.8)                         (1.3)
     i                   i


Panel B: Difference-in-Differences           Stocks Cross-listed on U.S.       Stocks not Cross-listed on U.S.
                                             exchange by December 1997          exchange by December 1997
6. Holdings: March 31, 1994                              8.6                                 2.3

7. Holdings: December 31, 1997                          17.1                                2.9

8. Change in holdings (1994-1997)                        8.5                                0.6

9. Difference-in-differences                                                 7.9
estimate of cross-listing effect                                            (0.5)
E ( H iL | X = 1) − E ( H iL | X = 0)

10. Number of Observations                              132                                 9479




                                                       49
                               Table 6: Determinants of Cross-Listing Effect
The table reports cross-sectional analyses of firm-level estimates of the cross-listing effect as a function of
firm and country instruments. The Heckman [1979]-based estimates are calculated as the difference
between the second and third columns of Table 4 in panels A and C. Reported in the difference-in-
differences columns are coefficient estimates from a regression of the change in U.S. holdings (as a
percentage of market capitalization) between March 31, 1994 and December 31, 1997 on a cross-listing
dummy interacted with 1994 values of the instrument. The sample is restricted to stocks that were not
cross-listed in U.S. markets in the earlier period. A dummy variable for cross-listing between 1994 and
1997, first-period values of the instruments, and changes in the instruments (between the first and second
period) are included as control variables, in addition to the reported interactions between the instruments
and cross-listing. P-values are shown in parentheses.
                                                Heckman [1979]-based              Differences-in-differences
                                             Baseline        Non-financial
Proportion of Shares Held                      -0.131            -0.109
by Insiders (%)                               (0.000)           (0.002)
Financial firm dummy                             0.801                                     -6.879             -5.123
                                                (0.351)                                   (0.000)            (0.003)
Canada dummy                                     -0.811              -0.607                -6.660             -3.634
                                                (0.379)             (0.453)               (0.000)            (0.112)
Log2 of total assets                             -0.427              -0.248                                   -0.549
                                                (0.144)             (0.282)                                  (0.021)
National accounting quality index                -0.036              -0.025                -0.041             0.169
                                               (0.000)††           (0.036) ††             (0.732)            (0.181)
Market value/Book value                          0.052               0.108                                    -0.549
                                                (0.189)             (0.123)                                  (0.000)
MSCI member dummy                                -4.575              -5.364                -3.237             -2.190
                                                (0.002)             (0.003)               (0.029)            (0.140)
Shareholder rights index                         -0.254              0.548                 2.738              2.714
                                                (0.271)             (0.256)               (0.000)            (0.000)
Dummy for dividend-paying firms                  -2.600              -1.770                                   1.127
                                                (0.234)             (0.323)                                  (0.483)
Home-country dividend withholding                0.050               -0.235
tax rate faced by U.S. investors                (0.315)             (0.128)
Firm-level accounting quality index              -0.379              -0.204                -2.018             -3.103
                                               (0.000)††           (0.001)††              (0.000)            (0.000)
English home language dummy                      -0.904              -1.029                -3.682             -7.874
                                               (0.000)††           (0.000)††              (0.060)            (0.001)
Foreign Sales as a proportion of total                               0.033
sales (%)                                                           (0.117)
Number Not Cross-Listed                          7788                 4970                 9195               7285

Number Cross-Listed                               279                 185                   128                 96

Adjusted R-squared                                                                          0.05               0.05
††Standard errors are from “not cross-listed” specification in Table 4 under the assumption that the cross-listed
coefficients equal zero.



                                                           50
               Fig. A-1: Shifted Inverse Logistic Distribution Function


7




6




5




4




3




2




1




0




-1




-2




-3
     0   0.1       0.2    0.3     0.4     0.5     0.6     0.7     0.8     0.9   1


                            Proportion of Shares Held




                                         51
