NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RULES RATHER THAN DISCRETION:
LESSONS FROM HURRICANE KATRINA
Howard Kunreuther
Mark Pauly
Working Paper 12503
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12503

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006

We would like to thank Erwann Michel Kerjan and Kip Viscusi for their helpful comments on an earlier
draft of this paper. Support from NSF Grant Number CMS-0527598 and the Wharton Risk Management
and Decision Processes Center is gratefully acknowledged.
© 2006 by Howard Kunreuther and Mark Pauly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Rules Rather Than Discretion: Lessons from Hurricane Katrina
Howard Kunreuther and Mark Pauly
NBER Working Paper No. 12503
August 2006
JEL No. G22,H23,H44
ABSTRACT
This paper explores options for programs to be put in place prior to a disaster to avoid large and often
poorly-managed expenditures following a catastrophe and to provide appropriate protection against
the risk of those large losses which do occur. The lack of interest in insurance protection and mitigation
by property owners and by public sector agencies prior to a disaster often creates major problems following
a catastrophic event for victims and the government. Property owners who suffer severe damage may
not have the financial resources easily at hand to rebuild their property and hence will demand relief.
The government is then likely to respond with costly but poorly targeted disaster assistance. To avoid
these large and often uneven ex post expenditures, we consider the option of mandatory comprehensive
private disaster insurance with risk based rates. It may be more efficient to have an ex ante public program
to ensure coverage of catastrophic losses and to subsidize low income residents who cannot afford
coverage rather than the current largely ex post public disaster relief program.
Howard Kunreuther
Operations and Information Management
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
and NBER
kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu
Mark Pauly
Health Care Systems Department
University of Pennsylvania
208 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
In their Nobel Prize winning contribution Kydland and Prescott (1977) show that a
discretionary policy, which may be optimal given the current situation, may not
necessarily result in a socially optimal policy in the longer run. As a specific example of
this general proposition, the authors note that unless individuals are initially prohibited
from locating in a flood plain, it will be very difficult politically to force these people to
leave their home. In making decisions to locate there, Kydland and Prescott indicate that
these individuals believe that the Corps of Engineers will subsequently build dams and
levees if enough people choose to build homes these flood plains. A large number of
homeowners then decide to locate in these high hazard areas for that reason and the
Corps of Engineers is forced to invest in flood control projects. Hence the need for
having explicit enforced rules restricting development in these areas, rather than giving
people discretion to choose where they would like to live.
In the case of New Orleans, the Corps of Engineers did not adequately shore up the
existing levees to protect the New Orleans greater metropolitan area from flooding
because of cost increases, design changes caused by technical issues, environmental
concerns, legal challenges and local opposition to portions of the project. The Corps
project fact sheet from May 2005 noted that the appropriated amounts in the President’s
budget for fiscal year 2005 were insufficient to fund new construction projects that
included levee enlargement to enhance protection in the New Orleans Metropolitan area.
(United States Government Accountability Office 2005). The interested parties concerned
with the hurricane threat to the Gulf Coast acted as if a disaster such as Katrina would not
occur within the next few years. This is sometimes referred to as the NIMTOF (Not in

2

My Term of Office) phenomenon. It was convenient to ignore the numerous studies that
warned of the devastation that could occur in the Gulf Coast from a major hurricane. The
media highlighted a potential catastrophe in the New Orleans area with the Pulitzer Prizewinning articles in The Times-Picayune that appeared on June 23-27, 2002, which stated
that the existing levees were inadequate and that one of the nation’s alleged highest
priorities was to reinforce these flood control projects. A story in the October 2004
edition of the National Geographic warned about what could be the most devastating
natural disaster in the US history (Bourne 2004).The scenario painted in this piece
became reality 10 months later.
This paper addresses the problem of what public policies might be put in place prior
to a disaster to avoid large and often poorly-managed expenditures following a
catastrophe and to provide appropriate protection against the risk of those large losses
which do occur. We consider the social optimality of property-owners’ disaster insurance
and location decisions, but we do not assume, as did Kydland and Prescott, that property
owners are expected utility maximizers and are forward looking. Instead, we argue that
individuals utilize simplified heuristics in making their decisions and do not anticipate the
government coming to the rescue in the wake of a flood, hurricane or earthquake but
demand relief after suffering losses from a natural disaster. More specifically we show
that many individuals move into hazard-prone areas without considering the likelihood or
consequences of a disaster rather than calculating either what they should do to protect
themselves or what the government will do should they locate there. Public sector
agencies may also behave in ways that are inconsistent with optimal social policy by not
using the principles of benefit-cost analysis when making their decisions as to whether to

3

protect an area as illustrated by the Corps of Engineers decision not to strengthen the
New Orleans levees.
The lack of interest in protection by property owners and by public sector agencies
prior to a disaster creates major problems following a catastrophic event for victims and
the government. Property owners who suffer severe damage may not have the financial
resources to rebuild their property and hence will demand relief. The government is then
likely to respond with costly disaster assistance. To avoid these large ex post expenditures
it may be useful to consider requiring insurance as a condition for residing in hazardprone areas as a way of improving both efficiency and equity. This message has a similar
ring to the Kydland-Prescott story about enforcing rules rather than allowing discretion,
but for different reasons.
To motivate this discussion we provide empirical evidence that prior to a disaster
many individuals believe the event will not happen to them, so they behave as if the
likelihood of a disaster causing damage to their property is zero. Hence they have no
incentive to invest in protective measures voluntarily. After a large-scale flood,
earthquake or hurricane, the government, representing other concerned citizens, will
provide at least some financial assistance to aid the recovery of the unprotected victims-property owners and firms.
Hurricane Katrina provided graphic evidence of this behavior. Many homeowners
suffering rising water damage from Hurricane Katrina did not have flood insurance even
though they were eligible to purchase such a policy at a subsidized rate through the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).2 The NFIP, which was established in 1968 by
the federal government, provides highly subsidized rates for existing homes so that any
2

For more details on the structure of the National Flood Insurance program see Pasterick (1968).

4

risk-averse individual who made the appropriate calculations of the expected benefits and
costs of purchasing such insurance should have wanted coverage. In the Louisiana
parishes affected by Katrina the percentage of homeowners with flood insurance ranged
from 57.7 percent in St. Bernard’s to 7.3 percent in Tangipahoa. Only 40 percent of the
residents in Orleans parish had flood insurance (Insurance Information Institute 2005).
To aid the victims of Katrina and rebuild the Gulf Coast, the federal government
subsequently committed to providing liberal disaster assistance. A few days after Katrina
hit landfall, the US Senate voted nearly $60 billion in federal aid. Under the Stafford Act
as revised in June 2006, the maximum amount of assistance to any individual or
household for repairing damaged property is $25,000 (FEMA 2006). In addition, the
Small Business Administration (SBA) offers loans of up to $200,000 to eligible
homeowners for repairs to damaged primary residences and loans of up to $1.5 million
for damage to business property, machinery and inventory. According to the US
Department of Homeland Security, as of April 2006, some $88 billion in federal aid had
been allocated for relief, recovery and rebuilding, with another $20 billion requested, to
help victims of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita to recover and rebuild. Although this figure
represents an historical record of federal aid in the aftermath of a natural disaster, it has
fallen far short of providing complete and timely protection against all uninsured losses
from the hurricane.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section determines the optimal insurance
decision for a homeowner who maximizes expected utility.3 We then provide evidence
from the laboratory and the field as to the limitations of this model for characterizing
individual behavior. The empirical data present a picture of a consumer who is poorly
3

A very similar model could have been constructed for mitigation as a substitute for insurance.

5

informed, in the spirit of Daniel McFadden’s recent Presidential address to the American
Economic Association (McFadden 2006). We then present an alternative sequential
model of choice that reflects consumer limitations in collecting and processing
information.
Section 3 examines the implications of a sequential model of choice for public policy.
Section 4 outlines a possible improved program: a system of required comprehensive
disaster insurance as an alternative to ex post disaster assistance. Such a program might
represent an alternative kind of public sector involvement that could reduce losses prior
to a disaster, cover catastrophic losses, and/or to subsidize low income residents who
cannot afford coverage. The concluding section summarizes the arguments in the paper
and suggests directions for future research.

2. Models of Insurance Choice by Homeowners.
An Expected Utility Model
The Waterman family in Orleans Parish with wealth W is considering how much
flood insurance coverage (I) to purchase next year against water damage to their house
from a future hurricane in the area. To keep the analysis simple and without loss of
generality we assume only two states of nature---flood or no flood with annual
probabilities p and 1-p respectively. If a flood occurs, the damage to the Waterman house
will be L dollars. The cost of insurance per dollar coverage is z. According to Federal
income tax laws any uninsured loss from a natural disaster can be written off on the
family’s federal income taxes at the marginal tax rate t based on the Waterman’s current

6

income. D (I, L) is the amount of disaster assistance the family will receive should they
have I dollars of insurance coverage and L dollars of losses.4
We assume that there are no moral hazard problems so that the Waterman family will
not take advantage of purchasing insurance by either being more careless or putting
objects in harm’s way (e.g. moving unwanted furniture to the basement). Furthermore we
assume that the insurer has the same information about risk as the Waterman family, and
charges risk-based premiums, so that there will be no adverse selection problems.
The optimal amount of insurance Iopt will be determined by maximizing the
Waterman’s expected utility E[U (I)]:
E[U (I)] = p U[ W –L + I (1-z) +t (L-I)) + D (I, L)] + (1-p) U(W-zI)
where

0

I

L

More specifically Iopt is determined by setting dE [U (I)]/dI = 0 which yields
=
(1-p) z
p [1-z-t -D ( Iopt , L)]

U [ W –L + Iopt (1-z) +t (L- Iopt) + D (Iopt, L)]
U (W-z Iopt)

(1)

with D and U being partial derivatives, valued at the optimum I*
Whenever the value of Iopt determined by (1) is between 0 and L, then this is the
actual amount I* of insurance a homeowner should purchase. Should (1) yield a value of
Iopt > L, which could be the case if the insurance premium is subsidized so that a person
would want to buy more than full coverage, then I*= L. If the solution to (1) indicates
that Iopt <0, then the individual will not purchase any coverage and I*=0.
The LHS of (1) is a contingency price ratio reflecting the tradeoff between the
marginal benefit of not having insurance (the numerator) and the marginal benefit of
4

The amount of disaster assistance is assumed to have no impact on the uninsured losses that a person can
write off for tax purposes.

7

having coverage (the denominator). The RHS is the ratio of the marginal utility of an
individual in the disaster state to the marginal utility in the non-disaster state. A rational
individual will be more likely to buy insurance as her value of L increases and/or as the
premium z decreases relative to p. Insurance coverage will be less attractive according to
this model when an individual expects significant disaster relief as a function of its
uninsured losses and magnitude of its loss (L) and the higher the tax write-off for
uninsured losses (t).
Empirical Evidence on the Expected Utility Model
Individuals normally purchase insurance on an annual basis and thus must decide
each year whether to renew or cancel their policy assuming they have this discretion. In
the case of residents in hazard-prone areas the annual probability of a disaster damaging
their structure is not high; it is within the range of 1 in 50 to 1 in 500. So, while the
financial losses should such an event occur can be significant, the great majority of
people will not have observed an event close at hand recently. The evidence on decision
making under uncertainty in these low probability cases suggests that many individuals
do not utilize an expected utility model such as the one characterized above to determine
how much insurance coverage to purchase. There are data from field and controlled
laboratory experiments showing that those at risk do not even seek out information on
probabilities in making their decisions on low probability, high consequence events.
[Magat, Viscusi and Huber (1987) and Camerer and Kunreuther (1989)]. When
consumers are asked to justify their decisions on purchasing warranties (a form of
insurance) for products that may need repair, they rarely use probability as a rationale for

8

purchasing this protection unless the data on likelihoods are given to them explicitly
(Hogarth and Kunreuther 1995).
People have difficulty dealing with probabilistic information for small likelihood
events because they need a context in which to evaluate the data.

In one study

individuals were presented with either a probability or an actuarially fair insurance
premium characterizing the risks associated with the discharge of a hypothetical toxic
chemical, Syntox. (Kunreuther, Novemsky and Kahneman 2001) The chemical had the
potential for causing fatalities to individuals living near the fictitious ABC chemical plant
located on the outskirts of an urban center in New Jersey. To give some reference
points, respondents were also provided with the probability of death from a car accident.
Finally, the participants were asked a set of questions regarding how risky they perceived
the facility to be.
People were not able to distinguish between probabilities which ranged from 1 in
10,000 to 1 in 1 million in judging the riskiness of the facility. Surprisingly, the study
also found that subjects did not respond to insurance premiums as a signal of risk. While
individuals may not be able to think meaningfully about what a 1 in 100,000 chance of
death means, they certainly know what a $15 premium means. Yet individuals perceived
no difference between the perceived risks of the ABC chemical plant, whether the annual
premiums paid for coverage against fatalities from the release of Syntox were $15.00,
$1.50 or 15 cents.
With respect to obtaining such data on their own, many potential victims of disaster
perceive the costs of getting information about the hazard and costs of protection to be so
high relative to the expected benefits that they do not even consider purchasing insurance

9

(Kunreuther and Pauly 2004). This reluctance to invest in protection voluntarily is
compounded by budget constraints. For some homeowners with relatively low incomes,
disaster insurance is considered a discretionary expense that should only be incurred if
there are residual funds after taking care of what they consider to be the necessities of
life. In focus groups on the topic, a typical reaction of such a homeowner living in a
hazard-prone area to the question “Why don’t you have flood or earthquake insurance?”
is “I live from pay day to pay day.” (Kunreuther et al 1978). This implies that an increase
in premiums will cause people to buy less insurance, and that this negative impact on
demand would not be offset by a compensating increase in loss probability. In contrast to
the expected utility model where the demand for insurance depends on the premium
relative to the expected loss, demand appears to depend only on the premium for a given
amount of coverage.
Another factor that has been purported to limit homeowners from wanting to
purchase insurance is the expectation of liberal disaster assistance following a
catastrophic event (Kaplow 1991; Harrington 2000 and Smetters 2005). These studies
claim that the expectation of federal disaster assistance creates a type of Samaritan’s
dilemma: providing assistance after a catastrophe reduces the economic incentives of
potential victims and the communities in which they live to invest in protective measures
prior to a disaster. Empirical studies on this issue, however, suggest that decision makers
do not report that they anticipate receiving any federal aid following a disaster. For
example, Kunreuther et al (1978) found that most homeowners in earthquake and
hurricane prone areas did not expect to receive aid from the federal government
following a disaster. Burby et al. (1991) showed that local governments that received

10

disaster relief undertook more efforts to reduce losses from future disasters than those
that did not. This lack of expectation regarding disaster assistance prior to a disaster
seems counter-intuitive and the reasons for it are not fully understood.
What is well understood is that large-scale losses from disasters are a driving force
with respect to the actual provision of government relief (Moss 2002). The Alaska
earthquake in 1964 and the spate of disasters that followed over the next eight years led
the Small Business Administration (SBA) to provide low interest loans, and in some
cases forgiveness grants, to aid uninsured victims of earthquakes, floods and hurricanes.
An extreme example of liberal disaster relief was after Tropical Storm Agnes in June
1972 that caused severe flooding in Pennsylvania and New York, five months before a
Presidential election. Few homes had flood insurance, so the SBA provided $5000
forgiveness grants and 1% loans to rebuild houses, and in some cases to retire existing
mortgages (Kunreuther 1973). This special legislation highlights the point made by
Kydland and Prescott that policymakers may be forced to respond to situations they had
not anticipated in advance.
Public assistance is far from a perfect substitute for good private insurance. It
normally takes longer to be paid than would the claims from private insurance policies,
the compensation from the government falls short of total losses, and the amount and
terms of the disaster assistance depend on random political influences including the
proximity of the disaster to the date of the next national election. Thus the combination of
low private insurance and haphazard public disaster relief may lead to inefficiency as
well as high levels of government spending.
A Sequential Model of Choice

11

Rather than using the expected utility model, many residents in hazard prone areas
appear to follow a sequential model of choice. As a first stage in such a process
individuals relate their perceived annual probability of a disaster causing severe damage
to their property (p) to a threshold level of concern (p*), which they may unconsciously
set. If p< p* they assume that there is nothing to worry about and hence do not have to
undertake protective measures such as purchasing insurance. Only if p>p* will the
individual or family consider ways that they can reduce the risk of future financial losses.
The contingent weighting model proposed by Tversky, Sattath and Slovic (1988)
provides a useful framework for characterizing individual choice processes with respect
to this lack of interest in purchasing insurance voluntarily. In this descriptive model,
individuals make tradeoffs between the dimensions associated with alternatives, such as
probability and outcomes. The weights they put on these dimensions are contingent,
because they may depend on the problem context and the way information is presented.
The decision to ignore events where p < p* may be justified if a person claims that there
is limited time available to worry about the vicissitudes of life. Hence s/he needs some
way of determining whether to pay attention to some risks. For these individuals only
after the occurrence of a disaster does this event assume sufficient salience that it is on
their radar screen.
Data supporting such a sequential model have been provided through homeowners
surveys of insurance purchase decisions in flood, hurricane and earthquake-prone areas
undertaken over 25 years ago (Kunreuther et al. 1978). More recent field surveys of
homeowners in California undertaken by Risa Palm and her colleagues lend further
confirming evidence to such a process. Four mail questionnaires undertaken since 1989

12

examine the spatial and demographic characteristics of those homeowners who had
purchased earthquake insurance. The findings indicate that insurance purchase is strongly
influenced by past experience but unrelated to any measure of seismic risk from experts
(Palm 1990; Palm 1995).
To illustrate, consider the Loma Prieta earthquake of 1989, which caused substantial
damage to property in Santa Clara County, and to a lesser extent, Contra Costa County,
California. In these counties, there were major differences in responses to the 1989 and
1990 survey. In 1989, prior to the earthquake, about 34 percent of the uninsured
respondents in both counties felt that earthquake insurance was unnecessary. By 1990,
only about 5 percent gave this response. Insurance coverage by homeowners between
1989 and 1990 rose from 40.4 to 50.9 percent in Santa Clara County and from 22.4 to
29.3 percent in Contra Costa County. It is hard to explain this behavior by using a
Bayesian learning model since most individuals residing in California know that the
likelihood of another earthquake causing damage to their homes is lower after one has
occurred because the stress in the fault lines have been relieved.
There is also empirical evidence that many homeowners who initially purchase
insurance are likely to cancel policies if they have not made a claim over the course of
the next few years (Kunreuther, Vetschera and Sanderson 1989).

In the case of flood

insurance this finding is particularly striking since the NFIP requires that homes located
in Special Flood Hazard Areas purchase insurance as a condition for federally-backed
mortgages.
To determine the extent that residents in hazard-prone areas adhere to the law, FEMA
examined applications for disaster assistance from 1549 victims of a flood in August

13

1998 in Northern Vermont and found that 84 percent in special flood hazard areas did not
have insurance, 45 percent of whom were required to have it. A study by Geotrac
revealed that more than one-third of the properties damaged in a 1999 flood in Grand
Forks, North Dakota were non-compliant with the mandatory insurance purchase
requirement (Tobin and Calfee 2005). With respect to earthquake insurance, eight years
after the creation of the California Earthquake Authority (CEA) in 1996 by the state of
California, the take-up rate for coverage was down from 30 percent to 15 percent (Risk
Management Solutions 2004). Insurance appears to be treated by many individuals as an
investment rather than a protective measure. Those who purchase coverage and do not
collect on their policies over the next few years feel that their premium payments have
been wasted. In the case of flood insurance, this finding also indicates that some banks,
which were expected to enforce the requirement that individuals in high-hazard areas
purchase flood coverage, looked the other way.
The effects of premiums on the demand for insurance in a sequential model are more
ambiguous than in an expected utility model. As indicated above, given that p is high
enough that people pay attention, higher premiums do discourage purchasing coverage
and lower premiums to some extent encourage it. However, many people choose not to
obtain flood coverage even when their rates are highly subsidized because they perceive
the likelihood of a flood to be below their threshold level of concern. It may also be the
case that a decision to build or improve property is related to insurance premiums, with
high premiums discouraging building in high risk areas and low premiums encouraging
it, but we do not know the importance or magnitude of this incentive.

14

In short, even in the sequential model the minority who buy insurance voluntarily
may pay attention to higher prices relative to lower prices, even when they do not
discriminate between higher and lower loss probabilities when these likelihoods are
below p* or there has been no recent loss-producing event. However, the empirical
evidence on the ability of insured individuals to relate premiums to risk is at present
inconclusive.

3. Public Policy and Sequential Consumers
If consumers generally ignore both loss probabilities and potential government
assistance in deciding whether or not to buy insurance and how much insurance to
purchase, public policy toward natural disasters can be simpler than in a world in which
public actions produced private reactions. Under this sequential model, some consumers
will decide to buy private insurance at a given premium and some will not. When a
disaster strikes, some victims will not have insurance to cover their losses and others will
have incomplete coverage. The rationale for government intervention in such cases is
altruistic sentiments of other citizens with an expectation that the government will bail
them out should they suffer losses in the future.
Concern for our fellow citizens as well as our own needs should disaster strike home
makes us want our government to help out, and in a democracy the public sector
responds. How far this assistance will aid the financial recovery of victims depends on
the strength of these feelings, and on the magnitude of the disaster. In this view of the
world, much of the common concern for a “Samaritan’s dilemma” affecting citizenprotective activities seems misplaced. We taxpayers would be much better off if people

15

who lived in disaster-prone areas bought insurance, but most of these residents do not
invest in this type of financial protection voluntarily.
Public intervention based on our concern for fellow citizens can be straightforward:
provide as much assistance as our conscience dictates to fill in the observed gaps in
coverage, both in terms of ex ante protective activities (like the aforementioned levees)
and in terms of ex post financial assistance. If such choices represent outcomes that are
incomplete or inefficient according to the “selfish” expected utility model, it is irrelevant
because people are not using this model of choice anyway.
While some public officials might contemplate expected-utility-based efficiency as a
goal in a democracy, they would have a difficult time implementing the higher taxes
needed to support more complete prevention or protection. If, as hypothesized, local
citizens do not anticipate catastrophes or generally think they are impossible until after
they occur, higher local taxes to pay for ex ante protection will not gain support. And
higher local taxes to pay post-disaster benefits will not be feasible, given the diminution
in the value of the tax base.
If others than those who might potentially benefit are to pay, their motivation will
have to be altruistic with some expectation for themselves should they suffer losses in the
future.5 While it is always risky to speculate on positive models of political behavior, it
does seem that the case for full efficiency in the expected utility sense is difficult to make
in a democratic model where few voters make decisions in that fashion. One implication
of this simpler sequential model of choice is that it explains the common finding of
“deficiencies” in public sector activities prior to a disaster, whether by the Corps of
5

The alternative and rational argument, that payment now for others sets the stage for a quid pro quo
should disaster strike here, will founder based both on non-enforceability and the assumed absence in
citizens of the expected utility motivation that would justify such an argument.

16

Engineers or FEMA, as the natural and political equilibrium of a system in which
misinformed and distracted citizens are also misinformed and distracted voters. Once the
disaster occurs, then the victims and the general public are concerned and the amount of
federal disaster assistance by FEMA and other agencies as well as the decision to invest
in better protection by the Corps of Engineers is determined by political forces that are
difficult to predict in advance.

4. Potential Advantages of Mandated Comprehensive Disaster Insurance 6
The previous sections have documented the lack of consumer interest in purchasing
disaster insurance voluntarily prior to a catastrophe, and the inefficiency of ex post
government assistance as a form of insurance. This section considers potential gains from
some form of required or mandated comprehensive natural disaster insurance, with
additional public sector involvement for assuring supply of protection against
catastrophic losses at reasonable premiums for coverage that cannot be handled by the
private market in the form of reinsurance, catastrophe bonds or insurance pools.
Insurance would obviate the need for disaster assistance for property damage. It may be
desirable that the public sector provide subsidies for insurance to low income residents
whose remaining consumption would be substantially reduced by the cost of coverage.
We also consider the desirability of basing private premiums on site-specific risk rather
than averaging premiums over a wide geographic area.
Efficiency Improvements from Expanding Homeowners Coverage
Current insurance market institutions distinguish between events based on the
cause of that damage. The typical homeowners’ policy covers losses from “all perils”
6

This subsection is based on Kunreuther (2006).

17

with only a few exceptions such as earthquakes or floods. Earthquake insurance can be
purchased from the private sector for an additional premium. In California one normally
buys an earthquake policy for residential damage through the California Earthquake
Authority, a state-run privately-funded earthquake insurance program, 7 although some
private insurers offer earthquake coverage today. As pointed out in the introduction,
subsidized flood insurance for residential structures is offered through the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP).
Prior to Hurricane Katrina some insurers discussed the need for a national disaster
insurance program that covers all natural hazards. Katrina has brought this issue to the
fore since there were a number of residents in the area who had homeowners insurance
but not flood coverage and were told that their damage was caused by rising water, not
wind, so they were ineligible for claims payments. Those who did have flood insurance
and suffered large losses from the rising waters were only able to cover a portion of their
losses because the maximum coverage limit for flood insurance under the NFIP is
$250,000on building property and $100,000 on personal property (Hartwig and
Wilkinson 2005b).
Expanding the standard homeowners’ policy marketed by private insurers to
include earthquake and flood thus has considerable appeal. Its primary benefit is
integration of disaster relief into the private insurance vehicle rather than administering
some of the assistance through politically influenced and non-competitive government
agencies. Anticipated public payment for disaster relief can be turned into ex ante
subsidies in the form of grants or low-interest loans to make the required coverage
affordable for low income residents in high hazard areas.
7

For more details on the California Earthquake Authority see Roth, Jr. (1998).

18

A mandated all-natural-hazards insurance program also might reduce the variance
associated with nationwide insurers’ losses relative to their surplus in any given year.8
Consider an insurer marketing coverage to homeowners throughout the country. It will
collect premiums that reflect the earthquake risk in California, hurricane risk on the Gulf
Coast, tornado damage in the Great Plains states and flood risk in the Mississippi Valley.
Because of the mandate, insurers need not be concerned that buyers in any part of its
portfolio will drop coverage should it charge high premiums based on risk. Using the law
of large numbers, this higher premium base and the diversification of risk across many
hazards reduces the likelihood that such an insurer will suffer a loss that exceeds its
surplus in any given year.
Such insurance may also be attractive to both insurers and policyholders in hurricaneprone areas because it avoids the costly process of having an adjuster determine whether
the damage was caused by wind or water. This problem of separating wind damage from
water damage has been a particularly challenging one following Hurricane Katrina.
Across large portions of the coast, the only remains of buildings are foundations and
steps where it will be difficult to reach a settlement due to the difficulty in determining
the cause of damage. In these cases insurers may decide to pay the coverage limits rather
than litigating about whether the damage came from water or wind because of the high
costs of taking the case to court. For a house still standing, this process is somewhat

8

Insurers who offer coverage in one region of the country could have the variance of their losses increase
by combining all-hazards in one policy. For example, a Florida insurance company providing protection
against hurricane damage might find the variance in losses to be higher than it is today if both wind and
water damage were covered under a homeowners policy. It would collect more premiums than before but
may still want to purchase additional reinsurance than it currently does to cover the possibility of a very
large loss resulting from a future hurricane.

19

easier since one knows, for example, that roof destruction is likely to be caused by the
wind, and water marks in the living room are signs of flooding (Towers Perrin 2005).
Another reason for having an insurance policy that covers all perils, including all
natural hazards regardless of type, is that there will be no ambiguity by the homeowner
as to whether or not she has coverage. Many residing in the Gulf Coast believed they
were insured for water damage from hurricanes when purchasing their homeowners
policies. In fact, lawsuits were filed in Mississippi and Louisiana following Katrina
claiming that homeowners policies should provide protection against water damage even
though there are explicit clauses in the contract that excludes these losses (Hood 2005).
The attractiveness of insurance that guarantees that the policyholder will have
coverage against all losses from disasters independent of cause has also been
demonstrated experimentally by Kahneman and Tversky (1979). They showed that 80
percent of their subjects preferred such coverage to what they termed probabilistic
insurance where there was some chance that a loss was not covered. What matters to an
individual is the knowledge that she will be covered if her property is damaged or
destroyed, not the cause of the loss. How these policies are framed also matters. Are they
characterized as an investment on which one might obtain a high return, are they
presented as a way of pooling risk in the community, or are they sold simply as
insurance? By combining all natural disasters into a single policy, it is more likely that a
property owner will consider purchasing insurance because the likelihood of some loss is
above her threshold level of concern and search becomes rational. If all natural hazards
were included in a homeowners’ policy, the risk might be large enough to get the
consumer’s attention (Kunreuther and Pauly 2004). Such a policy has added benefits to

20

the extent that individuals are unaware that they are unprotected against rising water or
earthquake damage in their current homeowners’ policy.
Risk-based Premiums for Mandated Insurance: Further Considerations
If one believes that those residing in hazard-prone areas should be responsible for
bearing their own financial burden for losses from a natural disaster, then insurance rates
should reflect the risk. The use of catastrophe models and exceedance probability curves
can be extremely useful in this regard for determining and legitimizing the types of rates
that should be charged. (Grossi and Kunreuther 2005).
Risk-based rating can be efficiency-improving in several dimensions. . It provides a
signal to individuals as to the risk they actually face so they can make a different decision
as to whether or not they want to invest and reside there. High premiums in high risk
areas might even prod sequential decision makers into considering loss probabilities and
therefore making more rational investments in mitigation. Such insurance is efficient by
having those at risk bear the expected costs of residing in hazard-prone area, and
therefore potentially deciding to live in areas with lower expected housing costs.
A system of risk based premiums also provides economic incentives to homeowners
to invest in cost-effective loss prevention measures. Today insurance rates in high hazard
areas are subsidized so that insurers have little reason to offer coverage, let alone provide
premium discounts for the adoption of mitigation measures. For example, in Florida
insurance rates along the coast subject to hurricanes are regulated so that the rates are
below the risks (Grace, Klein and Kleindorfer 2004). The Citizens Property Insurance
Company, a state-run insurer established in 2002 as a residual market mechanism to
provide insurance to individuals who are unable to obtain coverage in the voluntary

21

market, accounted for approximately 20 percent of the homeowners insurance in the state
at the end of 2004 with premiums at $1.2 billion.9 Following the hurricanes of 2005, a
number of additional insurance policies were transferred to Citizens, so their share of the
Florida insurance market is somewhat higher today than at the end of 2004.
In order for the private sector to provide insurance using risk-based premiums, state
Insurance Departments will have to support this effort. Harrington (2006) points out that
programs in California, Florida, Hawaii and Louisiana as well as other states have put
caps on market insurance rates and created state pools to provide catastrophic reinsurance
coverage at subsidized rates. Such mechanisms are likely to expose policyholders to
significant rate increases following large losses, as occurred in Florida and Louisiana
following Hurricane Katrina (Hartwig and Wilkerson 2005a). The implementation of a
mandate requiring everyone to purchase coverage will give regulators less of a reason to
bow to political pressure to cross-subsidize rates from intense minorities, such as highincome residents with large homes in high-risk areas, who can afford this coverage.
There are also distribution issues that have to be dealt with under such a system.
Some homes in high-risk areas are owned by low-income families who will have to
reduce their other consumption substantially, perhaps below a socially acceptable level,
in order to pay the costs of risk-based insurance or the costs of reconstruction should their
house suffer damage from a natural disaster. One issue that needs to be addressed is
whether subsidies in the form of low-interest loans or grants should be provided to this
group by a federal, state or local government agency to enable them to purchase
insurance or invest in mitigation. This could be in a form similar to the food stamp
9

More details on the Citizens exposure in the Florida insurance market at the end of 2004 can be found at
http://www.citizensfla.com/mo_reports/12-04morep.asp.

22

program today where the funds in this case would have to be used to purchase insurance.
Risk-based insurance premiums would also discourage lower income households from
moving into areas where the cost of residing there is high relative to their benefits from
that location compared to living somewhere safer.
A Public-Private Partnership
This section considers mandated comprehensive natural disaster insurance in
combination with other public-private sector initiatives to reduce future disaster losses. It
incorporates features of a proposal by Doherty et al (1990) for insuring against
environmental pollution and by Litan (2006) for insuring against natural disasters. Table
1 summarizes the four layers comprising the program.
Table 1: Proposed Comprehensive Disaster Insurance Program
Layer
1 Self Insurance
2 Private Insurance
3 Risk Transfer
4 State funds, multi-state pools

Who Bears the Cost
Property Owner
Insurance Companies
Reinsurers and Capital Markets
State and Federal government and Federal
reinsurance

Layer 1 is self-insurance by the homeowners to avoid moral hazard problems that
might otherwise occur if individuals behaved more carelessly because they knew they
were fully protected against the risk. This form of self-insurance is equivalent to having a
deductible on an insurance policy. The magnitude of the deductible could vary
depending on the amount of coverage in place (e.g. a percentage deductible) and the
needs of those at risk. Of course, if higher deductibles were permitted, homeowners who
choose such policies would not be eligible for disaster assistance to cover the cost of
those deductibles.

23

Some upper limits would therefore need to be placed on the deductibles in the
mandatory insurance program, with the maximum deductible probably falling with
income, perhaps offset by larger premium subsidies. That is, a well-off household might
be permitted to take insurance with a five figure deductible, because such a deductible
would still be small relative to their total wealth. A low income household might be
forbidden from purchasing inexpensive but incomplete coverage that puts a larger share
of their wealth at risk. To offset the more expensive premium, the poorer household
might be given a larger subsidy. Doing so would leave them less needy in the event of a
disaster than if they were permitted to purchase a higher deductible.
Layer 2 consists of private insurance with the amounts of coverage based on insurers’
surplus, their current portfolio, and their ability to diversify across risks. Layer 3 is
comprised of private sector risk transfer mechanisms that include reinsurance and
catastrophe bonds. The proportion of funds allocated by insurers to each of each risk
transfer mechanism will depend on the prices and available coverage. Layer 4 provides
financial protection against large scale losses. It could take the form of state funds or
multi-state pools for providing coverage in certain regions of the country subject to
particular hazards, such as hurricanes in Florida or the Gulf Coast states and earthquakes
in California. The federal government could also offer catastrophe reinsurance contracts
and/or provide pre-funded federal reinsurance for mega-catastrophes. Layers 2-4 would
be administered by private insurers; the government’s role would be limited to assisting
on the supply side. That is, in the ideal case, the work of selling insurance, collecting
premiums, and paying claims would be done by the insurance company; the government
reinsurance (from the consumer’s viewpoint) would only serve to make the initial

24

insurance premium lower or the availability of coverage greater. Only the primary
insurer would need to deal with the government reinsurer, probably transferring a portion
of the premium to it. The consumer need only talk to his primary insurer and would not
need to get FEMA on the phone.
In order to avoid the inefficiencies and inequities associated with disaster assistance
discussed in Section 3, homeowners in hazard-prone problems need to have purchased
coverage prior to a catastrophic event. Since homeowners’ insurance is currently required
as a condition for a mortgage by banks and financial institutions, these entities would
very likely require the comprehensive disaster insurance policy proposed here, but the
benefit would need to be large enough to cover both the lender’s liability and the
homeowners’ equity. States might well require homeowners who do not have a mortgage
to purchase this coverage in much the same way that automobile insurance is mandatory
today. Such a mandate could be enforced by linking property taxes to evidence of
coverage, with a tax penalty or fine imposed on properties that cannot provide evidence
of continuous insurance coverage.
For such a comprehensive disaster insurance program to reduce losses from future
disasters it needs to be linked with other private-public sector initiatives. The importance
of well-enforced building codes and land-use regulations to control development in
hazard-prone areas becomes an important part of such a program. If some states and the
federal government are providing protection against catastrophic losses, they can also
require these risk-reducing measures as part of such a private-public partnership. Banks
can offer home improvement loans for mitigation measures tied to mortgages on existing
structures. This option will be financially attractive to property owners if they obtain a

25

yearly premium reduction on their insurance policy that exceeds the annual payments on
the home improvement loan.
Communities can also offer tax incentives to encourage property owners to adopt
mitigation measures. The city of Berkeley has encouraged home buyers to retrofit newly
purchased homes by instituting a transfer tax rebate. The city has a 1.5 percent tax levied
on property transfer transactions; up to one-third of this amount can be applied to seismic
upgrades during the sale of property. Qualifying upgrades include foundation repairs or
replacement, wall bracing in basements, shear wall installation, water heater anchoring,
and securing of chimneys. Between 1993 and 1998 these rebates were applied to 6,300
houses, representing approximately $ 4.4 million in foregone revenues to the city
(Earthquake Engineering Research Institute, 1998).
There are likely to be a number of low-income residents who reside in high-hazard
areas. Consideration should be given to special treatment to this group by public sector
agencies at either the local, state and/or federal levels on both equity and efficiency
grounds. There needs to be a more detailed analysis as to what proportion of the homes in
high-hazard areas are occupied by low-income residents and the types of subsidies that
should be offered. It may be more efficient for them to move to less risky areas rather
than occupy what is, in effect, high cost housing.
5. Summary and Future Research Needs
This paper discusses mandated comprehensive disaster insurance for all homeowners
as an alternative to the current program because people today do not voluntarily protect
themselves against some natural disasters such as flood and earthquakes. As Kydland and
Prescott (1977) show in their path breaking paper, policy makers may develop policies

26

that are not socially optimal if individuals are given unlimited discretion in making their
choices. We have shown here that public disaster assistance is a form of insurance that is
suboptimal relative to coverage purchased prior to the event where the premiums are
based on the risks faced by the property owner. To the extent that some homeowners do
not use a sequential model of choice but rather react in an expected utility maximizing
way to premiums and to the presence of public assistance, such behavior will need to be
taken into account in the design of an insurance program. Such a reaction, if widespread,
would further strengthen the cases both for mandates and ex ante subsidies of insurance
for lower income residents in the form of grants or low interest loans.
Future research requires a deeper understanding of the factors that influence
individuals to purchase insurance and invest in protection voluntarily and those that
discourage them from doing so. There is also a need for a study on the ability of the
private market to provide insurance protection against disasters and the relative
effectiveness of disaster assistance compared with a comprehensive disaster insurance.
One also needs research on how to obtain better data to reduce the uncertainties
surrounding the risk assessment process, how one can provide better information on the
risk and alternative ways of reducing the risk faced by different interested parties ranging
from the potential victims to government agencies. Future studies should therefore focus
on how different stakeholders incorporate the concept of probability into their decisions.
A 250-year flood has a very specific meaning to an actuary determining insurance rates,
but is likely to be interpreted in a very different way by residents in hazard-prone areas
subject to this type of disaster.

27

We also need better research on the public decision making process. Is it
reasonable to think that a proposal for a mandate can garner widespread voter support
when many voters follow the sequential process of choice? Insurers and regulators will
find their lives made easier by mandates, and voters in the affected areas will presumably
not be distressed to learn of the disappearance of ex post disaster assistance payments
they did not expect to receive in the first place. But as long as insurers price in an
actuarial fashion, the mandate will mean a positive increase in housing costs for
households who had not thought that these disasters could happen to them. Lower
income people will have the increases cushioned (though not taken away entirely) by
subsidies, but the middle class especially may object to being charged for insurance
which they think they do not need and will never use. How to assemble at least a
minimal winning coalition of citizens to make mandated coverage feasible is a crucial
research topic.
Finally, when developing a hazard management strategy it is important to take
into account the current institutional arrangements and the types of information
individuals, firms and organizations in the private and public sectors utilize on the risk.
Without a clear understanding of the political and social landscape as well as how choices
are actually made, we are likely to develop policies and programs that will not achieve
their desired effects.

28

REFERENCES
Bourne, Joel K. (2004) Gone with the Water National Geographic October.
Burby, Raymond J. with Beverly A. Cigler, Steven P. French, Edward J. Kaiser, Jack
Kartez, Dale Roenigk, Dana Weist, and Dale Whittington (1991). Sharing Environmental
Risks: How to Control Governments’ Losses in Natural Disasters. Boulder, CO:
Westview.
Camerer, Colin and Kunreuther, Howard (1989). Decision Processes for Low Probability
Events: Policy Implications. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 8: 565-592.
Doherty, Neil, Paul Kleindorfer and Howard Kunreuther (1990). “Insurance Perspectives
on an Integrated Hazardous Waste Management Strategy,” Geneva Papers on Risk and
Insurance 27: 407-427.
Earthquake Engineering Research Institute (1998). Incentives and Impediments to
Improving the Seismic Performance of Buildings. Oakland, CA: Earthquake Engineering
Research Institute.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (2006). Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and
Emergency Assistance Act, as amended by Public Law 93-288, June, 2006. Online at
http://www.fema.gov/library/stafact.shtm (accessed July 5, 2006)
Grace, Martin F., Robert W. Klein, and Paul R. Kleindorfer (2004). "Homeowners
Insurance with Bundled Catastrophe Coverage", Journal of Risk and Insurance, Vol. 7:3
September.
Grossi, Patricia and Howard Kunreuther (2005), Catastrophe Modeling: A New Approach
to Managing Risk. New York: Springer.
Harrington, Scott . (2000), “Rethinking Disaster Policy,” Regulation: Spring, pp. 40-46
Harrington, Scott (2006). “Rethinking Disaster Policy After Hurricane Katrina” In
Daniels, R., Kettl, D., and Kunreuther, H. (eds.) On Risk and Disaster: Lessons from
Hurricane Katrina, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Hartwig, Robert and Claire Wilkinson (2005a), Public/Private Mechanisms Handling
Catastrophic Risk in the United States, Insurance Information Institute, New York, N.Y.
October.
Hartwig, Robert and Claire Wilkinson (2005b), The National Flood Insurance Program,
Insurance Information Institute, New York, N.Y. October.

29

Hogarth, Robin and Kunreuther, Howard (1995). “Decision Making Under Ignorance:
Arguing with Yourself”. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 10: 15-36.
Hood, Jim (2005) “A Policy of Deceit” New York Times November 19 p. A27.
Insurance Information Institute (2005) “Flood Insurance: Facts & Figures” Nov. 15.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky (1979), “Prospect theory: An analysis of decision
under risk.” Econometrica 47(2):263-291.
Kaplow, Louis. (1991), “Incentives and Government Relief for Risk,” Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, 4: 167-175
Kunreuther, Howard. (1973). Recovery from Natural Disasters: Insurance or Federal
Aid? Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.
Kunreuther, Howard, et al. (1978). Disaster Insurance Protection: Public Policy Lessons.
New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Kunreuther, Howard. Sanderson, Warren and Vetschera, Rudolph (1985), “A Behavioral
Model of the Ad/option of Protective Activities” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 6, 1-15.
Kunreuther, Howard, Novemsky, Nathan, and Kahneman, Daniel (2001). “Making Low
Probabilities Useful”, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 23:2, pp. 103-120.
Kunreuther, Howard and Pauly, Mark. (2004) “Neglecting Disaster: Why Don’t People
Insure Against Large Losses?” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 28:5-21.
Kunreuther, Howard (2006), “Comprehensive Disaster Insurance: Has its Time Come?”
in Risk and Disaster: Lessons from Hurricane Katrina. University of Pennsylvania Press,
Philadelphia, PA.
Kydland, Finn, and Prescott, Edward (1977), “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy 85: 473-91.
Litan, Robert (2006). “Sharing and Reducing the Financial Risks of Future “MegaCatastrophes”, Issues in Economic Policy No.4, Brookings Institute Washington, DC
March.
Magat, Wes. Viscusi, W. Kip and Huber, Joel (1987). “Risk-dollar Tradeoffs, Risk
Perceptions, and Consumer Behavior,” In W. Viscusi & W. Magat (eds.), Learning about
Risk (p. 83-97). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McFadden, Daniel. (2006) “Free Markets and Fettered Consumers” American
Economic Review 96: 5-29.

30

Moss, David (2002) When All Else Fails: Government as the Ultimate Risk Manager
Cambridge, MA: Harvard
New Orleans Times-Picayune (2002) “Washing Away: Special Report from the Times
Picayune” The New Orleans Times Picayune, June 23-27, 2002.
Palm, Risa (1990), Natural Hazards: An Integrative Framework for Research and
Planning. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Palm, Risa (1995), Earthquake Insurance: A Longitudinal Studies of California
Homeowners. Boulder: Westview Press.
Pasterick, Edward T. (1998), “The National Flood Insurance Program.” in Howard
Kunreuther and Richard J. Roth, Sr. (eds.), Paying the Price: The Status and Role of
Insurance Against Natural Disasters in the United States. Washington, DC: Joseph
Henry Press.
Risk Management Solutions (2004), “The Northridge, California Earthquake. A 10-Year
Retrospective”, May.
Roth, Richard Jr. (1998) “Earthquake Insurance in the United States” in Howard
Kunreuther and Richard J. Roth, Sr. (eds.), Paying the Price: The Status and Role of
Insurance Against Natural Disasters in the United States. Washington, DC: Joseph
Henry Press.
Smetters, Kent. (2004), “Insuring Against Terrorism: The Policy Challenge,” In Litan, R.
and Herring, R. (eds), Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services, pp. 139-182.
Tobin, Richard and Corinne Calfee (2005) The National Flood Insurance program’s
Mandatory Purchase Requirement: Policies, Processes, and Stakeholders Washington,
DC: American Institutes for Research.
Towers Perrin (2005) “Hurricane Katrina: Analysis of the Impact on the Insurance
Industry.” Available online at
http://www.towersperrin.com/tillinghast/publications/reports/Hurricane_Katrina/katrina.p
df
Tversky, Amos., Sattath, Shmuel., and Slovic, Paul. (1988), “Contingent Weighting in
Judgment and Choice,” Psychological Review, 95, 371-384.
United States Government Accountability Office (2005) Army Corps of Engiineers:
History of the Lake Pontchartrain and Vicinity Hurricane Protection Project
Statement of Ann Mittal before the Committee on Environment and Public Works,
U.S.Senate November 9th.

31

