                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ANNUITY MARKETS, SAVINGS, AND
                       THE CAPITAL STOCK


                     Laurence J. Kotlikoff

                         John B. Shoven

                          Avia Spivak



                     Working Paper No. 1250




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RE' SEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         December 1983




This paper is a draft of a presentation to be made at the
Econometric Society Winter Meetings, December 28—30, 1983, San
Francisco, California. It is not for quotation without permission
of the authors. We thank Evi Eckstein, Truman Hawley, Linus Yamane
and Ludo Van der Heyden for very helpful discussions and Linus
Yamane for excellent research assistance. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Pensions. Any opin-
ions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1250
                                               December L983




            Annuity Markets, Savings, and the Capital Stock


                                ABSTRACT



          This article examines how the availability of annuities affects

savings and inequality in economies in which neither private nor public

pensions initially exist. The absence of widespread market or government

annuity insurance is clearly descriptive of many less developed countries

in the world today; it was also a characteristic of virtually all countries

prior to World War II. The paper compares economies with perfect insurance

with economies in which completely selfish parents and children pool longev-

ity risk to their mutual advantage. The analysis of the latter economies

takes into account the infinite sequence of risk sharing bargains of suc-

cessive parents with their children. Such bargains affect current risk

sharing between parents and child because they determine the welfare of

current children when they become parents. Calculations based on the CBS

utility function indicate that perfecting annuity insurance can signifi-

cantly reduce national savings. Indeed, the insurance aspects of govern-

ment pensions are potentially as important as underfunding government pensions

in reducing national savings.




Laurence J. Kotlikoff                      j B. Shoven
National Bureau of
                                           Department of Economics
Economic Research
                                           Stanford University
1050 Massachusetts Ave.
                                           Stanford, CA 94305
Cambridge, MA 02138




                       Avia Spivak
                       Department of Economics
                       University of Pennsylvania
                       Phi1nr1n1.h4 nA lrA1flA
                               I. Introduction

         This paper examines how the availability of annuities affects

savings and inequality in economies in which neither private nor public

pensions initially exist. The absence of widespread market or government

annuity insurance is clearly descriptive of many less developed countries

in the world today; it was also a characteristic of virtually all countries

prior to World War II. While there is now a considerable body of litera-

ture addressing the savings impact of funding or not funding government

pensions (Feldstein (19714), Barro, 19T4), and numerous others), the effect

of the insurance provision per se has received less attention.

          Sheshinski and Weiss (1981) is the first analysis of the pure

insurance effects of social security on national saving. They demonstrate

that when private arrangements are unavailable, the government's provision

of fully funded old age annuities alters household consumption possibili-

ties. In their model in which agents have a bequest motive, the short—run

saving impact of such provision is ambiguous. Hubbard (1983) points out

that this provision unambiguously reduces national saving if agents have no

bequest motive. F\iller descriptions of life cycle (zero bequest motive)

economies in the absence of annuity insurance are presented in Eckstein,

Eichenbaum, and Peled (1983) and Abel (1983). Both papers independently

derived the stochastic steady state properties of economies in which agents

involuntarily leave bequests to their children. Abel also considers the

effects of introducing a fully funded social security system in such an

economy, his chief finding being that such a policy reduces savings.1



          paper reaches a similar conclusion about the savings impact of
perfecting insurance arrangements, although we model the initial,
no—market/government annuity economy quite differently. Abel's research
and that of our oin were conducted independently.
                                     -2—



           The assumption entertained by Eckstein et al. and Abel that

cczripletely selfish parents with no interest in their children leave

involuntary   bequests to their own children seems rather arbitrary. Clearly
parents have the option to bequeath their wealth to surviving spouses,
friends, other relatives, or charitable organizations. In addition, the
notion   that bequests are completely involuntary seems implausible. An

alternative assumption is that selfish parents and selfish children collec—

tively pool the risks of the parents' date of death in a manner that is

mutually advantageous.   There are three reasons why cooperative (voluntary)

risk pooling seems a more realistic assumption. First, cooperative risk

pooling Pareto dominates noncooperative behavior. Second, as described in

Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981), the risks of uncertain longevity appear to be

very large; the amount of resources that mildly risk—averse, selfish indi-

viduals would surrender to have access to fair annuity insurance is poten-

tially quite sizeable. This suggests a very substantial demand for market

insurance if selfish parents cannot nake comparable risk pooling arrange-

ments with their children, friends, or other relatives. Third, pooling

longevity risk with even a single child can capture a large fraction of the

gains fran perfect insurance (Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981)); hence, such

risk pooling with children appears well "worth the trouble," with the gains

far exceeding any reasonable transaction costs.

            This paper models cooperative risk pooling of selfish parents and

children taking into account the arrival of future selfish family members,

namely, unborn grandchildren, great grandchildren, great great
                                        —3—


grandchildren, etc. At each point in time the anticipated arrival of additional

agents with whom young family members can share risks influences the set of

current risk—sharing arrangements that are of mutual advantage to young and old

family members. As a consequence the solution to the bargaining problem

between currently living family members takes account of the infinite

sequence of bargains struck by family descendents.

              In addition to modeling the process of sequential generational

risk—sharing, we calculate, for the CES utility function, the stochastic

steady state level and distribution of wealth. These calculations suggest

that perfecting annuity insurance can have major impacts on national

savings. For our preferred set of parameter values, the introduction of

perfect annuity insurance reduces wealth by 35 to 60 percent in the long

run. The exact percentage reduction in savings within this range depends

on assumptions about the cooperative bargaining solution. These figures

are large, and are larger still if one assus a greater degree of risk

aver si on.

              Given our parameterization of preferences, the 35 to 60 percent

range should, however, be viewed as an upper bound for the impact of intro-

ducing what amounts to a. fully funded social security system in an econoury

with family     risk   sharing. There are two reasons why these figures are

likely to considerably overestimate the actual outcome. First, they are

partial equilibrium estimates, i.e., they do not take account of potential

 changes in factor prices (wages and interest rates) that wild arise, in a

 closed econon, from a major reduction in national wealth. Such price
                                       —h —




changes can significantly dampen savings reductions in models of this kind.
Second, in order to highlight the impact of insurance provision, we assume

that at most two family members are simultaneously alive. This generates

the smallest possible risk—sharing within families. Obviously, a suf-

ficiently large number of family members is capable of pooling virtually

all risks of uncertain longevity. With large enough families sharing mor-

tality risks, the affect on aggregate wealth of perfecting insurance provi-

sion could be quite small.

           While   these numbers are partial equilibrium estimates and inten—
tionaliy   biased upwards by our   modeling of family size, they are surpri-
singly large relative to our prior beliefs. They suggest that the

insurance aspects of social security are potentially as important in

altering national savings as is the riethod of social security finance.        lit



is also worth pointing out that the transition to the full annuity

insurance equilibrium is completed once the inital generation of young

family members reach old age. In real time, this is hO to 50 years, but

one would expect to    see most of the ultimate change in savings occuring
within the first 20 years. A final point that aids in evaluating these
findings is that full insurance, while generating a Pareto efficient steady
state, may involve a steady state level of welfare that is lower than the
minimum level of welfare in the family insurance stochastic steady state.
This somewhat paradoxical result is explained as follows; the provision of
full insurance transfers resources to the first cohort of elderly at the
expense of initial young and future generations. While the new steady
                                      —5—




state   is efficient, it has a smaller stock of resources, in this case capi-

tal, because of the initial transfer. This transfer to the initial elderly

is not effected by explicit redistribution across age groups. It arises

more subtly, namely, from the inability of young family members to continue

selling insurance to their parents in exchange for their parents' potential

bequests. Rather than bargain at less than fair insurance terms with

children, provision of perfect annuities, which involves each cohort

pooling risk with its c'in members, permits the initial generation of

elderly to consume at a higher rate. The initial set of children as well

as all future generations are better off because of the perfection of the

insurance market, but worse off because they no longer receive inheritan-

ces. Since all children in this paper are born with identical endowments,

eliminating inheritances by providing perfect insurance also eliminates

inequality.

            The next section presents the infinite horizon bargaining model;

the zero bargaining, involuntary bequests model is also presented for pur-

poses of comparison. This section also describes the algorithm used to

solve the bargaining problem. Section III discusses the process of wealth

transmission in the stochastic steady state. Section IV compares long—run

stocks of wealth under (1) perfect annuity markets, (2) three alternative

parent—child bargaining solutions, and (3) nc—insurance arrangements with

involuntary transfers made to children. This section also considers how

the presence of additional children would alter the findings. Section V

sumnarizes the paper and discusses ideas for additional research.
                                          —6—


                                    II.    The Model

            As a prelude to presenting the selfish family, infinite horizon
bargaining problem, this section briefly reviews wealth accumulation under
perfect annuity markets. In the subsequent modeling of family risk
sharing, each selfish parent reaches a bargain with a single selfish child

regarding    the risk of long life. This is the simplest of family   struc-
tures, but the associated intergenerational bargaining problem remains

moderately complicated. The final part of this section describes how our

stylized econosr operates when family bequest-annuity aggreements do not

exist, but where involuntary bequests are made to children as in Eckstein,

et. al. (1981) and Abel (1983). In this case it is everyone for himself;

that is, there are no risk pooling opportunites to ameliorate the risk of

long life.

             In canparing the econonor under these three insurance arrangements

——   perfect   insurance, self insurance between parent and child, and no

insurance ——    it is important to distinguish between transition effects and
steady state comparisons. Clearly, if we move from no insurance to a

family deal or from a family bargain to perfect insurance, the first

generation ins. These gains are due to the fact that the generation

alive during the switch received an inheritance from its parent, but gives

none or one of smaller expected value to its children. Kotlikoff and

Spivak (1981) estimated that these gains to the first generation could be

very substantial. For instance, consider a completely selfish 55 year old

male who gains no pleasure from leaving bequests and whose time separable
                                       —7—




consumption preferences are isoelastic, with a relative risk aversion coef-
ficient of .75.   This   individual would consider the introduction of a per-

fect annuities market equivalent to an increase in his (her) wealth of 1Vf

percent; with perfect annuities, there is no need to maintain precautionary

balances to provide for an extraordinarily long life, and the individual

can, therefore, enjoy a higher consumption stream for the remainder of his

(her) life. The gains to those who first get access to a perfect annuities

market increase with the age and degree of risk aversion of the individual.

For uninsured individuals the gains to deals within the family are also

large. With two participants the gain is roughly half that offered by per-

fect insurance, and with three it is roughly 70 percent as great. Hence,

one would also expect significant start up gains in moving from zero to

family insurance.

          This paper, in contrast to Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981), con-

centrates on steady state comparisons of the three insurance environments.

In the case of family insurance we look at situations where a parent is

insuring with a child, and the child later makes a deal with his child and

so on. The analysis of aggregate wealth requires consideration of the

entire family history of insurance arrangements and mortality experience.

Obviously, the consumption and saving of current family memhers depends on

their inherited wealth which depends on the sequence of wealth and death

dates of all previous ancestors.

           There are four periods of life in this model. People live with

 certainty for the first three periods and survive to the fourth with proba—
                                               —8—




bility        P. So, the fraction (i—F) of the population live only three

periods, while P live 14 periods. Children are one when their parents are

three. Any negotiation or deal, explicit or implicit, between parent and

child takes place before the parent and child engage in their respective

third and first period consumption.

                       are exogenously endowed with earnings. The time pat-
                   Individuals

tern of the receipt of these earnings greatly influences saving and wealth
in the economy. We assume that no earnings are received in the fourth
period of life and examine a number of patterns of income receipt in the
first     three periods. Consumers are modelled as nnximizing expected life-

time utility subject to one or more budget constaints. Utility is taken as

separable in consumption (Ct) over time.

                   The perfect annuities case is by far the simplest to analyze

since an individual's choice problem is separate from that of his parents

and children. In this case each individual at age one nnximizes


f   \              EU —
                          14
                                       (t—l)
                          , PtUkCt)a
                         t=l

subject        to

                               PtCttU =
                         t=l
where              is the probability of surviving to period t (P1rP2P31, and

o <            <   1),   Ct is consumption in period t, R is the discount factor (one
        P14

 divided by one plus the interest rate), a is the pure time discount factor,

 and W1 is the present value of earnings. Throughout this paper we use the
                                             —9—




isoelastic   form for


                          l—y
           u(c ) =—
(2)
              t l—y                                          -




where l—y is the elasticity of utility with respect to consumption. The

parameter y measures the (constant) degree of relative risk aversion.

           The solution to the consumer's problem in the case of perfect

annuities takes the form


                         w1 (R)(t_1)T
             c =                ____—
(3)
             t
                   J=l


Knowing C. and the time pattern of earnings one can derive the accumulated

wealth   of each cohort.        Total wealth in the economy equals the sum of each

cohort's wealth holdings.

             The family insurance solution where each member acts solely out

of self interest is much more complicated. When the bargaining takes place

the parent is age three with one more period of certain life followed by

one period of uncertain life. The agreement reached by parent and

child can be thought of as         the   parent buying an annuity from the child. In

return for some money in period 3           (the   price of the annuity) the child pro-

mises to offer a specified level of support for the parent in period 14 in

the event that the parent lives that long. Equivalently, the deal can be

arranged such that the child gives the parent some money before period 3 in

return for being made beneficiary of the will of the parent. The equiva—
                                     —10—


lence can be seen in the following example which assumes a zero rate of

interest for simplicity: say the parent pays $1 for an annuity that gives

him $2 in period 1 of his life should he live. In the equivalent support—

for—bequest arrangement the child gives the parent $1 in period 3 in return

for the parent's agreeing to save $2 for this fourth period, and rakes the

child his beneficiary should he die at the end of period 3. In both of

these arrangements the child rakes a net transfer of $1 to the parent if

the parent lives to old age and receives $1 if the parent does not.

Regardless of how the bargain is explicitly or implicitly specified the

parent and child share the risk of the parent's lifespan. Perhaps the

simplest way to think about these deals is the first way, the purchase of

annuity insurance by the parent from the child. The next issue to address

is what is the price of this insurance.

            Both the parent and the child can be made better off by striking

a bargain. However, there is some indeterminacy as to how the surplus will

be divided. One can imagine the price of the annuity being set suf-

ficiently high that the parent's utility is just the same as if no deal had

been struck, and, therefore, all of the gains from trade go to the child.

At some low price, all of the gains from trade would go to the parent. An

additional complication is that the child, in striking an arrangement with

the parent, considers the 3rd period bargain he will make with his

own child. The expected utility from that future bargain is

denoted V and depends on the child's level of third period wealth,

i.e., V =            Throughout the paper we assume that successive children
            v(w3).
all earn identical amounts with certainty in the first three periods of their
                                                  —11—


lives. Hence, the resources of the grandchild, with whom the child will

bargain, is supressed as an argument of V.

         The frontier of the utility possibilities space with intergenera-

tional bargaining is located by solving

         Maximize:



(})        f3al—y l—i
          -—
             l—y
                   sl
                     1—i
                              +
                                   l—y



          + O,     (s2a + a2V(W s3,a ))
                    1—i


                          czC'
          + 0(1—F) (               +
                           2;d             a2V(ws3d))

subject to


          Cf3 + C51 +      R(Cf        +
                                           C52   a +             a
                                                                     =
                                                                             + Wf3/R

and


          Cf3 + C51 + RC52 d +                      d
                                                        =
                                                            sl   +
                                                                     W13/R


where Cf3 and Cf are the parent's certain and contingent consumption in

periods 3 and 14, respectively; C1 is the child's first period consumption,

and 0s2,a and C52d are the child's second period consumption contingent

upon the parent being alive or dead in period 14,                        respectively.   The child's cer-

tain present value of resources is W51, and his (her) parent's third period

wealth is W .
             f3    Finally,    W
                                  s3,a
                                            and W
                                                  s3,d
                                                            are the third period levels of wealth

of the child, that he or she uses in bargaining with the grandchild, contingent

upon the parent being alive or dead in period tt.
                                     —12—


          Problem (14) involves rraximizing a weighted sum of the two

participants' expected utility where the weight 0, applied to the child's

utility, potentially ranges from 0 to w.    The child considers his consump-

tion in periods 3 and 4 under two eventualities: either his parent dies

early, and he, therefore, does not have to pay off on the annuity insurance

agreement (this is reflected in the final term of (14) which is weighted by

the (1—P) possibility of its occurrence), or the parent dies late and,

hence, the child does have to pay off on the annuity insurance (the fourth

term in (4) ).   As stated, the v(w) function gives the expected utility the

child experiences from his third and fourth period consumption discounted

to period 3 of his life as a function of his wealth in period 3.

          Problem (14) has two budget constraints because total consumption

plus savings for the child's third period equals total initial wealth of

the parent and child under both lifetime possibilities for the parent. The

weight 0 reflects the terms of trade in this bargaining problem. In

general one would expect 0 to be a function of the resources of both the

parent and the child, Wf3 and W1, respectively. However, since w51 is

constant in our analysis, we express 0 = 0(Wf3).

          Solving problem (4) for different values of 0 traces out the uti-

lity possibility frontier for family deals shown in Figure 1. Obviously,

not all values of 0 will generate outcomes that are in the core. We have

labeled as O the critical value for 0 for which the parent receives none

of the gains from trade (i.e., the child receives all gains from trade).

   is defined symnetrically with the parent getting all of the surplus.
          Figure 1. Utility Posib1lit1es Frontier



    Child's
   Expected
    Utility



                     Os Bargain




Child's
Threat
Point
                                  O Bargain

                                                    Parent's
                                                    Expected
                                                    Utility
              Parent's
               Threat
               Point
                                       —13—


The point T is the threat point, indicating the parent's and child's

expected utility levels if they fail to bargain with each other. As is

clear from problem (Ii), figure 1 depends on the respective resources of the

father and the son, W51 and Wf3 and on the function V( .).

            Since   we consider a stationary environment in which tastes and

endowments of children remain unchanged, we will limit outseif to sta-

tionary bargaining solutions. That is, we assume that the V function dll

be the same for the bargaining of each successive pair of generations. An

implication of stationarity is that the parent's expected utility in 4)

expressed as a function of his wealth, Wf3, equals the child's expected
utility function, V, when the child becomes a father. An immediate property

of stationarity is that the child reaches the same deal with his child as

his parent did dth him if respective resources are the same. More

formal1r, a stationary solution is defined as a bargaining function O(W3)

and an expected utility function v(w) such that if Cf, Cf are optimal

values of consumption derived from solving problem (4), where

v(w3) is substituted for v(w3), then V(Wf3) =                  + aPT

            Solving   problem V4) involves searching for a fixed point

function V and an associated B(Wf3)     function   that produces outcomes that

are in the core. We consider and compute three solutions to problem (n).

In   the first solution, denoted O, the child receives all the gains      from

trade;   furthermore, all successive bargains involve     children receiving all
gains    from trade. In the second, O. solution, the initial and all suc-

cessive fathers receive all gains from trade. In the third solution the
                                                 —1i—


gains from trade are always divided between child and son according to John

Nash's (l951) two person bargaining solution.

         In the 0 solution parents receive their threat point level of

expected utility. This is the expected utility received by the parent if

he acts on his own and is given by the solution to (5).    Maximize:


          Cl•__Y•              aPci_I

             l—y                 l—y

subject to

          Cf 3       + R       C =   W3/R

The structure of the problem is very much like that with perfect annuities,

except that providing for Cf costs R instead of only PR. The advantage of

annuity markets is precisely this reduced cost of consumption in periods

where survival is uncertain. Denote VS(Wf3) as the maximum utility that

the parent with wealth Wf3 can achieve on his own by solving (5). V5(Wf3)

is, thus, the indirect utility function when no deal is struck and     is   given




             v (w          )   =k
                 $    f3             l—y

where

                                            ()
             k       R1l((l+(P)1R I )Y

Naturally,    V$(Wf3) is the minimum the parent is willing to accept in

an annuity bargain with his child. V5 is also the expected utility func-

tion of the child in the Os bargain with his own child. Replacing V for V
                                                —15—




in (14) and choosing 0 for each value of W such that V (w )                              +p
                           $                            f3              s f3      l—              l—y
provides a proof by       construction that V is a fixed point function for the

Os problem. In addition the computed values of O for different values

of W13 determine the function 0(W13). While                  parents,   in this O bargain,

receive their threat point         levels      of expected utility, their actual pattern

of consuiition differs from what they would choose on their own.                  As

described below, C3 is snller and                      greater than the respective

solution values to problem (5).

           Althou the V5 function was               obtained   analytically, this is

not generally possible. For the the o and Nash (denoted e)                     solutions     an

iterative technique described below is used to find fixed point func-

tions and their associated 0 functions. Both the O and 0 solutions

require specifying        the   child's threat point. Given our          assumption   of a

cooperative, efficient solution to father/son bargaining, the child, if' he

fails to bargain with his father, can credibly assert to his father that he

will be able to reach a deal with his child. The child's threat point EUT,

is the solution to problem (6); it involves the child's consuming C1 and C52

in his first two periods, respectively, and bargaining with his child

in period 3 based on third period wealth, W53.

      Maximize:


                                l—y
(6)        EU
               T =   sl
                           +
                                ly
                                 s2
                                      +
                                          2-
                                           v(w53)

subject   to
            Csl +RCs2+R2W s3       W
                                       sl


            In the case of      bargaining, V is replaced by Vf in (6) as well

as (14). The       solution proceeds by first guessing a function Vf. Next

we solve (6) to determine the son's threat point utility EXJT. Given the

guess of Vf and the derived value of E&, B is choosen in (14) such that

the son's expected utility in the solution to (14) equals EUT. This

last calculation is repeated for different values of Wf3 thereby

generating a function Gf(Wc). In addition to computing a Bf function

based on the initial guess of Vf, the solution to (14) based on Of(Wf3)

determines the father's expected utility in the bargain. The maximizing

            c*l1        c*tT
values of          +   Pa      for different values of Wf3 provide an expected

utility function for the parent in his O bargain with his child. This

function is used as the next guess of the Vf function, and the calculations

are repeated. The iteration proceeds until the guess of the Vf function

equals the father's expected utility as a function of Wf3, i.e., until

we have found a function Vf. which is a fixed point of the mapping described.

            In the Nash bargaining case a very similar solution technique

is applied. The Nash solution involves choosing B in (14) to maximize

the quantity (Jf - EU)(EU         — EUT), where     and EU are the expected

utilities obtained by the parent and child respectively, and          equals

V, the parent's threat point. To find V, the Nash fixed point function,

we again choose an initial guess of V and solve (6) to find,TEU. We
                                        —1T-



also solve (5) to find EU. Next the guessed value of V is substituted

for V in (14), and 8 is choosen to maximize (EUf —                    —
                                                           E)(EU5
Repeating this last step for alternative values of             generates a

function On(Wf3) as well as an expected utility function of the father arising

from Nash bargaining. This latter function is used as the second guess

of   the V function. The iteration continues until we find a fixed point

function V. In this bargaining solution as in the previous

Os solution, the Of(Wf3) and O(W3) functions calculated in the last

round of the iteration correspond to the correct bargaining functions for

the functions V and V, respectively.

            The V function is used as the initial guess of the V function

for the O. and Nash bargaining solutions. In each iteration we computed

the solution to (14) for 80 different values of Wf3. We then fit a fifth

order polynominal in Wf3 to these points and used the resulting regression

as the   guess of V in the next iteration. The iterative procedure for
determining V converged roughly by the 8th iteration; 12 iterations each
were used for the      and Nash cases.         "rough convergence" we mean that
economic choice variables were      identical to at least the second digit
between   iterations. For a range of intermediate values of Wf3 the calcu-

lated consumption terms    are   identical to five digits between iterations.

While we believe more    accurate values of' the V and V functions could be
obtained,   the computation costs of achieving the additional accuracy is

considerable; solving V4) for any      one   of the 80   values of   Wf3 in any one of'

the 12    iterations requires rather extensive computation.
                                                            —18—



The Involuntary Bequest Model
               The next case we examine is the situation with no insurance

arrangements, but unintentional bequests are made to children. This case

has been examined in two period models by Eckstein et al. (1983) and Abel

(1983). The solution differs from that of the threat points because the

child inherits unspent money of the parent. The child in period 1 of his

life can observe the wealth of his parent and can calculate the potential

inheritance, I, he will receive should his parent die young. The child is

assumed      to solve the following problem.
               Maximize:

               C'
                sl                czC
                                         l—y
                                        s2,a
U)                      +                       + c2V (w
                                                      s s3,a
                                                                 ))
               l—y                 1—y

                                        l—y
               + (1—F)             s2,d        +
                              (
                                                   a2v5(ws3d))

subject to

               C
                   si
                        +RC              +R2W               sl
                              s2,a                 s3,a

and


               Csl +RC s2,d                         s3,d
                                                           =Wsl +1,
wh e r e


               I =
                        W/R       —
                                        Cf3

The child maximizes his welfare subject to the certain earnings endowment,

           and the inheritance I left by the parent if he dies young. The
                                        —19—


     function gives the level of expected utility the child can receive in

periods 3 and       with no deal with his child, i.e., the solution to problem

(5) above.

III. The Transmission of Wealth in the Stochastic Steady State

             Figure 2 graphs the wealth of children in their third period

(when they are parents) against their parents' wealth, Wf3 for the case of

family insurance bargains. The amount of wealth the child brings

into his third period depends, of course, on the age at which his

parent dies. The curves Wd3(w3) and w3(w3) indicate the third

period wealth of the child if his own parent lives for three periods

and four periods, respectively. Note that the two curves intersect

on the vertical axis, since a child whose parent has no wealth engages in

the same consumption regardless of the date of his parent's death.

             The   exact position and shapes of these curves depend on the spe-
cification    of the utility   function as well as the parent—child bargaining
solution.     For the examples we describe here, the curves were constructed

by   fitting fifth order polynominals to the values of W3(Wf3)and W3(Wf3)

calculated for 80 different values of W3. The intercepts in each

regression were constrained to equal the amount of resources a child would

save for period 3 assuming he engages in no bargain with his parent. In

each calculation, the estirrated curves     were essentially straight   lines,

with
       Wd3(Wf3) and Wa3(Wf3) monotonically increasing and decreasing in Wf3,
respectively.

             Intuitively, Wd3(Wf3) rises with Wf3 because a fraction of the

parent's increased resources will be allocated to the parent's contingent
          T:ert 2.                                      tt ..y
                     state P1strfl'utori           th


'E 3, d
Ws3a

                                                                     (Wf3)




                                   I           I             (Wf3)

                                   I           I
                                   I       I
                                 I
                                   I       I
                                 I
                                           I
                                           I
                                           I
                                           I
                                           I

                                                                      Wf3
                                           I
                                Wf3        Wf3ax
                                         —20—


fourth period consumption, C,4. If the parent dies after period 3, the

additional Cf is passed onto the child. For the child the inheritance is

allocated to larger second period consumption as well as larger third

period savings, W3(Wf3), that is used in the bargain with his own child.

The decline in t3(Wf3) as Wf3 increases is explained as follows:

regardless of the bargaining solution between the parent and child, the

parent's contingent bequest rises with Wf3. Part of the price the child

pays for the larger contingent bequest is somewhat lower values of second

period consumption and third period wealth in the case the parent does not

die young. This permits the parent to consume sore in period 3 and, poten—

tial]y,   in   period 4.

           Assuming, as is verified in our actual calculation, that the
slope of Wd3(Wf3) is everywhere positive and less than unity, Wf3max is the

unique limiting value of a parent's third period wealth when all his fore-

fathers have died early. For values of Wf3 above Wf3max successive early

deaths of parents leads to smaller values of Wf3 for each successive parent

until the sequence converges to Wf3max Similarly, starting with a

value for Wf3 below Wf3max and assuming that all successive parents die

early   leads    to successively larger values of Wf3 until Wf3max is reached.

               We   next turn to the minimum bound on the stochastic steady state
distribution of a parent's wealth. If the slope of 3(Wf3) is between 0
and —1, which is the case in the examples presented below, then W13 is the
unique limit of the value of a parent's wealth as successive parents in a
family continue to live through period four. In this case, the sequence of

Wf3s, starting at any particular value, converges as a "Cobb—web" to W3;
                                               —21—




i.e.,     each successive parent with more wealth than Wf3, who lives to period

four, has a child who has less than W1,3 when the child becomes a parent.

              In the stochastic steady state Wf3min is the lower bound on a

parent's third period wealth. Values below W13. cannot arise in the

stochastic steady state; any parent with Wf3 below Wf3mifl will have a child

whose wealth as a parent is between Wf3mifl and Wf3max Once the Wf3 for a

particular family falls within Wf3mifl and Wf3max no parent in the family

will ever appear with wealth outside this range. Values of Wf3 below

Wf3mifl
            and above Wf3max are nonrecurrent states in         the Markoff process that

maps Wf3 into W3(W3) with probability 1—p and into W3(w3) with probabi-

lity p. As can readily be seen by tracing out alternative p and (1—p)

sequences, starting with values of               between Wf3min and Wf3rnx the larger

the value of Wf in the preceding generation,           the smaller will be the Wf3 in
the   next generation if the parent dies late. Wf3mifl, therefore,

corresponds to the value of 3(Wf3) for Wf3max i.e., Wf3min =

                    Hence, if   the   richest parent survives to period 4,        his   child

is    the   poorest parent when he reaches period 3.           This   extreme "riches to

rags" result is quite intuitive. A parent with the largest possible

vealth,              provides   the largest estate if he dies early, but no estate

if he dies late. In order to "purchase" the right to this largest poten-

tial estate the child pays the largest price in terms of reduced consump-

tion and third period wealth if          his   parent lives.

               Since the Markov process described in Figure 2            is nonrecurrent
there are large regions between Wf3min and Wf3max that have zero
                                       —22—



mass with respect to the steady state distribution of wealth. The

shaded areas in Figure 2 chart this distribution for the case Os in which

parents receive none of the gains from bargaining with their children.

This distribution was constructed by giving one hundred thousand families

the same initial value of Wf3 and then simulating 25 successive generations

using a .6   probability   of a four period lifetime. The distribution of

                                  generationS.    Since we assume that a new
Wf3 stablized after rcighly 8

generation   is born every period, rather than every other period, there are

also orphaned two—year old children as well as two—year old children with

surviving parents who hold wealth at any point in time. Calculating the

stochastic steady state's stock of wealth requires simply sununing the

wealth holdings of all age 3 parents, the wealth of orphaned children, and

the wealth of two—year old children and their surviving four—year old

parents. The wealth holdings of these latter two groups are derived from

the distribution of wealth holdings of three-year old parents; the consump—

tion of each of the 100,000 parents and their children, when these parents

are age 3, is subtracted from the income of these families to compute their

combined saving. This saving plus each parent's initial wealth represents

 the next period wealth holdings of families consisting of either orphaned

 children or of children with     surviving   parents. Since this wealth distri-

 bution is stationary in the stochastic steady state, next period's wealth

 holdings of these groups is identical to this period's wealth holdings        of
 such groups. Similar calculations are made for the case in which there are
                  bargains between parents and children, but children   noriethe—
 no   insurance
                                         —23—



less   inherit their parentst estates.

           Parameter values were chosen as follows; the time preference

factor, a, and the disccint factor, R, both equal .86. The coefficient of

risk aversion, y, equals 1, and   the    fourth period suvival probability, p,

equals .6. If one thinks of each period as consisting of 15 years, then a

discount factor of .86 corresponds to a 1 percent annual real rate of

return. In addition, if we view parents as being age 50 and children age

20 when the bargains are struck, the .6 fourth period survival probability

is rouly equivalent to assuming an expected age of death of Th.
           Table 1 presents the calculated values for a parent's third and

fourth period consumption at alternative levels of Wf3 under perfect

insurance, the three alternative parent—child bargains (the          Nash, and Os
solutions to (6)), and the case of no—insurance arrangements.       In   each of

these cases, the parent's consumption increases with his third period

wealth. Access to perfect insurance results, for this parameterization of'

utility, in higher levels of consumption for the parent in both periods 3

and 14 relative to the other cases of partial or zero insurance. For

example, if the parent's wealth is 14.14 at the beginning of' period 3, he

consurrs 2.9 and 2.5 in periods 3 and 14, respectively, with no insurance,

and 3.14 in both periods with perfect insurance. The present value dif-

ference in these consumption paths is 25 percent.

           A parent—and—child bargain in which successive parents receive

all gains from trade with successive children, the O bargain, provides

parents with consumption values that are rough midway between those of perfect
                                                                         Table    1


                                 Parent's Consumption Under Alternative Insurance Arrangements

                                                                    Consumption Values



Parent's
Third                                      Of Bargain                                 Nash           Os Bargain
Period      Perfect                     (parents receive                     bargaining          (children receive       No Insurance
Wealth     Insurance                   all gains frcn trade)                  solution          all gains from trade     Arrangements
(wF3)      CF3    CF4                    CF3          CF14                  CF3     CF14         CF3             CF14    CF3      CF4



9.0        6.9            6.9            6.14                 5.8           6.2          5.6     5.9              5.3    5.0      5.3

8.0        6.7            6.7            5.7                  5.2           5.5          14.9    5.2              14.7   5.3      14.6

 7.0        5.14          5.14           5.0                  14.5          14.89        4.3     14.              14.1   14.6     14.0

 6.0        14.6          14.6           4.14                 14.0          14.2         3.8     3.9              3.6    14•Q     3.5

 5.0        3.8           3.8            3.6                  3.3           3.5          3.2     3.2              3.0    3.3      2.9
 4q14       3•14          3.14           3.2                  3.0           3.0          2.8     2.8              2.6    2.9      2.5


Table assumes        =           =           =   R =   .86.
                i'       14, P       .6, a
                                       -214-



and zero insurance. Consumption values for the parent under the Nash

bargaining solution lie between the O. and O deals. This is the expected

result since the Nash solution divides the gains frcn trade between parents

and children. The Os bargain, in which the parent receives no benefits

from dealing with his child, involves slightly less third period consump-

tion and slightly more fourth period consumption when old than in the case

of zero insurance.

            Table 2 shows consumption and third period wealth values of

children in different insurance regimes. Under perfect insurance the

child's consumption is 3.1 in each period; with no insurance arrangements

and no involuntary bequests the child consumes 3.2 during the first three

periods and 2.8 in the last period. Depending on the parent's wealth and

longevity and the bargain struck between the two, the child can potentially

consume well in excess of the perfect insurance values. As an example,

take    the case of a parent with wealth of 6.o   who agrees to a O bargain

with his child. The child's first period consumption is 3,1t, the       same as
under   perfect insurance. If the parent dies after his third period, the

child consumes 4.5 in period 2 rather than 3)4, the perfect insurance

amount. Furthermore, the child's third period wealth in this case is 7.9,

substantially    in excess of     the third period wealth of a son under per—

fect    insurance. With third period wealth of 1.9,   the child's third and

contingent fourth period consumption values are, from Table 1, roughly       5.5
and 4.9. For this child the total potential realized present value of con-

sumption is 114.14, although the present value of his earnings   is   only 10.
                                                                                      Table   2


                                         Child's Consumption Under Alternative Insurance Arrangements

                                                Consumption and Wealth Values:                        Father—Son Bargains




                              6Bargain                                                                                                 8. Bargain
                       (Children get all                                                                                             (Children Get No
Father's                Gains from Trade)                                    Nash Bargaining Solution                                Gains from Trade)
Wealth     CS1        CS2A CS2D WS3,A WS3,D                             CSl CS2A CS2D WS3,A W53,D                              CS1   CS2A CS2D WS3,A      W53,D


  9.0      3.14        3.1        5.2          514        9.1           3.14          3.1     5.5       4.6     8.3            3.3   2.9    5.1    4.14    8.5
  8.0      3q14        3.1        4.9          5.14       8.7           3.5           3.1     5.2       14.6    7.9            3.3    3.0   14.9   14•4   8.1
  7.0      3.14       3.1      14.7            5.14       8.3           3.5           3.1     5.0       4.6     7.5            3.3    3.0   14.T   14.5    77
  6.0      3.14        3.1        14.5         5.4        7.9           3.5           3.1     5.0       14.6    7.1            3.3    3.0   14.5   14.5    7.3
  5.0      3.3         3.1        14.3         5.14       7.5           3.14          3.1     14.5      14.7    6.8            3.2    3.0   14.3   14.5    6.9
  14.14    3.3        3.1      14.1            5.14       7.3           3.14          3.2     14.14     14.7    6.6            3.3    3.0   4.2    14.6    6.7


                                                                             Consumpt ion Values

                                                                                                         No Insurance
                                                                                                  Arrangements and No
                                                       Perfect Insurance                          Involuntary Bequests
                                                      061 CS2 CF3 CFI4                            CS1     CS2    CF3    CF14


                                                      3•14      3.4   3.14     3.14                 3.2 3.2      3.2    2.8


Table assumes     '     14,   P          .6,    cz    R      .86.
                                     —25—


IV. The Savins Impact of Alternative Insurance Arrangements

           Table 3 compares steady state per capita wealth stocks in the

different insurance regimes under alternative assumptions about age ear-

nings profiles. Each of the age earnings profiles has a present value of

10, which is received with certainty over the course of the first three

periods. Since the child's resources are identical in each of these cases,

the consumption decisions of the child and parent are the same for each of

these earnings paths. Hence, the difference in stocks of wealth by row in

Table 3 are simply a function of the timing of the receipt of labor income.

           The absolute size of these economies' wealth stocks may appear

small in comparison to the level of earnings or income in a particular

period. However, such stock—flow ratios must be adjusted for the fact that

flows in this model are received over a period that corresponds to roughly

15 years. In the case of the third and probably the nnst realistic ear-

nings profile in Table 3, the ratio of wealth to one—fifteenth of a

period's labor earnings is 6.9 in the case of the O bargain.     A wealth—to—

earnings   ratio of 6.9 is somewhat greater than that observed in the United

States.

           The percentage reductions in wealth from civing to perfect

insurance reported in Table 3 are very   large.   For the earnings profile in

the third row the long—run wealth reduction is 59 percent starting from the

0 (children take all) stochastic steady state. It is tl percent in the

case of an initial Nash bargaining equalibrium and 35 percent when the ini-

tial equilibrium involves 0. (parents take all) bargain.
                                                             Table 3
           Wealth Per Capita and Percentage Long—Run Decline in Wealth from Switch to Perfect Insurance




                                        Bargain                                       Os Bargain       No Bargain
                  Perfect        (Parents receive all    Nash Bargaining      (Childrenrecieve all     Involuntary
                Insurance          gains Irom Trade)         Solution          gains from Trade)       Bequests
  Age                                      Percentage            Percentage           Percentage            Percentage
Earnings                                     Wealth               Wealth                  Wealth             Wealth
Profile           Wealth          Wealth       Decline   Wealth   Decline     Wealth      Decline    Wealth   Decline

(io,o,o,o)            12.7             13.9      8.6      l.2     10.6         15.9        20.1       15.5     i8.i
(5.0,5.8,0,0)             7.7           8.9     13.5      9.2     16.3         10.9        29.4       10.5     26.7
(3.3,3.9,4.5,0)           2.2           3.14    35.3       3.7     140.5        .b         59.3        5.0     56.0
(3.0,5.8,2.7,0)           3.14          4.6     26.1       14.9    30.6         6.6        148.        6.2     145.2


(2.0,5.8,3.5,0)           0.7           2.9    171.4       3.2    78.1          3.9        82.0        3.5     80.0




Table   assunsi   = 14,    p =   .6,    aR = .86.
                                        —26—


             The values in Table 3 are highly sensitive to the shape of the

age earnings profile. The smallest percentage wealth reduction arises when

all earnings are received in the first period; in this case wealth falls

20.1 percent starting from the 0 bargain and by 13.9 percent starting from

the O. bargain.

            The percentage change in wealth appears relatively insensitive to

variations in the degree of relative risk aversion, y. For example,

reducing y    from 4 to 1.5 lowers the percentage decline in wealth under row

3's earnings profile and initial Os bargaining from 59.3 percent to 50.1

percent. Raising y to 8 increases the value to 63.2 percent. Under Table

3's first age earnings profile the percentage wealth reductions starting

from      economies are 15.1, 20.1, and 22.9 for values of y equal to 1.5, 4,

and 8, respectively.

            There is considerably more sensitivity to changes in the fourth

period survival probability P; however, the sensitivity depends on the

choice of earnings profile. For example, lower P from .6 to .3, which

reduces the expected age of death from roughly i to roughly 69, converts

the 59.3 percent Os reduction (row 3, Table 3) to 83.6 percent. The same

reduction in P raises Table 3's row 1, O value from 20.1 percent to only

       percent.

            The large differences in wealth stocks between the perfect

insurance and family insurance regimes suggests that steady state welfare

could actually be lower in    the   case of perfect insurance. This is indeed

possible. Under        (children take all) bargaining and assuming y equals
                                       —2T —




1.5,   the expected utility of even the child of the poorest parent exceeds

the uniform, steady state expected utility under perfect insurance.

Starting frcm a situation of zero insurance, achieving the perfect

insurance expected utility level requires a 7 percent increase in

resources; achieving the expected utility of the child with the poorest

parent in the       stochasic steady state requires an 8 percent increase in

life—time resources, starting from this benchmark regime. Attaining the

level of welfare of the child whose parent in the e steady state has the

maximum potential wealth, Wf3max requires a corresponding 12 percent

increase in resources.

            The   steady state stocks of wealth in the case of no family
arrangements, but involuntary bequests to children are slightly smaller
than those under O bargaining. This is not surprising since in both cases
parents receive their threat point levels of utility, and, consume roughly
similar amounts. In the B deal, however, the child's insurance provision
leads to a somewhat lcMer level of the parent's consumption in period 3 and
a somewhat higher level in period 14 (see Table 1). In addition, given Wf3,
the    child consumes slightly less in period 1 in the     deal than in the

involuntary   bequest   setting. This consumption pattern explains the larger

wealth    stock in the   insurance regieme.
             Another question raised by Table 3 is the extent to which imper-
fections in annuity markets can fully explain observed intergenerational
transfers. Kotlikoff and Summers (1981) invoked the assumption of perfect
 insurance arrangements in estimating that roughly 80 percent of private
                                      —28—



U.S.   wealth corresponds to accumulated inheritances of those currently

alive. This assumption that annuity insurance is fairly well developed in

the United States can be defended      pointing to social security and other

government annuities, private pensions, old age labor earnings that are

partly contingent on survival, and the potential for family risk sharing

involving multiple members. Still, it is interesting to ask how their

calculation turns out when it is applied to the two member family insurance

econonry described above. Their technique involves subtracting accumulated

consumption    fran accumulated earnings for each cohort and then summing
across cohorts to get a total wealth stock. This t?life cycle" wealth is
then    canpared with actual wealth holdings. If agents in the economy are

selfish and annuity arrangements are perfect or very close to perfect, coin—

puted and actual aggregate wealth will be identical or extremely close to

one another.

             The two person family regime is, however, quite far from that of

perfect insurance. As described here, this imperfection produces a

stochastic steady state in which observed consumption profiles often exceed

what could be financed from one's own labor earnings even under perfect

 insurance. Hence, in this economy, subtracting, for all cohorts, accumu—

 lated consuiition, part of which is financed by    past   intergenerational

              from accumulated earnings produces   an underestimate of the
transfers,

 economy' actual wealth. For the 0 bargain, with ' equals          and with Table

 3's row 3 earnings profile, 1.5, the underestimate is close to 90 percent

 of    actual wealth. Since Kotlikoff and Summers' calculation understates
                                           —29—


U.S. wealth by 80     percent,   imperfections in annuity markets appear poten—

tial],y capable   of fully   explaining   actual U.S. intergenerational

transfers.


                                      V. Conclusion

             The preceeding calculation as well as the figures presented in

table 3 must be viewed cautiously. They imbed rather extreme assumptions

concerning the size of the risk sharing pool and, in the O case, the

nature of risk sharing. A more realistic model would contain two parents

pooling risk with two or more children. Since the parents, by themselves,

can provide each other with considerable insurance protection, their threat

point values of expected utility are greater in collective bargaining with

their children. As a consequence one would expect parents, in such a

model, to have an expected utility level considerably greater than that

described by the        solution. In addition, if they can extract most of the

gains from trade from dealing with their children, they will end up with

close to perfect insurance. In that case the impact of improving          annuity
arrangements    on savings would be minor.

             Extending the analysis to different configurations of families

is an area for future research. To date we have considered the simplest

case of multiple children dealing with a single parent under the

B bargain. For table 3's third earnings profile the percentage reduction

in wealth is quite similar to the 50 percent figure in table 3 over a range

of children numbering as great as 5        per   parent. Since their earnings pro-

file   implies very   little   saving in period one, the change in the earnings'
                                          —30—


age structure fran a 1 to 5     ratio   of children to parents has little impact

on accumulated earnings of particular cohorts at a point in time. In addi-

tion, the consumption patterns of children and the parent are not greatly

altered in moving from 1 to 5    children    under the O bargain. This would

not, of cairse, be the case in the e        bargain. A O bargain with 5
children   would provide parents with close to the consumption levels

available with perfect insurance.

           While the findings should be viewed cautiously they do suggest

that   the manner in which annuity markets function can significantly affect
saving, wealth, and   welfare   in an economy. That each generation has large
incentives   to improve annuity arrangements was demonstrated in Kotlikoff

and Spivak (1981). Here we find that the steady state welfare gains are

significantly smaller and, in fact, may be negative. The first

generations' gain results in a smaller inheritance and capital stock for

future generations. This lower wealth may more than offset the welfare

gains   that each generation receives from the availability of long—life
insurance.
             We slTould re—emphasize that we are addressing a different question
from that of Felftstein (19Th) and others who are largely concerned with the
funding status of social security. While that line of research attempts to
estimate   the substitutability of social security wealth for private capital, we

are here concerned with the insurance aspects of pensions and social security.

It is our feeling, buttressed by the results of this paper, that a considerable

amount   of saving is potentially done for what ccxxld be Joosely termed pre—
                                       —31—



                                                                             insure
cautionary motives. In addition, the exact manner in which families self
can have major consequences for wealth accumulation. When nire perfect

insurance policies are made available, whether funded or not, less aggregate

saving occurs. While we have focused on annuity insurance, the paper's findings

suggest that the availability of unemployment insurance, disability insurance,

and   health   insurance could also significantly affect national saving. In addi-

tion, the government's pooling of human capital risks through progressive income

taxation may also be having a major impact. In general, the study of savings

and   government   insurance provision is an important area for additional

research.
                                                                            WORKING PAPER //1250



                                     References


Abel, Andrew B., Bequests with Uncertain Lifetimes, mimeo, April 1983.

Barro, Robert J., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal_of             Political
     Econonw, Vol. 82, November—December 19T14, pp. 1095—118.
Davies, J.B., "Uncertain Lifetime Consumption and Dissaving in Retirement,"

     Journal   of   Political Econor, Vol. 89,     June   1981, pp. 561-78.

Eckstein, Zvi, Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Dan Peled, The_Distribution of

     Wealth    and Welfare in   the Presence of Incomplete Annuy Markets,"

     mimeo, May 1983.

Feldstein, Martin S., "Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate

     Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political_Econony, Vol. 82, October

     19714, pp. 905—26.

Hubbard, Glenn R., Uncertain Lifetimes and the IpactofSocialSecuri

     on Individual Wealth Accumulation, mimeo, May 1983.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Avia Spivak, "The Family as an Incomplete

     Annuities Market," Journal of Political Econou, Vol. 89,              April   1981,

     pp. 372—91.

            and Lawrence H. Summers, "The Role of Intergenerational Transfers

     in Aggregate Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political Econo,

     Vol.   90, August 1981, pp. '106—32.

Sheshinski, E. and Y.     Weiss,   "Uncertainty and Optimal Social Security

     Systems," Quarterly Journal       of   Economics   (1981),   pp. 189-206.

Yaari, M.E., "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of

     the Consumer," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 32 (1965), pp. 137—50.
</ref_section>
