NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY STRATEGY:
HOW DID WE GET HERE?
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper 12515
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12515

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2006

This paper is the introductory chapter in my book, "Monetary Policy Strategy", forthcoming from MIT
Press. I thank my editor Elizabeth Murry for her extremely helpful comments. Any views expressed
in this paper are those of the author only and not those of Columbia University or the National Bureau
of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Monetary Policy Strategy: How Did We Get Here?
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 12515
September 2006
JEL No. E52,E58
ABSTRACT
This paper, which is the introductory chapter in my book, "Monetary Policy Strategy", forthcoming from
MIT Press, outlines how thinking in academia and central banks about monetary policy strategy has
evolved over time. It shows that six ideas that are now accepted by monetary authorities and governments
in almost all countries of the world have led to improved monetary performance: 1) there is no long-run
tradeoff between output (employment) and inflation; 2) expectations are critical to monetary policy
outcomes; 3) inflation has high costs; 4) monetary policy is subject to the time-inconsistency problem;
5) central bank independence helps improve the efficacy of monetary policy; and 6) a strong nominal
anchor is the key to producing good monetary policy outcomes.
Frederic S. Mishkin
Uris Hall 817
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

The last three decades have seen an extraordinary transformation in the conduct of
monetary policy. In the 1970s, inflation had risen to very high levels, with most countries, ,
including the United States, experiencing inflation rates in the double digits. Today, almost
all nations in the world are in a low inflation environment. Of two hundred and twenty-three
countries, one hundred and ninety-three currently have annual inflation rates less than or
equal to 10%, while one hundred and forty-nine have annual inflation rates less than or equal
to 5%.1 Why and how has the strategy of the conduct of monetary policy changed such that
it has become so successful in taming inflation?
The answer provided in the following chapters is that monetary authorities and
governments in almost all countries of the world have come to accept the following ideas: 1)
there is no long-run tradeoff between output (employment) and inflation; 2) expectations are
critical to monetary policy outcomes; 3) inflation has high costs; 4) monetary policy is
subject to the time-inconsistency problem; 5) central bank independence improve the
efficacy of monetary policy; and 6) a strong nominal anchor is the key to producing good
monetary policy outcomes. But this list, which central bankers now subscribe to, is not
where monetary policymakers started. In the 1960s, central bankers had a very different
world view which produced very bad monetary policy outcomes.

1.
Central Banking in the 1960s
The 1960s began with a relatively benign inflation environment, particularly in the
United States where inflation was running at an annual rate of a little over one percent.
(Inflation rates were at higher rates in countries such as Germany, France, Japan, and the
United Kingdom but were still below 4% in 1960.) At the Federal Reserve and at many
other central banks, the focus was on “money market conditions”: on variables such as
nominal interest rates, bank borrowings from the central bank, and free reserves (excess
reserves minus borrowings).2 In addition, in the wake of the Great Depression of the 1930s,
the economics professions became dominated by Keynesians, the followers of John
Maynard Keynes, who viewed the Depression as directly resulting from policy inaction
-1-

when adverse shocks hit the economy. This led to an era of policy activism in which
economists armed with Keynesian macro econometric models argued that they could fine
tune the economy to produce maximum employment with only slight inflationary
consequences. This was the intellectual environment that I was exposed to when I first
started my study of economics as an undergraduate in 1969.
Particularly influential at the time was a famous paper published in 1960 by Paul
Samuelson and Robert Solow, both MIT professors, which argued that work by A.W.
Phillips, which became known as the Phillips curve, suggested that there was a long-run
tradeoff between unemployment and inflation and that this tradeoff should be exploited.3
Indeed, Samuelson and Solow even mentioned that a nonperfectionist goal of a 3%
unemployment rate could be attained at what they considered to be a low inflation rate of 4
to 5% per year. This thinking, not only by Samuelson and Solow, but also by the then
dominant Keynesian economists, led to increased monetary and fiscal policy activism to get
the economy to full employment. However, the subsequent economic record was not a
happy one: Inflation accelerated, with the inflation rate in the United States and other
industrialized countries eventually climbing above 10% in the 1970s, leading to what has
been dubbed “The Great Inflation”, while the unemployment rate deteriorated from the
performance in the 1950s.

No long-run tradeoff between output (employment) and inflation

The Monetarists, led by Milton Friedman, first mounted the counterattack to policy
activism. Milton Friedman, in a series of famous publications in 1963 established that
fluctuations in the growth rate of the money supply were far more capable of explaining
economic fluctuations and inflation than nominal interest rates.4 In Congressional
testimony, Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer criticized the use of “money market conditions”
to guide monetary policy and suggested that targeting monetary aggregates would produce
better policy outcomes.5

In his famous 1968 presidential address to the American

Economic Association, Milton Friedman along with Edmund Phelps argued that there was
no long-run tradeoff between unemployment and inflation rate: rather the economy would
-2-

gravitate to a natural rate of unemployment in the long run no matter what the rate of
inflation was.6 In other words, the long-run Phillips curve would be vertical, and attempts to
lower unemployment below the natural rate would only result in higher inflation. The
Monetarist counterattack implied that monetary policy should be focused on controlling
inflation and the best way to do this would be pursuing steady growth in the money supply.

2.
Central Banking in the 1970s
At first, the Monetarist counterattack was not successful in getting central banks to
increase their focus on controlling inflation and money supply growth. In the early 1970s,
estimates of the parameters of the Phillips curve did not yet suggest that in the long run the
Phillips curve was vertical. Economists and policymakers also were not as fully aware of
how important expectations are to monetary policy’s effect on the economy, a realization
which would have led them to accept the Friedman-Phelps natural rate hypothesis more
quickly. Also, estimates of the natural rate of unemployment were far too low, thus
suggesting that increases in inflation that were occurring at then prevalent unemployment
rates were the result of special factors and not overly expansionary monetary policy.7

The Rational Expectations Revolution

Starting in the early 1970s, in a series of papers Robert Lucas launched the rational
expectations revolution, which demonstrated that the public and the markets’ expectations of
policy actions have important effects on almost every sector of the economy. .8 The theory of
rational expectations made it immediately clear why there could be no long-run tradeoff
between unemployment and inflation, so that attempting to lower unemployment below the
natural rate would only lead to higher inflation and no improvement in performance in
output or employment. Indeed, one implication of rational expectations in a world of
flexible wages and prices was the policy ineffectiveness proposition which indicated that if
monetary policy was anticipated, it would have no real effect on output; only unanticipated
-3-

monetary policy could have a significant impact. An implication of the policy
ineffectiveness proposition was that a constant-money-growth-rate rule along the lines
suggested by Milton Friedman would do as well as any other deterministic policy rule with
feedback.9 The only result of all the policy activism advocated by Keynesian economists
would be higher and more variable rates of inflation. Although evidence for the policy
ineffectiveness proposition is weak,10 the rational expectation revolution’s point that
monetary policy’s impact on the economy is substantially influenced by expectations about
that policy has become widely accepted.

Recognition of the high costs of inflation and the benefits of price stability

Events on the ground were also leading to a rejection of policy activism. Inflation
began a steady rise in the 1960s and then in the aftermath of the 1973 oil price, energy
shock, inflation climbed to double digit levels in many countries. Economists, but also the
public and politicians, began to discuss the high costs of inflation.11 A high inflationary
environment leads to overinvestment in the financial sector which expands to profitably act
as a middleman to help individuals and businesses escape some of the costs of inflation.12
Inflation leads to uncertainty about relative inflation about relative prices and the future
price level, making it harder for firms and individuals to make appropriate decisions, thereby
decreasing economic efficiency.13 The interaction of the tax system and inflation also
increases distortions that adversely affect economic activity.14
The recognition of the high costs of inflation led to the view that low and stable
inflation can increase the level of resources productively employed in the economy, and
might even help increase the rate of economic growth. While time-series studies of
individual countries and cross-national comparisons of growth rates were not in total
agreement, the consensus grew that inflation is detrimental to economic growth, particularly
when inflation rates are high.15

-4-

The Role of a Nominal Anchor

The groundbreaking developments in economic theory coincided with the growing
recognition among economists, politicians and the public of the high costs of inflation. It also
made clear why a nominal anchor – a nominal variable that monetary policymakers use to
tie down the price level such as the inflation rate, an exchange rate or the money supply – is
such a crucial element to achieving price stability. Adhering to a nominal anchor that keeps
the nominal variable in a narrow range supports price stability by directly promoting low
and stable inflation expectations. With stable inflation expectations, markets do much of the
work for monetary policymakers: low and stable inflation expectations result in stabilizing
price and wage setting behavior that lowers both the level and volatility of inflation.16

The Advent of Monetary Targeting

The three related ideas that expansionary monetary policy cannot produce higher
output (employment) in the long run , that inflation is costly, and the advantages of a strong
nominal anchor, all combined to help generate support for the ideas espoused by monetarists
that central banks needed to control the growth rate of monetary aggregates. This led to the
adoption of monetary targeting by a number of industrialized countries in the mid-1970s
(see Chapter 8).
Monetary targeting involves three elements: 1) the reliance on information conveyed
by a monetary aggregate to conduct monetary policy, 2) the announcement of medium-term
targets for monetary aggregates, and 3) some accountability mechanism to preclude large an
systematic deviations from the monetary targets.

The Federal Reserve started to follow

weekly tracking paths for the monetary aggregate measures M1 and M2, while indicating its
preferred behavior for M2. Then in response to a Congressional resolution in 1975, the Fed
began to announce publicly its targets for money growth. In late 1973, the United Kingdom
began informal targeting of a broad monetary aggregate, sterling M3 and began formal
publication of targets in 1976. The Bank of Canada instituted monetary targeting in 1975
under a program of “monetary gradualism” in which M1 growth was to be controlled with a
-5-

gradually falling target range. In late 1974, both the Bundesbank and the Swiss National
Bank began to announce money stock targets: the Bundesbank chose to target central bank
money, a narrow aggregate which was the sum of currency in circulation and bank deposits
weighted by the 1974 required reserve ratios, and the Swiss National Bank targeted M1. In
1978, the Bank of Japan announced “forecasts” of growth rates of M2 (and after 1979, M2 +
certificate of deposits).

3.
Central Banking in the late 1970s and the 1980s:
The Failure of Monetary Targeting?
Monetary targeting had several potential advantages over previous approaches to the
conduct of monetary policy. Announced figures for monetary aggregates are typically
reported within a couple of weeks, and so monetary targets can send almost immediate
signals to both the public and markets about the stance of monetary policy and the intentions
of the policymakers to keep inflation in check. These signals can help fix inflation
expectations and produce less inflation. Another advantage of monetary targets is
promoting almost immediate accountability for monetary policy in order to keep inflation
low.
These advantages of monetary aggregate targeting depend on one key assumption:
there must be a strong and reliable relationship between the goal variable (inflation or
nominal income) and the targeted aggregate. If there are large swings in velocity, so that the
relationship between the monetary aggregate and the goal variable is weak as is found in
Chapter 6, then monetary aggregate targeting will not work. The weak relationship implies
that hitting the target will not produce the desired outcome on the goal variable and thus the
monetary aggregate will no longer provide an adequate signal about the central bank’s
policy stance. The breakdown of the relationship between monetary aggregates and goal
variables such as inflation and nominal income was common, not only in the United States,
but also even in Germany, which pursued monetary targeting for a much longer period
(Chapter 6).17 A similar instability problem in the money-inflation relationship has been
-6-

found in emerging market countries, such as those in Latin America (Chapter 14).
Why did monetary targeting in the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom
during the late 1970s and the 1980s not prove successful in controlling inflation? There are
two interpretations for why this was the case. One is that monetary targeting was not
pursued seriously, so it never had a chance to succeed (Chapters 8 and 10). The Federal
Reserve, Bank of Canada, and particularly the Bank of England, engaged in substantial
game playing in which they targeted multiple aggregates, allowed base drift (the initial
starting point for the monetary target was allowed to shift up and down with realizations of
the monetary aggregate) , did not announce targets on a regular schedule, used artificial
means to bring down the growth of a targeted aggregate, often overshot their targets without
reversing the overshoot later and often obscured the reasons why deviations from the
monetary targets occurred.
The second reason for monetary targeting’s lack of success in the late 1970s was the
increasing instability of the relationship between monetary aggregates and goal variables
such as inflation or nominal income meant that this strategy was doomed to failure. Indeed
monetary targeting was not pursued seriously because doing so would have been a mistake
because the relationship between monetary aggregates and inflation and nominal income
was breaking broken down. Once it became clear by the early 1980s that the moneyincome relationship was no longer strong, all three countries formally abandoned monetary
targeting. Or as a Gerald Bouey a former governors of the Bank of Canada, put it: "We
didn't abandon monetary aggregates, they abandoned us."
The problems that an unstable relationship between the money supply and inflation
create for monetary targeting is further illustrated by Switzerland unhappy 1989-1992
experience described in Chapter 8, during which the Swiss National Bank failed to maintain
price stability after it had successfully reduced inflation.18 The substantial overshoot of
inflation from 1989 to 1992, reaching levels above 5%, was due to two factors. The first
was that the Swiss franc’s strength from 1985 to 1987 caused the Swiss National Bank to
allow the monetary base (now its targeted aggregate) to grow at a rate greater than the 2%
target in 1987 and then caused it to raise the monetary base, growth target to 3% for 1988.
The second reason arose from the introduction of a new interbank payment system, Swiss
-7-

Interbank Clearing (SIC), and a wide-ranging revision of the commercial banks' liquidity
requirements in 1988. The resulting shocks to the exchange rate and the shift in the demand
for the monetary base arising from the above institutional changes created a serious problem
for its targeted aggregate. As 1988 unfolded, it became clear that the Swiss National Bank
had guessed wrong in predicting the effects of these shocks so that monetary policy was too
easy even though the monetary base target was undershot. The result was a subsequent rise
in inflation to above the 5% level. As a result of this experience, the Swiss National Bank
moved away from monetary targeting first by not specifying a horizon for its monetary base
target announced at the end of 1990 and then in effect moving to a five-year horizon for the
target afterwards, until it abandoned monetary targeting altogether in 1999.
The German experience with monetary targeting was generally successful, and
coupled with the success of the initial Swiss experience, help us understand why monetary
policy practice evolved toward inflation targeting. As argued by Jurgen von Hagen, the
Bundesbank’s adoption of monetary targeting in late 1974 arose from the decision making
and strategic problems that it faced at the time.19 Under the Bretton Woods regime, the
Bundesbank had lost the ability to control monetary policy and focusing on a monetary
aggregate was a way for the Bundesbank to reassert control over the conduct of monetary
policy. German inflation was also very high (at least by German standards) having reached
7% in 1974 and yet the economy was weakening. Adopting a monetary target was a way of
resisting political pressure and signaling to the public that the Bundesbank would keep a
check on monetary expansion. The Bundesbank also was concerned that pursuing price
stability and aiming at full employment and high output growth would lead to policy
activism that in turn would lead to inflationary monetary policy. Monetary targeting had the
additional advantage of indicating that the Bundesbank was responsible for controlling
inflation in a longer run context, but was not trying to fight temporary bursts of inflation,
particularly if these came from non-monetary sources.
The circumstances influencing the adoption of monetary targeting in Germany led to
several prominent design features that were key to its success. The first is that the monetary
targeting regimes were not bound by monetarist orthodoxy and were very far from a
Friedman-type monetary targeting rule in which a monetary aggregate was kept on a
-8-

constant-growth-rate path and is the primary focus of monetary policy.20 The Bundesbank
allowed growth outside of its target ranges for periods of two to three years, and overshoots
of its targets were subsequently reversed. Monetary targeting in Germany and in
Switzerland was instead primarily a method of communicating the strategy of monetary
policy that focused on long-run considerations and the control of inflation.
The calculation of monetary target ranges put great stress on making policy
transparent (clear, simple and understandable) and on regular communication with the
public. First and foremost, a numerical inflation goal was prominently featured in a very
public exercise of setting of target ranges. The Bundesbank's set targets using a quantity
theory equation to back out the monetary target growth rate using the numerical inflation
goal, estimated potential output growth and expected velocity trends. The use of estimated
potential output growth and not a desired path of actual output growth in setting the
monetary targets was an important feature of the strategy because it signaled that the
Bundesbank would not be focusing on short-run output objectives. Second, monetary
targeting, far from being a rigid policy rule, was quite flexible in practice. As we will see in
Chapter 8, the target ranges for money growth were missed about fifty percent of the time in
Germany, often because the Bundesbank did not completely ignore other objectives,
including output and exchange rates.21 Furthermore, the Bundesbank demonstrated
flexibility by allowing its inflation goal to vary over time and to converge to the long-run
inflation goal quite gradually.
When the Bundesbank first set its monetary targets at the end of 1974, it announced a
medium-term inflation goal of 4%, well above what it considered to be an appropriate longrun goal for inflation. It clarified that this medium-term inflation goal differed from the
long-run goal by labeling it the "unavoidable rate of price increase." Its gradualist approach
to reducing inflation led to a nine-year period before the medium-term inflation goal was
considered to be consistent with price stability. When this convergence occurred at the end
of 1984, the medium-term inflation goal was renamed the "normative rate of price increases"
and set at 2%, continuing at this level until it was changed to 1.5 to 2% in 1997. The
Bundesbank also responded to restrictions in the supply of energy or raw materials which
increased the price level by raising its medium-term inflation goal: specifically it raised the
-9-

unavoidable rate of price increase from 3.5% to 4% in the aftermath of the second oil price
shock in 1980.
The monetary targeting regimes in Germany and Switzerland demonstrated a strong
commitment to communicating the strategy to the general public. The money-growth
targets were continually used as a framework for explaining the monetary policy strategy:
the Bundesbank and the Swiss National Bank expended tremendous effort, both in their
publications and in frequent speeches by central bank officials, to communicate to the public
what the central bank was trying to achieve. Indeed, given that both central banks
frequently missed their money-growth targets by significant amounts, their monetarytargeting frameworks are best viewed as a mechanism for transparently communicating how
monetary policy was being directed to achieve inflation goals and as a means for increasing
the central bank’s accountability.
Many other countries envied the success of Germany’s monetary policy regime in
producing low inflation, which explains why it was chosen as the anchor country for the
Exchange Rate Mechanism. One clear indication of Germany's success occurred in the
aftermath of German reunification in 1990. Despite a temporary surge in inflation stemming
from the terms of reunification, high wage demands, and the fiscal expansion, the
Bundesbank was able to keep these temporary effects from becoming embedded in the
inflation process, and by 1995, inflation had fallen below the Bundesbank's normative
inflation goal of 2%.
The experience of Germany and Switzerland illustrate that much of the success of
their monetary policy regime’s success stemmed from their active use of the monetary
targeting strategy to clearly communicate a long-run strategy of inflation control. Both
central banks in these two countries used monetary targeting to clearly state the objectives of
monetary policy and to explain that policy actions remained focused on long-run price
stability when targets were missed. The active communication with the public by the
Bundesbank and the Swiss National Bank increased the transparency and accountability of
these central banks. In contrast, the game playing which was a feature of monetary targeting
in the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada hindered the communication process
so that transparency and accountability of the central banks in these countries was not
-10-

enhanced.
The German and Swiss maintained flexibility in their monetary targeting approach
and did not come even close to following a rigid rule. Despite a flexible approach to
monetary targeting which included tolerating target misses and gradual disinflation,
Germany and Switzerland demonstrated that flexibility is consistent with successful inflation
control. The key to success was seriousness about pursuing the long-run goal of price
stability and actively engaging public support for this task.
Despite the successes of monetary targeting in Switzerland and particularly Germany,
monetary targeting does have some serious drawbacks. The weak relationship between the
money supply and nominal income discussed in Chapter 6 implies that hitting a particular
monetary target will not produce the desired outcome for a goal variable such as inflation.
Furthermore, the monetary aggregate will no longer provide an adequate signal about the
stance of monetary policy. Thus, except under very unusual circumstances, monetary
targeting will not provide a good nominal anchor and help fix inflation expectations. In
addition, an unreliable relationship between monetary aggregates and goal variables makes it
more difficult for monetary targeting to serve as a communications device that increases the
transparency of monetary policy and makes the central bank accountable to the public.

4.
The Search for a Better Nominal Anchor:
The Birth of Inflation Targeting in the 1990s
The rational expectations revolution also led to a big breakthrough in our
understanding of monetary policy strategy and the importance of a nominal anchor with the
recognition of the time-inconsistency problem.

The Time-Inconsistency Problem

Papers by Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott, Guillermo Calvo, and Robert Barro and
David Gordon all dealt with the time-inconsistency problem, in which monetary policy
-11-

conducted on a discretionary, day-by-day basis leads to poor long-run outcomes.22 Their work
indicated that optimal monetary policy should not try to exploit the short-run tradeoff between
unemployment and inflation by pursuing overly expansionary policy because decisions about
wages and prices reflect expectations about policy made by workers and firms; when they see a
central bank pursuing expansionary policy, workers and firms will raise their expectations about
inflation, and push wages and prices up. The rise in wages and prices will lead to higher
inflation, but will not result in higher output on average. Monetary policymakers, however,
are tempted to pursue a discretionary monetary policy that is more expansionary than firms
or people expect because such a policy would boost economic output (or lower
unemployment) in the short-run. In other words, the monetary policymakers will find
themselves unable to consistently follow an optimal plan over time; the optimal plan is timeinconsistent and so will soon be abandoned.
Putting in place a strong nominal anchor can also help prevent the time-inconsistency
problem in monetary policy by providing an expected constraint on discretionary policy. A
strong nominal anchor can help ensure that the central bank will focus on the long run and resist
the temptation or the political pressures to pursue short-run expansionary policies that are
inconsistent with the long-run price stability goal.

Central Bank Independence

One undesirable feature of the time-inconsistency literature first addressed by
Bennett McCallum and elaborated upon in Chapter 2, is that the time-inconsistency problem
by itself does not imply that a central bank will pursue expansionary monetary policy that
leads to inflation.23 Simply by recognizing the problem that forward-looking expectations in
the wage- and price-setting process creates for a strategy of pursuing expansionary monetary
policy, monetary policymakers can decide to “just not do it” and avoid the timeinconsistency problem altogether. To avoid the time-inconsistency problem, the central
bank can make it clear to the public that it does not have an objective of raising output or
employment above what is consistent with stable inflation and will not try to surprise people
with an unexpectedly, discretionary, expansionary policy.24 Instead, it will commit to keeping
-12-

inflation under control.
Although central bankers are fully aware of the time-inconsistency problem, it
remains nonetheless because politicians are able to put pressure on central banks to pursue
overly expansionary monetary policy.25 Making central banks independent, however, can
help insulate them from political pressures to exploit short-run tradeoffs between
employment and inflation. Independence insulates the central bank from the myopia that is
frequently a feature of the political process arising from politicians' concerns about getting
elected in the near future and would thus lead to better policy outcomes. Evidence supports
the conjecture that macroeconomic performance is improved when central banks are more
independent. When central banks in industrialized countries are ranked from least legally
independent to most legally independent, the inflation performance is found to be the best
for countries with the most independent central banks.26 Both economic theory and the
better outcomes for countries that have more independent central banks has lead to a
remarkable trend toward increasing central bank independence. Before the 1990s very few
central banks were highly independent, most notably the Bundesbank, the Swiss National
Bank and to a somewhat lesser extent the Federal Reserve. Now almost all central banks in
advanced countries and many in emerging market countries have central banks with a level
of independence on par with or exceeding that of the Federal Reserve. In the 1990s, greater
independence was granted to central banks in such diverse countries as Japan, New Zealand,
South Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and those in the eurozone.

The Birth of Inflation Targeting

Putting in place a strong nominal anchor can help prevent the time-inconsistency problem
in monetary policy by providing an expected constraint on discretionary policy. A strong
nominal anchor can help ensure that the central bank will focus on the long run and resist the
temptation or the political pressures to pursue short-run expansionary policies that are
inconsistent with the long-run price stability goal. However, as we have seen, a monetary target
will have trouble serving as a strong nominal anchor when the relationship between money and
inflation is unstable. The disappointments with monetary targeting led to a search for a better
-13-

nominal anchor and resulted in the development of inflation targeting in the 1990s, which is
discussed in Chapters 9 to 16..
Inflation targeting evolved from monetary targeting by adopting its most successful
elements: an institutional commitment to price stability as the primary long-run goal of
monetary policy and to achieving the inflation rate goal; increased transparency through
communication with the public about the objectives of monetary policy and the plans for
policy actions to achieve these objectives; and increased accountability for the central bank
to achieve its inflation objectives. Inflation targeting, however, differs from monetary
targeting in two key dimensions: rather than announce a monetary aggregates target, this
strategy publicly announces a medium-term numerical target for inflation; and it makes use
of an information-inclusive strategy, with a reduced role for intermediate targets such as
money growth.
New Zealand was the first country to adopt inflation targeting. After bringing
inflation down from almost 17% in 1985 to the vicinity of 5% by 1989, the New Zealand
parliament passed a new Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act in 1989 that became effective
on February 1, 1990. Besides moving the central bank from being one of the least
independent to one of the most independent among the industrialized countries, the act also
committed the Reserve Bank to a sole objective of price stability. The act stipulated that the
Minister of Finance and the Governor of the Reserve Bank should negotiate and make public
a Policy Targets Agreement which sets out the criteria by which monetary policy
performance would be evaluated. These agreements have specified numerical target ranges
for inflation and the dates by which they were to be reached.
The first Policy Targets Agreement, signed by the Minister of Finance and the
Governor of the Reserve Bank on March 2, 1990, directed the Reserve Bank to achieve an
annual inflation rate of 3 to 5% by the end of 1990 with a gradual reduction in subsequent
years to a 0 to 2% range by 1992 (changed to 1993), which was kept until the end of 1996
when the range was changed to 0 to 3% and then to 1 to 3% in 2002.
New Zealand’s action was followed by Canada’s announcement of February 1991,
by Israel in January 1992, by the United Kingdom in October 1992, by Sweden in January
1993 and by Finland in February 1993. (Chile adopted a softer form of inflation targeting in
-14-

January 1991).27 Since its inception, more than twenty countries have adopted inflation
targeting, and new ones are added to the inflation targeting club every year.
Inflation targeting has superseded monetary targeting because of several advantages.
First, inflation targeting does not rely on a stable money-inflation relationship and so large
velocity shocks of the type discussed in Chapter 6, which distort this relationship, are largely
irrelevant to monetary policy performance.28 Second, the use of more information, and not
primarily one variable, to determine the best settings for policy, has the potential to produce
better policy settings. Third, an inflation target is readily understood by the public because
changes in prices are of immediate and direct concern, while monetary aggregates are farther
removed from peoples’ direct experience. Inflation targets are therefore better at increasing
the transparency of monetary policy because these make the central bank’s objectives
clearer. This does not mean that monetary targets could not serve as a useful
communication device and increase accountability to control inflation as they did in
Germany and Switzerland, but once the relationship between monetary aggregates and
inflation breaks down, as it has repeatedly (and especially in Switzerland), monetary targets
lose a substantial degree of transparency because the central bank now has to provide
complicated discussions of why it is appropriate to deviate from the monetary target.
Fourth, inflation targets increase central bank accountability because its performance can
now be measured against a clearly defined target. Monetary targets work less well in this
regard because of the unstable money-inflation relationship that makes it harder to impose
accountability on the central bank because the central bank will necessarily miss its
monetary targets frequently – the Bundesbank missed its target ranges over half of the time
and it was the most successful practitioner of this policy regime. Inflation targeting has
much better odds of successful execution..
A key feature of all inflation targeting regimes is the enormous stress put upon
transparency and communication. Inflation targeting central banks have frequent
communications with the government, some mandated by law and some in response to
informal inquiries, and their officials take every opportunity to make public speeches on
their monetary policy strategy. Communication of this type also has been prominent among
central banks that have not adopted inflation targeting, including monetary targeters such as
-15-

the Bundesbank and Switzerland, as well as non-targeters such as the Federal Reserve. Yet
inflation-targeting central banks have taken public outreach a number of steps further: not
only have they engaged in extended public information campaigns, even engaging in the
distribution of glossy brochures, but they have engaged in publishing a type of document
known by its generic name Inflation Reports after the original document published by the
Bank of England.
The publication of Inflation Reports is particularly noteworthy because these
documents depart from the usual, dull-looking, formal central bank reports and incorporate
the best elements of college textbook writing (using fancy graphics and boxes) in order to
better communicate with the public. Inflation Reports are far more user-friendly than
previous central bank documents and clearly explain the goals and limitations of monetary
policy, including the rationale for inflation targets: the numerical values of the inflation
targets and how these were determined; how the inflation targets are to be achieved, given
current economic conditions; and the reasons for any deviations from targets. Almost all
Inflation Reports also provide inflation forecasts, while the majority provide output forecasts,
and some provide a projection of the policy path for interest rates (see Table 1 in Chapter 5).
These communication efforts have improved private-sector planning by reducing uncertainty
about monetary policy, interest rates and inflation; these reports have promoted public
debate of monetary policy, in part by educating the public about what a central bank can and
cannot achieve; and these have helped clarify the responsibilities of the central bank and of
politicians in the conduct of monetary policy.
Because an explicit numerical inflation target increases the central bank’s
accountability in controlling inflation, inflation targeting also helps reduce the likelihood
that a central bank will suffer from the time-inconsistency problem in which it reneges on
the optimal plan and instead tries to expand output and employment by pursuing overly
expansionary monetary policy. But since time-inconsistency is more likely to come from
political pressures on the central bank to engage in overly expansionary monetary policy, a
key advantage of inflation targeting is that it is better able to focus the political debate on
what a central bank can do best in the long-run – control inflation – rather than what it
cannot do: raise economic growth and the number of jobs permanently through
-16-

expansionary monetary policy. (A remarkable example of raising the level of public discussion,
as recounted in Chapter 10, occurred in Canada in 1996, when a public debate ensued over a
speech by the president of the Canadian Economic Association criticizing the Bank of Canada.)29
Thus inflation targeting appears to reduce political pressures on the central bank to pursue
inflationary monetary policy and thereby reduces the likelihood of time-inconsistent
policymaking.
Although inflation targeting has the ability to limit the time-inconsistency problem, it
does not do this by adopting a rigid rule, and thus has much in common with the flexibility
of earlier monetary targeting regimes. Inflation targeting has “rule-like” features in that it
involves forward-looking behavior that limits policymakers from systematically engaging in
policies with undesirable long-run consequences. But rather than using a rigid rule, it
employs what Ben Bernanke and I dubbed “constrained discretion” in Chapter 9. Inflation
targeting, allows for some flexibility but constrains policymakers from pursuing overly
expansionary (or contractionary) monetary policy.
Inflation targeting also does not ignore traditional output stabilization, but instead
puts it into a longer run context, placing it outside the shorter-run business cycle concerns
that characterized monetary policy throughout the 1960s and 1970s. Inflation targeting
regimes allow for the flexibility to deal with supply shocks and have allowed the target to be
reduced gradually to the long-run inflation goal when inflation is initially far from this goal
(also a feature of monetary targeters such as Germany) . As Lars Svensson had shown, a
gradual movement of the inflation target toward the long-run, price-stability goal indicates
that output fluctuations are a concern (in the objective function) of monetary policy.30 In
addition, inflation targeters have emphasized that the floor of the range should be as binding
a commitment as the ceiling, indicating that they care about output fluctuations as well as
inflation. Inflation targeting is therefore better described as “flexible inflation targeting”.
The above discussion suggests that although inflation targeting has evolved from
earlier monetary policy strategies, it does represent true progress. But how has inflation
targeting fared? Has it actually led to better economic performance?

-17-

Has inflation targeting made a difference?
The simple answer to this question is generally yes, with some qualifications.31 This
conclusion is derived from the following four results:32

•

Inflation levels (and volatility), as well as interest rates, have declined after
countries adopted inflation targeting.

•

Output volatility has not worsened, and if anything improved, after adoption of
inflation targeting.

•

Exchange rate pass-through seems to be attenuated by adoption of inflation
targeting.33

•

The fall in inflation levels and volatility, interest rates and output volatility is part
of a worldwide trend in the 1990s, and inflation targeters have not done better in
terms of these variables or in terms of exchange rate pass-through than noninflation targeting industrialized countries such as the United States or
Germany.34

The fact that inflation targeting countries see improvement in inflation and output
performance but do not do better than countries like the United States and Germany also
suggests that what is really important to successful monetary policy is the establishment of a
strong nominal anchor.35 As will be pointed out in Chapter 8 and Chapter 10,36 Germany was
able to create a strong nominal anchor with its monetary targeting procedure. In the United
States the strong nominal anchor has been in the person of Alan Greenspan (Chapter 2).
Although inflation targeting is one way to establish a strong nominal anchor, it is not the only
way. It is not at all clear that inflation targeting would have improved performance in the United
States during the Greenspan era, although it well might do so after Greenspan is gone (Chapter
11). Furthermore, as is emphasized in Chapters 13 and 18, by itself, an inflation target is not
capable of establishing a strong nominal anchor if the government pursues irresponsible fiscal
policy or inadequate prudential supervision of the financial system, which might then be prone to
financial blow ups.37
There is, however, empirical evidence on inflation expectations that is more telling about
-18-

the possible benefits of inflation targeting. Recent research has found the following additional
results:

•

Evidence is not strong that the adoption of inflation targeting leads to an
immediate fall in inflation expectations.38

•

Inflation persistence, however, is lower for countries that have adopted inflation
targeting than for countries that have not.

•

Inflation expectations appear to be more anchored for inflation targeters than nontargeters: that is, inflation expectations react less to shocks to actual inflation for
targeters than non-targeters, particularly at longer horizons.39

These results suggest that once inflation targeting has been in place for a while, it does
make a difference because it better anchors medium- and longer-term inflation expectations and
thus strengthens the nominal anchor. Since, as argued earlier, establishing a strong nominal
anchor is a crucial element in successful monetary policy,40 the evidence on inflation
expectations provides a stronger case that inflation targeting has represented real progress.
The benefits of inflation targeting suggest that it might be an attractive option for the the
Federal Reserve and this topic is taken up in Chapter 11.

5.
An Alternative Nominal Anchor: Exchange Rate Pegging
Pegging the value of the domestic currency to that of a large, low-inflation country is
another potential nominal anchor for monetary policy and this monetary policy regime has a
long history. Exchange-rate pegging has several advantages. It directly contributes to keeping
inflation under control by tying the inflation rate for internationally traded goods to that found in
the anchor country. It anchors inflation expectations to the inflation rate in the anchor country as
long as the exchange rate peg is credible. With a strong commitment mechanism, it provides an
automatic rule for the conduct of monetary policy that mitigates the time-inconsistency problem:
-19-

it forces a tightening of monetary policy when there is a tendency for the currency to depreciate
or a loosening of policy when there is a tendency to appreciate.
Given its advantages, it is not surprising that exchange rate pegging has been used to
lower inflation both in advanced economies (Chapter 10) and in emerging market countries
(Chapters 13 and 14). There are, however, several serious problems with this strategy pointed
out in these chapters. With capital mobility the targeting country can no longer pursue its own
independent monetary policy and use it to respond to domestic shocks that are independent of
those hitting the anchor country. Furthermore, an exchange-rate peg means that shocks to the
anchor country are directly transmitted to the targeting country, because changes in interest rates
in the anchor country lead to a corresponding change in interest rates in the targeting country.
A second disadvantage of an exchange-rate peg is that it can weaken the accountability of
policymakers, particularly in emerging market countries. Because exchange-rate pegging fixes
the exchange rate, it eliminates an important signal that can help limit the time-inconsistency
problem by constraining monetary policy from becoming too expansionary. In industrialized
countries, particularly in the United States, the bond market provides an important signal about
the stance of monetary policy. Overly expansionary monetary policy or strong political pressure
to engage in overly expansionary monetary policy produces an inflation scare in which inflation
expectations surge, interest rates rise, and there is a sharp decline in long-term bond prices.
Because both central banks and politicians want to avoid this kind of scenario, overly
expansionary policy will be less likely.
In many countries, particularly emerging market countries, the long-term bond market is
essentially nonexistent. Under a floating exchange rate regime, however, if monetary policy is
too expansionary, the exchange rate will depreciate. In these countries the daily fluctuations of
the exchange rate can, like the bond market in the United States, provide an early warning signal
that monetary policy is too expansionary. Just as the fear of a visible inflation scare in the bond
market constrains central bankers from pursuing overly expansionary monetary policy and
constrains politicians from putting pressure on the central bank to engage in overly expansionary
monetary policy, fear of exchange-rate depreciations can make overly expansionary monetary
policy less likely.
The benefits from signals from the foreign exchange market may be even more greater in
-20-

emerging market countries because the balance sheet and actions of their central banks are not as
transparent as they are in industrialized countries. Pegging the exchange rate to another currency
can make it even harder to ascertain the central bank’s policy actions. The public is less able to
keep watch on the central bank and the politicians pressuring it, which makes it easier for
monetary policy to become too expansionary.
A third, and probably the most severe, problem is that an exchange-rate peg leaves
countries open to speculative attacks on their currencies and if these attacks are successful, the
collapse of the domestic currency is usually much larger, more rapid and more unanticipated
than when a depreciation occurs under a floating exchange-rate regime. A pegged regime is
especially dangerous for an emerging market economy because they have so much of their
debt denominated in foreign currencies, a phenomenon called liability dollarization.
Emerging market countries with pegged exchange rates are thus especially vulnerable to
twin crises, in which the currency collapse destroys firms’ and households’ balance sheets,
which in turn provokes a financial crisis and a sharp economic contraction. Emerging
market countries exiting from pegged exchange rate regimes are more prone to higher-cost
financial crises and large declines in output the longer the exchange rate peg has been in place.41
As Chapter 17 points out, the dangers of pegged exchange rate regimes for emerging
market countries are so quite clear. However, in emerging market countries whose political
and monetary institutions are particularly weak and who therefore have a history of
continual bouts of very high inflation, fixing the exchange rate relative to a sound currency
may be the only way to break inflationary psychology and stabilize the economy. In
addition, a pegged exchange rate may encourage integration of the domestic economy with
its neighbors, which may be an important goal in its own right. These considerations have
led some economists to suggest that there are times when a strong commitment to a fixed
exchange rate (either through a currency board or through full dollarization in which the
country abandons its currency and adopts a foreign currency like the dollar as its money)
might be necessary.42
However, as is argued in Chapter 18, the choice of exchange rate regime, whether a
fixed or flexible one, is likely to be of secondary importance to the development of good
financial, fiscal, and monetary institutions in producing successful monetary policy in
-21-

emerging market countries.

6.
Where is Monetary Policy Strategy Heading?
Just as inflation targeting evolved from earlier monetary policy strategies, monetary
policy strategy will continue to evolve over time. There are four major issues under active
debate regarding where monetary policy strategy might head in the future.

Inflation versus price level targeting?

Currently all inflation targeting countries target an inflation rate rather than the price
level. The traditional view, forcefully articulated by Stanley Fischer, argues that a price-level
target might produce more output variability than an inflation target because unanticipated
shocks to the price level are not treated as bygones and must be offset.43 Specifically, a pricelevel target requires that an over-shoot of the target must be reversed, and this might require
quite contractionary monetary policy which, with sticky prices, could lead to a sharp downturn in
the real economy in the short run. Indeed, if the over-shoot is large enough, returning to the
target might require a deflation, which could promote financial instability and be quite harmful.
On the other hand, in theoretical models with a high degree of forward-looking behavior,
a price-level target produces less output variance than an inflation target.44 (A price-level target
was used successfully in Sweden in the 1930s.)45 Empirical evidence, however, does not clearly
support forward-looking expectations formation, and models with forward-looking behavior
have counter-intuitive properties that seem to be inconsistent with inflation dynamics.46 Thus the
jury is still out on whether it would be better for the monetary policy regime to move from
inflation targeting to price level targeting. Indeed, in the future central banks might experiment
with hybrid policies , which combine features of an inflation and a price-level target by
announcing a commitment to some error correction in which target misses will be offset to
some extent in the future.47 Evaluating these hybrid policies will likely be a major focus of
future research, but as is discussed in Chapter 19, the reasoning here indicates if monetary
-22-

policy responds to persistent undershoots or overshoots of the inflation target, it is likely to
result in better performance for output and inflation.

How far should central bank transparency go?

Inflation-targeting central banks have also been moving to greater and greater
transparency over time by publishing their forecasts. The central banks in New Zealand,
Colombia, and most recently Norway have been announcing projections of their policy path
for future interest rates. Publication of forecasts and policy projections can help the public
and the markets understand central bank actions, thus decreasing uncertainty and making it
easier for the public and markets to assess whether the central bank is serious about
achieving its inflation goal.
Lars Svensson argues that not only should central banks announce their projections
of the future policy path, but also announce their objective function (the relative weights
they put on output versus inflation fluctuations in their loss function).48 I, however, argue in
Chapter 5 that central bank transparency can go too far if it complicates communication with
the public. Announcing a policy path may confuse the public if it does not sufficiently
convey that the path is conditional on events in the economy. The public may then see a
deviation from this path as a central bank failure, and the central bank would then be
vulnerable to attacks that it is flip flopping which could undermine the support for its
independence and focus on price stability. This objection does not mean that providing
information about the future policy path in some form has no value. It does mean that there
are nuances as to how this could be done. Providing information about the future policy
path in more general terms or in terms of fan charts that emphasize the uncertainty about the
future policy path might achieve most of the benefits of increased disclosure and still make
clear how conditional the policy path is on future events.49 Central banks pursuing inflation
targeting are likely to experiment further with different approaches to providing more
information about future policy, and I discuss possible alternatives in Chapter 19.
Clearly, central banks care not only about reducing the volatility of inflation, but also
want to lowering output (employment) fluctuations. In Chapter 4 I argue that monetary
-23-

policy that targets inflation, but does it in a flexible manner, is the best way to produce better
outcomes for both output and inflation fluctuations. Indeed, central bankers do care about
stabilizing output and employment as evinced by their actions: they are, however, very
reluctant to talk about it because they are worried that it will lead to political pressure for
them to pursue overly expansionary policy that will lead to inflation. The reluctance to
discuss stabilization goals is what I refer to in Chapter 5 as the “dirty little secret” of central
banking. I argue there although central banks can increase transparency by indicating that
they do want to stabilize output and employment fluctuations, publishing an output
(potential GDP) or unemployment target is problematic. As is illustrated by Chapter 7, the
appropriate level of output or unemployment targets is very hard to measure, and shooting
for these targets is likely to lead to poor policy outcomes. How central banks can
communicate their concerns about output fluctuations is discussed further in Chapter 19.

How should monetary policy authorities respond to asset prices?

A final issue confronting central banks is how they should respond to movements in
asset prices and I discuss this issue in Chapter 3 and in Chapter 19. Standard central
banking practice accepts that monetary policy should react to asset prices when changes in
these prices provide useful information about future inflation and the path of the economy.
The tougher issue is whether central banks should react to asset prices over and above their
effects on future inflation. Bubbles in asset prices, when they collapse, can lead to financial
instability and as a result some researchers have argued that monetary policy should act to
limit asset price bubbles to preserve financial stability.50 To do this successfully, the
monetary authorities would need to know when a bubble exists, yet is unlikely to think that
government officials, even central bankers, know better what are appropriate asset prices
than do private markets.51 Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler find that an inflation targeting
approach which does not focus on asset prices over and above their effect on the economy,
but does make use of an information-inclusive strategy in setting policy instruments, does
have the ability to make asset prices bubbles less likely, thereby promoting financial
stability.52 With the recent sharp run up of housing prices in many countries and the
-24-

possibility of bubbles, central banks concerns about asset price movements and what to do
about them are unlikely to abate.

How should the monetary policy react to exchange rates in an inflation targeting regime?

Even if a central bank is targeting inflation, fluctuations in the exchange rate, which
of course is another important asset price, are also a major concern to inflation-targeting
central banks, particularly in emerging market countries because, as we have seen, sharp
depreciations can trigger a financial crisis.53 Inflation-targeting central banks therefore
cannot afford to pursue a policy of benign neglect to exchange rates, as is emphasized in
Chapter 13.54 They may have to smooth “excessive” exchange rate fluctuations, but how
they should do this is still an open question. Indeed, there is a danger that focusing on
exchange rate movements might transform the exchange rate into a nominal anchor that
interferes with achieving the inflation rate target. (This indeed happened in Hungary as is
pointed out in Chapter 15.)55 In addition, when inflation targeters have focused on exchange
rate movements, they have often made serious errors.56 Dealing with exchange rate
fluctuations is one of the most serious challenges for inflation targeting regimes in emerging
market countries.

7.
Conclusion
The practice of central banking has made tremendous strides in recent years. We are
currently in a highly desirable environment that few would have predicted fifteen years ago:
not only is inflation low, but its variability and the volatility of output fluctuations are also
low. This book argues that new thinking about monetary policy strategy is one of the key
reasons for this success. If we learn from historical experience, perhaps we can replicate
and refine what does work, and not repeat past mistakes.

-25-

APPENDIX
TABLE OF CONTENTS
MONETARY POLICY STRATEGY
(MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, forthcoming)
Preface

Chapter 1:

How Did We Get Here?

PART I:
FUNDAMENTAL ISSUES IN THE CONDUCT OF MONETARY POLICY

Introduction to Part I

Chapter 2:

What Should Central Banks Do?

Chapter 3:

The Transmission Mechanism and the Role of Asset Prices in Monetary Policy

Chapter 4:

The Role of Output Stabilization in the Conduct of Monetary Policy

Chapter 5:

Can Central Bank Transparency Go Too Far?

Chapter 6:

Is There a Role for Monetary Aggregates in the Conduct of Monetary Policy?

Chapter 7:

Rethinking the Role of NAIRU in Monetary Policy: Implications of Model
Formulation and Uncertainty

PART II:

-26-

MONETARY POLICY STRATEGY IN ADVANCED ECONOMIES

Introduction to Part II

Chapter 8:

Central Bank Behavior and the Strategy of Monetary Policy: Observations
from Six Industrialized Countries

Chapter 9:

Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy?

Chapter 10:

International Experiences with Different Monetary Policy Regimes

Chapter 11:

Why the Fed Should Adopt Inflation Targeting

PART III:
MONETARY POLICY STRATEGY IN EMERGING MARKET
AND TRANSITION ECONOMIES
Introduction to Part III

Chapter 12:

Inflation Targeting in Emerging Market Countries

Chapter 13:

Monetary Policy Strategies for Latin America

Chapter 14:

Monetary Policy Strategies for Emerging Market Countries: Lessons from Latin
America

-27-

Chapter 15:

Inflation Targeting in Transition Countries: Experience and Prospects

Chapter 16:

One Decade of Inflation Targeting in the World: What Do We Know and What
Do We Need to Know?

Chapter 17

The Dangers of Exchange Rate Pegging in Emerging-Market Countries

Chapter 18:

The Mirage of Exchange Rate Regimes for Emerging Market Countries

PART IV:
WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?

Introduction to Part IV

Chapter 19:

Everything You Wanted to Know About Monetary Policy Strategy, But Were
Afraid to Ask

-28-

REFERENCES
Alesina, Alberto, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1993. "Central Bank Independence and
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence." Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking 25, no. 2 (May): 151-62.

Aizenman, Joshua and Reuven Glick (2005) “Pegged Exchange Rate Regimes – A Trap?”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11652 (September 2005)

Andersen, Palle, and David Gruen. 1995. “Macroeconomic Policies and Growth.” In Palle
Andersen, Jacqueline Dwyer, and David Gruen, eds., Productivity and Growth, 279-319.
Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia.

Ball, Laurence and Naihm Sheridan (2005). “Does Inflation Targeting Matter?” in Ben S.
Bernanke and Michael Woodford, eds. The Inflation Targeting Debate (University of Chicago
Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research: Chicago, 2005):249-276.

Barro, Robert J., and David Gordon (1983). "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a
Natural Rate Model." Journal of Political Economy 91, no. 4 (August): 589-610.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler (1999), “Monetary Policy and Asset Volatility,” Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review Fourth Quarter 84 (4): 17-52.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler (2001), “Should Central Banks Respond to Movements
in Asset Prices?” American Economic Review 91 (2) (May): 253-57.

Bernanke, Ben S., Laubach, Thomas, Mishkin, Frederic S. and Adam S. Posen (1999).
Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience, (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press).

-29-

Bernanke, Ben S., and Ilian Mihov (1997). "What Does the Bundesbank Target?" European
Economic Review 41, no. 6 (June): 1025-53.

Black, Richard, Macklem and David Rose, 1998. "On Policy Rules for Price Stability," Price
Stability, Inflation Targets and Monetary Policy, Proceedings of a Conference held by Bank of
Canada, May 1997, Ottawa, Canada:411-61.

Borio, Claudio E.V. and Philip W. Lowe (2002), “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary
Stability: Exploring the Nexus,” BIS Working Paper No. 114 (July)

Briault, Clive. 1995. "The Costs of Inflation." Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 35
February): 33-45.

Brunner, Karl and Alan Meltzer (1964a), “Some General Features of the Federal Reserve’s
Approach to Policy,” U.S. Congress, Committee on Banking and Currency, Subcommittee
on Domestic Finance, 88th Congress, 2nd session.

Brunner, Karl and Alan Meltzer (1964b), “An Alternative Approach to the Monetary
Mechanism,” U.S. Congress, Committee on Banking and Currency, Subcommittee on
Domestic Finance, 88th Congress, 2nd session.

Brunner, Karl and Alan Meltzer (1964c), “The Federal Reserve’s Attachment to Free
Reserves,” U.S. Congress, Committee on Banking and Currency, Subcommittee on
Domestic Finance, 88th Congress, 2nd session.

Calvo, Guillermo (1978). "On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in the Monetary
Economy." Econometrica 46, no. 6 (November): 1411-28.

Calvo, Guillermo, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2003). "The Mirage of Exchange Rate Regimes
-30-

for Emerging Market Countries," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 17, No. 4 (Fall
2003): 99-118.

Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart (2000) “Fixing for Your Life,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 8006 (2000)

Castelnuovo, Efrem., Sergio Nicoletti-Altimari, and Diego Rodriguez Palenzuela (2003).
“Definition of Price Stability, Range and Point Targets: The Anchoring of Long-Term
Inflation Expectations,” in Otmar Issing, ed., Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of
Its Monetary Policy Strategy (European Central Bank: Frankfurt-am-Main, Germany 2003):
43-90.

Cecchetti, Stephen, Genberg, Hans, Lipsky, John and Sushil Wadhwani (2000) Asset Prices
and Central Bank Policy (Geneva: International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies).

Clarinda, Richard, and Mark Gertler (1997). "How the Bundesbank Conducts Monetary
Policy." In Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and
Strategy, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press): 363-406..

Corbo, Vittorio, Oscar Landerretche, and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (2002) “Does Inflation
Targeting Make a Difference?” in Norman Loayza and Raimundo Soto, eds., Inflation
Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges (Central Bank of Chile: Santiago): 221-269.

Cukierman, Alex. 1992. Central Bank Strategy, Credibility, and Independence: Theory and
Evidence. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Dittmar, Robert and William Gavin (2000), “What Do New-Keynesian Phillips Curves Imply for
Price-Level Targeting?” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, vol. 82, no. 2, March-April:
21-30.

-31-

Ditmar, Robert, Gavin, William T. and Finn E. Kydland. (1999), "The Inflation-Output
Variability Tradeoff and Price Level Targets," Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis: 2331.

Eggertsson, G.B. and M. Woodford. (2003). “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal
Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 139-211.

Eichengreen, Barry (1999) “Kicking the Habit: Moving from Pegged Exchange Rates to Greater
Exchange Rate Flexibility,” Economic Journal (March), pp. C1-C14

Eichengreen, Barry and Paul Masson (1998) “Exit Strategies: Policy Options for Countries
Seeking Greater Exchange Rate Flexibility,” Occasional Paper No. 98/168 (International
Monetary Fund: Wash. D.C.)

English, William B. 1996. "Inflation and Financial Sector Size." Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series, no. 96-16, April.

Estrella, Arturo and Jeffrey Fuhrer (1998), “Dynamic Inconsistencies: Counterfactual
Implications of a Class of Rational Expectations Models,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Working Paper: 98/05, July 1998

Estrella, A. and F.S. Mishkin (1997) Is There a Role for Monetary Aggregates in the
Conduct of Monetary Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 40:2, (October): 279-304.

Feldstein, Martin (1997), “Price Stability,” in Achieving Price Stability (Kansas City: Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City).

Fischer, Stanley (1993) “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 32: 485-512.

-32-

Fischer, Stanley. (1994). "Modern Central Banking," in Forest Capie, Charles Goodhart,
Stanley Fischer and Norbert Schnadt, The Future of Central Banking, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, U.K.: 262-308.

Friedman, Benjamin M. and Kenneth N. Kuttner. 1993. “Another Look at the Evidence on
Money-Income Causality.” Journal of Econometrics 57: 189-203.

Friedman, Milton (1968) “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, 58,
(March): 1-17.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz (1963a) A Monetary History of the United States,
1867-1960 (Princeton N.J: Princeton University Press).

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz (1963a) “Money and Business Cycles,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 45, Supplement: 32-64.

Friedman, Milton and David Meiselman, “The Relative Stability of Monetary Velocity and
the Investment Multiplier,” in Commission on Money and Credit, editor, Stabilization
Policies (Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall): 165-268.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. (1997), “The (Un)Importance of Forward-Looking Behavior in Price
Specifications,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 29, no. 3, August 1997, pp.
338-50.

Gertler, Mark (2005), “Comment on Ball, Laurence and Niamh Sheridan, ‘Does Inflation
Targeting Matter?’” in Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford, eds. The Inflation Targeting
Debate (University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research: Chicago,
2005): 276- 281.

-33-

Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert G. King (1997) “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the
Role of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, pp. 231-283.

Hu, Yifan (2003). “Empirical Investigations of Inflation Targeting,” Institute for International
Economics, Working Paper No. 03-6 (July).

Hyvonen, M. (2004). “Inflation Convergence Across Countries,” Reserve Bank of Australia
Discussion Paper 2004-04.

Issing, Otmar (1996). “Is Monetary Targeting in Germany Still Adequate?” In Horst
Siebert, ed., Monetary Policy in an Integrated World Economy: Symposium 1995, (Tübingen:
Mohr).

Johnson, David R. (2002). “The Effect of Inflation Targeting on the Behavior of Expected
Inflation: Evidence from an 11 Country Panel,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49, no. 8
(November): 1493-1519.

Johnson, David R. (2003). “The Effect of Inflation Targets on the Level of Expected Inflation in
Five Countries,” Review of Economics and Statistics vol. 55, no. 4 (November): 1076-81.

Jonas, Jiri and Frederic S. Mishkin, "Inflation Targeting in Transition Countries: Experience
and Prospects," in Michael Woodford, ed., Inflation Targeting (University of Chicago Press:
Chicago, 2005) pp. 353-413.

King, Mervyn, 1999, "Challenges for Monetary Policy: New and Old," in New Challenges
for Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri:11-57.

Kydland, Finn, and Edward Prescott (1977). "Rules Rather than Discretion: The
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans." Journal of Political Economy 85, no. 3 (June): 473-92.

-34-

Levin, Andrew, Natalucci, Fabio M. And Jeremy M. Piger. 2004. “The Macroeconomic Effects
of Inflation Targeting,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, forthcoming.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr (1972) Expectations and the Neutrality of Money. Journal of Economic
Theory 4: 103-24.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr (1973) Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs.
American Economic Review 63: 326-34.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr (1976) Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique. in The Phillips
Curve and Labor Markets, Brunner K and Meltzer A eds. Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 1: 19-46.

Mayer, Thomas (1998), Monetary Policy and the Great Inflation in the United States: The
Federal Reserve and the Failure of Macroeconomic Policy, 1965-1979, (Cheltenham, U.K.:
Edward Elgar)

McCallum, Bennett T. (1995) “Two Fallacies Concerning Central-Bank Independence.”
American Economic Review 85, no. 2 (May): 207-11.

McKinnon, Ronald, and Gunther Schnabl (2004) “The East Asian Dollar Standard, Fear of
Floating and Original Sin,” Review of Development Economics, vol 8, no. 3 (2004), pp. 331360.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1982a) "Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Matter? An Econometric
Investigation," Journal of Political Economy 90 (February 1982): 21-51.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1982b) “Does Anticipated Aggregate Demand Policy Matter? Further
Econometric Results," American Economic Review 72 (September 1982): 788-802.

-35-

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1983) A Rational Expectations Approach to Macroeconometrics: Testing
Policy Ineffectiveness and Efficient Markets Models, (University of Chicago Press for The
National Bureau of Economic Research: Chicago).

Mishkin, Frederic S., (1996). "Understanding Financial Crises: A Developing Country
Perspective," in Michael Bruno and Boris Pleskovic, eds., Annual World Bank Conference on
Development Economics, World Bank, Washington D.C.: 29-62.

Mishkin, Frederic S., (1999). "Lessons from the Asian Crisis," Journal of International
Money and Finance, 18, 4: 709-723.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (2000b). "Inflation Targeting in Emerging Market Countries,"
American Economic Review, May, 90, #2: 105-109.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (2001) "Issues in Inflation Targeting," in Price Stability and the LongRun Target for Monetary Policy, (Bank of Canada: Ottawa, Canada): 203-222.

Mishkin, Frederic S. and Adam Posen (1997). "Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four
Countries," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, 3 (August): 9-110.

Mishkin, Frederic S. and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (2005), “Does Inflation Targeting Make a
Difference,” in Mishkin, Frederic S. and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, editors, Monetary Policy
Under Inflation Targeting (Santiago, Chile: Central Bank of Chile, forthcoming.)

Mishkin, Frederic S. and Niklas Westelius (2005), “Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal
Inflation Contracts,” Columbia University mimeo (November).

Muth, John F. (1960) “Optimal Properties of Exponentially Weighted Forecasts,” Journal
of the American Statistical Association 55: 299-306.

-36-

Muth, John F (1961) “Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements,”
Econometrica 29: 315-35.

Neumann, Manfred J.M., and Jurgen von Hagen (1993). "Germany." In M. Fratianni and D.
Salvatore, eds., Handbook of Monetary Policy in Industrialized Countries. (Westport, Conn.:
Greenwood).

Neumann, Manfred J.M. and Jurgen von Hagen (2002). “Does Inflation Targeting Matter,”
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review (July/August): 127-148.

Phelps, Edmund (1967), “Phillips Curves, Expectations and Optimal Unemployment Over
Time,” Economica, 34 (August): 254-81.

Phillips, A.W. (1958), “The Relationship Between Unemployment and the Rate of Change
of Money Wages in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957,” Economica vol. 25 (1958): 283-99.

Rich, Georg (1997). “Monetary Targets as a Policy Rule: Lessons from the Swiss
Experience.” Journal of Monetary Economics 39, no. 1 (June): 113-41.

Roger, Scott and Mark Stone (2005). “On Target? Inflation Performance in Inflation Targeting
Countries,” IMF Working Paper No. Xxx (February)

Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer (2002), “The Evolution of Economic
Understanding and Postwar Stabilization Policy,” in Rethinking Stabilization Policy (Kansas
City, Mo.: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: ): 11-78.

Samuelson, Paul and Robert M. Solow, “Analytic Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy,”
American Economic Review, vol. 50 (May 1960): 368-79.

-37-

Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace (1975) “Rational Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
Instrument and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,” Journal of Political Economy 83: 241-54.

Sabban, Veronica Cohen, Rozado, Martin Gonzalez Rozada, and Andrew Powell (2003), “A
New Test for the Success of Inflation Targeting,” Universidad Torcuato Di Tella mimeo.,
January 2003.

Sims, Christopher (2005) “Limits to Inflation Targeting,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Michael
Woodford, eds. The Inflation Targeting Debate (University of Chicago Press for the National
Bureau of Economic Research: Chicago, 2005): 283-308.

Svensson, Lars.E.O., 1997. "Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring
Inflation Targets," European Economic Review, 41: 1111-1146.

Svensson, Lars, E.O, 1999. "Price-Level Targeting Versus Inflation Targeting: A Free
Lunch," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 31: 277-95.

Svensson, Lars E.O., 2002, “Monetary Policy and Real Stabilization,” in Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, Rethinking Stabilization Policy: 261-312.

Svensson, L.O. and Michael Woodford (2003), “Optimal Policy with Partial Information in
a Forward-Looking Model: Certainty-Equivalence Redux,” NBER Working Paper 9430

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson (1989). “Interpreting the Evidence on MoneyIncome Causality.” Journal of Econometrics 40: 161-182.

Truman, Edward M. (2003) Inflation Targeting in the World Economy (Institute for International
Economics: Washington, D.C.)

-38-

Vestin, David, 2000. "Price Level Targeting Versus Inflation Targeting in a Forward Looking
Model." mimeo., IIES, Stockholm University, May.

von Hagen, Jürgen (1995). "Inflation and Monetary Targeting in Germany." In Leonardo
Leiderman and Lars E. O. Svensson, eds., Inflation Targets, 107-21. (London: Centre for
Economic Policy Research).

von Hagen, Jurgen (1999), “Money Growth Targeting by the Bundesbank,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 43: 681-701.

Woodford, Michael (1999), “Optimal Monetary Policy Inertia,” NBER Working Paper no. 7261.

Woodford, M. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy
(Princeton University Press: Princeton).

-39-

ENDNOTES
1. See the CIA’s, The World Factbook (2006).
2. See Mayer (1998) and Romer and Romer (2002) for a description of economic thinking
and monetary policy practice in the 1960s.
3. Samuelson and Solow (1960) and Phillips (1958).
4. Friedman and Schwartz (1963a, b) and Friedman and Meiselman (1963).
5. Brunner and Meltzer (1964a, b, c).
6. Phelps (1967) and Friedman (1968).
7. Mayer (1998) and Romer and Romer (2002).
8. Lucas (1972, 1973, and 1976). The Lucas (1976) paper was already very influential in 1973,
when it was first presented in 1973 at the first Carnegie-Rochester Conference. Note that
although Muth (1960, 1961) introduced the idea of rational expectations over ten years earlier,
his work went largely unnoticed until resurrected by Lucas.
9. Sargent and Wallace (1975) .
10. See Mishkin (1982a, b, 1983).
11. For example, see the surveys in Fischer (1993) and Anderson and Gruen (1995).
12. English (1996)
13. Briault (1995).
14. Fischer (1994) and Feldstein (1997).
15. For example, see the survey in Anderson and Gruen (1995).
16. The importance of a strong nominal anchor to successful monetary policy is also a key
feature of recent theory on optimal monetary policy, referred to as the new neoclassical synthesis
(Woodford, 2003, and Goodfriend and King, 1997).
17. For evidence in the United States, see Stock and Watson (1989), Friedman and Kuttner
(1993) and Chapter 6.
18. Also see Rich (1997).

-40-

19. von Hagen (1999).
20. Otmar Issing, (1996).
21. Also see von Hagen (1995), Neumann and von Hagen (1993), Clarinda and Gertler (1997),
Mishkin and Posen (1997) and Bernanke and Mihov (1997).
22. Kydland and Prescott (1977), Calvo (1978) and Barro and Gordon (1983).
23. McCallum (1995).
24. When a central bank does not pursue an objective of raising output or employment above
what is consistent with stable inflation, there will be no inflation bias (average inflation above
the optimal long-run level). In a model with a forward-looking, New Keynesian, Phillips curve,
however, there will still be a problem of stabilization bias (too much focus on reducing output
fluctuations relative to inflation fluctuations) and a lack of history dependence (response to
initial conditions that would produce better outcomes). See Woodford (2003).
25. For an example of how the time-inconsistency problem can be modeled as resulting from
political pressure, see Mishkin and Westelius (2005).
26. For example, Alesina and Summers (1993), Cukierman (1992) and Fischer (1994)
27. The dating of adoption of inflation targeting is not always clear cut. The dates used here are
from Chapter 16.
28. An unstable relationship between money and inflation could make inflation targeting more
difficult because there is less information in the monetary aggregates to help forecast inflation.
However, successful inflation targeting is not dependent on having a stable money-inflation
relationship as long as other information enables the monetary authorities to forecast future
inflation and the impact of the current monetary policy stance on the economy.
29. Also see Mishkin and Posen (1997) or Bernanke et al. (1999).
30. Svensson (1997).
31. This is the conclusion in a recent paper presented to the Executive Board of the IMF. Roger
and Stone (2005).
32. There is also some mildly favorable evidence on the impact of inflation targeting on sacrifice
ratios. Bernanke et al. (1999) did not find that sacrifice ratios in industrialized countries fell
with adoption of inflation targeting, while Corbo, Landerretche and Schmidt-Hebbel (2002) with
a larger sample of inflation targeters have concluded that inflation target did lead to an
improvement in sacrifice ratios. However, defining sacrifice ratios is extremely tricky, so I
would put less weight on this evidence. Sabban, Rozada and Powell (2003) also find that
-41-

inflation targeting leads to nominal exchange rate movements that are more responsive to real
shocks rather than nominal shocks. This might indicate that inflation targeting can help the
nominal exchange rate to act as a shock absorber for the real economy.
33. Lower exchange rate pass-through might be seen as a drawback because it weakens this
channel of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. As long as other channels of monetary
policy transmission are still strong, however, the monetary authorities still have the ability to
keep inflation under control.
34. For evidence supporting the first three results, e.g., see Bernanke et. al. (1999), Corbo,
Landerretche and Schmidt-Hebbel (2002), Neumann and von Hagen (2002), Hu (2003), Truman
(2003), and Ball and Sheridan (2005).
35. Ball and Sheridan (2005) is one of the few empirical papers that is critical of inflation
targeting: it argues that the apparent success of inflation targeting countries is just a reflection of
regression towards the mean: that is, countries that start with higher inflation are more likely to
find that inflation will fall faster than countries that start with an initially low inflation rate.
Since countries that adopted inflation targeting generally had higher initial inflation rates, their
larger decline in inflation just reflects a general tendency of all countries, both targeters and
nontargeters to achieve better inflation and output performance in the 1990s when inflation
targeting was adopted. This paper has been criticized on several grounds and its conclusion that
inflation targeting had nothing to do with improved economic performance is unwarranted: see
Hyvonen (2004), Gertler (2005) and Mishkin and Shmidt-Hebbel (2005). However, Ball and
Sheridan’s paper does raise a serious question because inflation targeting is clearly an
endogenous choice and so finding that better performance is associated with inflation targeting
may not imply that inflation targeting causes this better performance. Mishkin and SchmidtHebbel (2005) does attempt to explicitly deal with potential endogeneity of adoption of
inflation targeting through use of instrumental variables and continues to find favorable
results on inflation targeting performance.
36. Also see Mishkin and Posen (1997), Bernanke et al. (1999) and Neumann and von Hagen
(2002)
37. Also see Sims (2005)
38. For example, Bernanke et al.(1999) and Levin, Natalucci and Piger (2004) do not find that
inflation targeting leads to an immediate fall in expected inflation, but Johnson (2002, 2003)
does find some evidence that expected inflation falls after announcement of inflation targets.
39. Levin, Natalucci and Piger (2004) and Castelnuovo, Nicoletti-Altimari and Palenzuela
(2003).

-42-

40. The importance of a strong nominal anchor to successful monetary policy is also a key
feature of recent theory on optimal monetary policy, referred to as the new neoclassical synthesis
(Woodford, 2003, and Goodfriend and King, 1997).
41. Eichengreen and Masson (1998), Eichengreen (1999) and Aizenman and Glick (2005).
42. See Chapter 13, Calvo and (2000), and McKinnon and Schnabl (2004).
43. Fischer (1994).
44. For example, Clarinda, Gali, and Gertler (1999); Dittmar, Gavin and, Kydland (1999);
Dittmar and Gavin (2000); Eggertson and Woodford (2003); Svensson (1999); Svensson and
Woodford (2003); Vestin (2000); Woodford (1999, 2003).
45. , Berg and Jonung (1999).
46. Fuhrer (1997) and Estrella and Fuhrer 1998.
47. Research at the Bank of Canada and the Bank of England (Black, Macklem and Rose,
1998, Battini and Yates, 1999, and King, 1999) suggests that an inflation target with a small
amount of error correction can substantially reduce the uncertainty about the price level in
the long run, but still generate very few episodes of deflation.
48. Svensson (2002).
49. However, announcing a specific policy path as has recently occurred in the United States
when it announced that it would remove accommodation at a measured pace, and then had
seventeen straight FOMC meetings starting in June of 2004 in which it raised the policy rate by
25 basis points each time, did not sufficiently convey the degree of uncertainty about the future
path.
50. For example, Cecchetti, Genberg, Lipsky and Wadhwani (2000) and Borio and Lowe
(2002)
51. Bernanke and Gertler (2001) point out that Cecchetti et al (2000) only find that asset prices
should be included in the central bank’s policy rule because they assume that the central bank
knows with certainty that the asset price rise is a bubble and know exactly when the bubble will
burst.
52. Bernanke and Mark Gertler (1999, 2001)
53. Mishkin (1996, 1999).
54. Also see Mishkin (2000).
55. It also happened in Israel (Bernanke et al., 1999).
-43-

56. For example, New Zealand and Chile in 1997 and 1998 (Mishkin, 2001).

-44-

