                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES AND DUMMIES
                                 FOR GRAVITY EQUATIONS

                                             Richard Baldwin
                                              Daria Taglioni

                                          Working Paper 12516
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12516


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2006




We thank Thierry Meyer, Volker Nitsch and Rob Feenstra for helpful feedback. This paper reflects views
of the authors, which do not necessarily correspond with those of the ECB nor imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of the ECB. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Richard Baldwin and Daria Taglioni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Gravity for Dummies and Dummies for Gravity Equations
Richard Baldwin and Daria Taglioni
NBER Working Paper No. 12516
September 2006
JEL No. F1, F3, F4

                                              ABSTRACT


This paper provides a minimalist derivation of the gravity equation and uses it to identify three
common errors in the literature, what we call the gold, silver and bronze medal errors. The paper
provides estimates of the size of the biases taking the currency union trade effect as an example. We
generalize Anderson-Van Wincoop's multilateral trade resistance factor (which only works with
cross section data) to allow for panel data and then show that it can be dealt with using time-varying
country dummies with omitted determinants of bilateral trade being dealt with by time-invariant pair
dummies.

Richard Baldwin
Graduate Institute of International Studies
Cigale 2
CH-1010 Lausanne
SWITZERLAND
and NBER
baldwin@hei.unige.ch

Daria Taglioni
European Central Bank
Postfach 16 03 19
D-60066 Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
daria.taglioni@ecb.int
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                                                1




Gravity for dummies and dummies for
gravity equations


Richard Baldwin and Daria Taglioni1
Graduate Institute of International Studies (HEI), Geneva; European Central Bank, Frankfurt;
24 August 2006 (First draft: May 2005)



1. INTRODUCTION
   The gravity model is a workhorse tool in a wide range of empirical fields. It is regularly used to estimate
   the impact of trade agreements, exchange rate volatility, currency unions, the ‘border effect’, common or
   related language usage and it even has a range of more exotic applications such as the impact of religion
   on trade and the impact of trade on the likelihood of war. Its popularity rests on three pillars: First,
   international trade flows are a key element in all manner of economic relationships, so there is a demand
   for knowing what normal trade flows should be. Second, the data necessary to estimate it are now easily
   accessible to all researchers. Third, a number of high profile papers have established the gravity models
   respectability (e.g. McCallum 1995, Frankel 1997, Rose 2000) and establish a set of standard practices
   that are used to address the ad hoc empirical choices that face any empirical researcher. Some of these
   standard practices, in turns out, impart mild to severe biases to the point estimates.
   This paper reviews the basic theory behind the gravity equation and uses this to explain why several of the
   standard choices are incorrect and why they typically bias the results. After exploring these points from a
   microeconomic and statistical theoretical perspective, we review the actual impact of the errors on a
   specific database which has been used to examine the trade effects of the euro.
Literature
   The gravity model emerged in the 1960s as an empirical specification with hand-waving theoretical
   underpinnings (Tinbergen 1962, Poyhonen 1963, Linnemann 1966). Leamer and Stern’s famous 1970
   book provided some foundations (three distinct sets, in fact). The best is based on what could be called
   the ‘potluck assumption.’ Nations produce their goods and throw them all into a pot; then each nation
   draws its consumption out of the pot in proportion to its income. The expected value of nation-i’s
   consumption produced by nation-j will equal the product of nation-i'  s share of world GDP times nation-j’s
   share of world GDP. In this way, bilateral trade is proportional the product of the GDP shares.
   Anderson (1979) seems to be the first to provide clear microfoundations that rely only on assumptions that
   would strike present-day readers as absolutely standard. The cornerstone of Anderson’s theory, however,
   rested on an assumption that was viewed as ad hoc at the time, namely that each nation produced a unique
   good that was only imperfectly substitutable with other nations’s goods. The gravity model fell into
   disrepute in the 1970s and 1980s; for example, Alan Deardoff refers to the gravity model as having
   “somewhat dubious theoretical heritage” (Deardoff 1984 p. 503).
   The gravity equation’s next set of theoretical foundations came when Bergstrand (1985) sought to provide
   theoretical foundations based on the old trade theory; in particular he developed a theoretical connection


   1
     We thank Thierry Meyer, Volker NItsch and Rob Feenstra for helpful feedback. This paper reflects views of the authors, which do not necessarily
   correspond with those of the ECB nor imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the ECB.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                                              2


  between factor endowments and bilateral trade. He did not manage to reduce the complicated price terms
  to an empirically implement-able equation; “calculating the complex price terms in [his expression] is
  beyond this paper’s scope,” he wrote. He argued that one could approximate the theory-based price terms
  with various existing price indices. Bergstrand (1989, 1990) re-did his earlier effort using the Helpman-
  Krugman model (Helpman and Krugman 1985) that married the new and old trade theory, but he
  continued to use existing price indices instead of the ones he justifies with his theory (Bergstrand 1989, p.
  147). More generally, the emergence of the ‘new trade theory’ in the late 1970s and early 1980s (e.g.
  Krugman 1979, 1980, 1981, Helpman 1981) started a trend where the gravity model went from having too
  few theoretical foundations to having too many. For example, in a 1995 paper on the gravity model
  Deardorff writes: “it is not all that difficult to justify even simple forms of the gravity equation from
  standard trade theories.” Also see Evenett and Keller (2002) for a thorough discussion of this point.
  Anderson and Van Wincoop (2001), published as Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003), is a recent well-
  known effort to microfound the gravity equations. The basic theory in Anderson and Van Wincoop (2001)
  is very close the Anderson (1979); the main value added is the derivation of a practical way of using the
  full expenditure system to estimate key parameters on cross-section data. Since this procedure is difficult,
  they also use an alternative procedure of using of nation-dummies – a procedure first employed by
  Harrigian (1996).
  Recent years have seen a number of papers by empirical trade economists that take the theory seriously,
  but these are typically viewed as contributions to narrow empirical topics – e.g. the size of the border
  effect, or the magnitude of the elasticity of substation – so the methodological advances in these papers
  have been generally ignored in the wider literature. Some of the key papers in this line are Harrigan (1996)
  and Head and Mayer (2000), and Combes, Lafourcade and Mayer (2005). In a similar vein, a number of
  papers have tackled the question of ‘zeros’ in the trade matrix, for example, Helpman, Melitz and
  Rubinstein (2005), and Westerlund and Wilhelmsson (2006). The former uses an sophisticated two step
  procedure, the later suggests using a Poisson fixed effects estimator; both show that estimates can be
  severely biased by incorrect treatment of zero trade flows. We do not address the important issue of
  ‘zeros’ in our paper since we use a dataset that has none. Our paper is most closely related to the
  methodological paper Pakko and Wall (2001).



2. BASIC GRAVITY THEORY: GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES
  The inspiration for the gravity model comes from physics where the law of gravity states that the force of
  gravity between two objects is proportional to the product of the masses of the two objects divided by the
  square of the distance between them. In symbols:
                                               force of     M M
                                                        = G 1 22 ;
                                                gravity    (dist12 )
  In trade, we replace the force of gravity with the value of bilateral trade and the masses M1 and M2 with
  the trade partners’ GDPs (in physics G is the gravitational constant). Strange as it may seem, this fits the
  data very well; an R-squared of 0.7 on cross-section data is par for the course. Yet despite its goodness-of-
  fit, this naïve version of the gravity equation can yield severely biased results. To see this point we need to
  work through a minimalists theory of the gravity equation. This shows that the gravity equation is
  essentially an expenditure equation with a market-clearing condition imposed. The simple theory also
  explains why it fits so well. Expenditure equations do explain expenditure patterns rather well and markets
  generally do clear. The point, however, tells us that the gravity model is not a model in the usual sense – it
  is the regression of endogenous variables on endogenous variables.
  We note immediately that there is nothing new in our theory (see Introduction). If there is any value added
  in the theory beyond fixing ideas for subsequent sections of our paper, it lies with the simple presentation.2


  2
    The theory here is not new; its basic outline follows Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003), but we extend it to allow for panel data; Anderson-Van-
  Winccop’s theory only applies to cross section data.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                        3



2.1. A first-pass gravity equation for bilateral trade

   Step 1: The expenditure share identity
  The first step is the expenditure share identity for a single good exported from the ‘origin’ nation to the
  ‘destination’ nation:

  (1)                    pod xod ≡ shareod E d ;
  where xod is the quantity of bilateral exports of a single variety from nation ‘o’ to nation ‘d’ (the ‘o’ is a
  mnemonic for ‘origin’ and ‘d’ for ‘destination’), pod is the price of the good inside the importing nation
  also called the ‘landed price’, i.e. the price of the imported good that is faced by customers in the
  importing nation; this is measured in terms of the numeraire.3 Of course, this makes xodpod the value of the
  trade flow measured in terms of the numeraire. Ed is the destination nation’s expenditure (again measured
  in terms of the numeraire) on goods that compete with imports, i.e. tradable goods. By definition, shareod
  is the share of expenditure in nation d on a typical variety made in nation-o.

   Step 2: The expenditure function: shares depend on relative prices
  Microeconomics tells us that expenditure shares depend upon relative prices and income levels, but we
  postpone consideration of the income elasticity in this first-pass presentation; the expenditure share is
  assumed to depend only on relative prices. Adopting the CES demand function and assuming that all
  goods are traded, the imported good’s expenditure share is linked to its relative price by:


                                                                                   (                       )
                                                     1−σ
                                         p                                                                 1 /(1−σ )
                                                                                            n ( p kd )
                                                                                        R            1−σ
  (2)                    shareod       ≡ od                , where Pd ≡                 k =1 k
                                                                                                                       ,σ >1
                                         Pd
  where pod/Pd is the ‘real price’ of pod. Also, Pd is nation-d’s ideal CES price index (assuming all goods are
  traded), ‘R’ is the number of nations from which nation-d buys things (this includes itself), and σ is the
  elasticity of substitution among all varieties (all varieties from each nation are assumed to be symmetric
  for simplicity); nk is the number of varieties exported from nation k. We assume symmetry of varieties by
  source-nation to avoid introducing a variety index. As always, all prices here are measured in terms of the
  numéraire (more on choice of numéraire below). Combining (2) and (1) yields product specific import
  expenditure equation. This could be estimated directly, but researchers often lack good data on the trade
  prices. We can get around this by putting more structure on the problem.

   Step 3: Adding the pass-through equation
  The landed price in nation-d of goods produced in nation-o are linked to the production costs in nation-o,
  the bilateral mark-up, and the bilateral trade costs via:

  (3)                                                          pod = µ p oτ od
  where po is the producer price in nation-o, µ is the bilateral markup, and τod reflects all trade costs, natural
  and manmade. This assumes that the price-cost markup is a parameter. To keep things simple, we take
  µ=1 as in Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition or perfect competition with Armington goods.

   Step 4: Aggregating across individual goods
  So far we have per-variety exports. To get total bilateral exports from ‘o’ to ‘d’, we multiply the
  expenditure share function by the number of symmetric varieties that nation ‘o’ has to offer, namely ‘no’.
  Using upper case V to indicate to total value of trade, Vod≡nosodEd and:




  3
      We do not need to be specific about exactly which good is the numeraire; more on this below.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                                                      4



                                                                                         Ed
   (4)                                             Vod = no ( poτ od )1−σ                1−σ
                                                                                    Pd
   Lacking data on the number of varieties no and producer prices po, we compensate by turning to nation-o’s
   general equilibrium condition.

    Step 5: Using general equilibrium in the exporting nation to eliminate the nominal price
   The producer price, po, in the exporting nation-o must adjust such that nation-o can sell all its output,
   either at home or abroad. Expression (4) gives us nation-o sales to each market. Summing over all
   markets, including o’s own market, we get total sales of nation-o goods. Assuming markets clear, nation-
   o’s wages and prices must adjust so the nation-o’s production of traded goods equals its sales of trade
   goods. In symbols, this requires.
                                                                            R
                                                             Yo =           d =1
                                                                                   Vod
   Where Yo is nation-o’s output measured in terms of the numéraire. Relating Vod to underlying variables
   with (4), the market clearing condition for nation-o becomes:

                                                                 1−σ         R             1−σ     Ed
   (5)                                             Yo = no p o              d =1
                                                                                    τ od               1−σ
                                                                                                  Pd
   where the summation is over all markets (including o’s own market). Solving this for nopo1-σ:

                                             1−σ        Yo                                             R              1−σ    Ei
   (6)                              no p o          =      , where                   Ωo ≡                     (τ oi              1−σ
                                                                                                                                       )
                                                        Ωo                                             i =1
                                                                                                                            Pi
   Here Ωo measures what is akin to what is called ‘market potential’ in the economic geography literature (a
   nation’s market potential is often measured by the sum of its trade partners’ real GDPs divided by bilateral
   distance); the capital-omega is a mnemonic for ‘openness’ since it measures the openness of nation-o’s
   exports to world markets.

    Step 6: A first-pass gravity equation
   Substituting (6) into (4), we get our first-pass gravity equation:

                                                                1−σ        Yo E d
   (7)                                             Vod = τ od         (            1−σ
                                                                                         )
                                                                          Ω o Pd
   Note that all variables are measured in terms of the numéraire. Expression (7) is a microfounded gravity
   equation. It is identical to Anderson-Van Wincoop’s expression (9).4 It is not identical to their final
   expression, (11), since their last step is only valid for cross-section data. See Box 1.


2.1.2. The gravity equation and the ‘gravitational un-constant’
    Taking the GDP of nation-o as a proxy for its production of traded goods, and nation-d’s GDP as a proxy
    for its expenditure on traded goods, this can be re-written to look just like the physical law of gravity.
                       bilateral         Y1Y2                                                    1         1
   (8)                           =G                      ;                           G≡
                         trade      (dist12 )elasticy −1                                         Ω o Pd 1− elasticity


   where the Y’s are the nations’ GDPs and it is assumed that bilateral trade costs depend only upon bilateral
   distance in order to make the economic gravity equation resemble the physical one as closely as possible.

   4
     Their Π is akin to our Ω and use they use y to indicate expenditure; they also multiply and divide by world income/expenditure once in the expression
   and once in their definition of Π.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                               5


  Importantly, G here is not a constant as it is in the physical world – it is what might be called the
  gravitational un-constant since it includes all the bilateral trade costs and GDPs,.so it will vary over time.
  Ignoring the gravitational un-constant is the source of a large number of errors in the gravity equation
  literature.
  Box 1: Applicability of the Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003) is limited to cross-section data
  Anderson-Van-Wincoop do not stop with (7). They do one more simplification. This last step implies an
  assumption that will be violated in most recent uses of the gravity equation, i.e. those that employ panel
  data. Of course, there is no mistake in Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003), since they only use cross-
  section data, but this important caveat is not always recognised in the literature.
  Anderson-Van-Wincoop assert that Ωi=Pi1-σ for all nations since Ωi=Pi1-σ is a solution to the system of
  equations that define Ω and P1-σ. Their point can be seen from the definition of the price index which
  yields
                           Yk                    Yk
        Ωo =       τ 1−σ
                  k ok
                                     ∆o =           τ ko1−σ           ∀ o = 1,...R
                           ∆k                  k
                                                 Ωk
  By inspection, the two definitions would continue to hold if χΩi=∆i, for any χ, as Anderson-Van Wincoop
  observe in their footnote 12 of the published paper. What this tells us beyond a doubt is that any set of Ω
  and P1-σ that solves this set of equations must be proportional.
  This proportionality is obviously correct and indeed intuitively obvious. Since Ω measures the openness of
  the world to a nation’s exports and Pi1-σ measures the openness of a nation to imports from the world,
  these two will be related when all bilateral trade costs are symmetric. If nation-o finds itself located in a
  place that has good market access (which makes exporting easy), then it will automatically be in a place
  where foreign exporters find it easy to sell into nation-o. The authors go beyond proportionality, claiming
  that the two are actually equal. The text asserts that the point is “easily verified.” This is elaborated upon
  in footnote 12, which goes on to say that χΩi=∆i and claims that taking χ=1 is ‘a particular normalisation.’
  Here we show that χ=1 cannot be a solution in general unless trade costs never vary. Since the Anderson
  Van Wincoop method is used for panel data, we can be sure that trade costs are varying in which case we
  cannot take Ωi=Pi1-σ.
  The Anderson-Van Wincoop model is difficult to manipulate since it is basically a CES expenditure
  system with market clearing conditions imposed. There are two basic problems. The first stems from the
  high dimensionality of the system. For example, with just 3 nations there are 3 expenditure equations for
  each nation as well as the definitions for the three Ω’s and the three P’s, and the three adding up
  constraints. Second, even given endowments and trade costs, it is mathematically impossible to solve for
  prices and the trade pattern with paper and pencil (the problem is non-integer powers). Given this, one
  cannot directly demonstrate that χ≠1 by finding χ and showing it is not unity. Instead, we offer a counter
  example which disproves the general rule and explains why Anderson and Van Wincoop’s fourth step is
  correct for cross-section applications of their equation but incorrect for panel-data applications.
  If χ=1 is the solution, then it must work for all cases, including a simple one. What we do here is show
  that χ=1 cannot be the general solution in the simplest possible case – namely, 3 identical nations with a
  single factor of production, and bilateral trade costs that are identical for every trade flow. In this case, the
  definition of Ω is (symmetry of nations allows us to drop subscripts):
                                  Y
  (9)                      Ω=          (1 + 2τ 1−σ )       ↔        Ω = Y (1 + 2τ 1−σ )
                                 P 1−σ
  where the second expression follows by imposing Ω=P1-σ.
  The problem is that this is inconsistent with a typical nation’s market clearing condition. To make the
  point as simply as possible, we assume, as in Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003), that nations make a
  single good under conditions of perfect competition and constant returns; we also assume that nations are
  endowed with a single factor of production, L. Thus the typical nation’s income is Y=wL where w is the
  typical nation’s wage and from perfect competition the price of its good is p=wa, where ‘a’ is the unit
  labour input coefficient.
  Using perfect-competition pricing namely p=wa, the definition of income Y=wL, and (9), the market
  clearing condition for the typical nation, namely p1-σ=Y/Ω, can be written as:
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                                                        6



                                                                 wL
                                     ( wa )1−σ =
                                                          wL(1 + 2τ 1−σ )
   The key point in the counter example is that if we take labour as numéraire, so w=1, then this holds but
   only if we choose to measure units of labour in a way such that ‘a’ exactly equates the left-hand side to the
   right-hand side. More to the point, once we chose units for labour, then this will only hold if there is no
   change in bilateral trade costs and no change in GDPs. The same point holds if one takes the typical goods
   price, p, as the numéraire. We have worked out more general examples numerically (using Maple) and we
   always find that the Ω and P1-σ are proportional regardless of the GDPs and bilateral trade costs, but the
   factor of proportionality depends upon GDP’s and trade costs.
   This shows that setting Ω=P1-σ does indeed involve ‘a particular normalisation’ but we need a different
   normalisation for every set of GDPs and trade costs. In other words, Ω does not equal P1-σ in data that has
   a time dimension.




3. BASIC ECONOMETRIC BIASES: THE MEDALS
   A large fraction of the gravity model studies contain serious errors, some of which have been repeated so
   often that they have become accepted practice even though some of them are well recognized by
   researchers specializing gravity model estimation.
Common empirical implementation of the gravity equation
  Empirically implementing (7) requires a number of additional choices. Many of these choices became
  common practice since Jeffery Frankel’s well-known use of the gravity equation in the 1990s, e.g. Frankel
  (1997). To provide a concrete example, we use a highly cited paper, Rose (2000).
   Trade flow choices: For the independent variable, the average bilateral trade flow is used. Specifically
   exports of France to Germany are averaged with the exports of Germany to France.5 Since the economic
   mass variables are in terms of base-year dollars, the trade flows are deflated by the base year using a US
   price index such as the CPI.
   Economic mass variable choices: Expenditure on tradable goods, namely Ed, and output of tradable goods,
   namely Yo are measured with the real GDP figures. The specific data series used are the real GDPs
   adjusted for local price differences (Penn World Table figures). Since the averaging of bilateral trade
   flows makes it impossible to know which nation is the origin and which is the destination, it is not
   possible to separately estimate the coefficients on the origin and destination GDP variables.6 The common
   solution is to work with the product of two nations’ GDPs.
   Bilateral trade costs: There is a long tradition in the gravity literature of modelling τ as depending upon
   natural barriers (bilateral distance, adjacency, land border, etc.), various measures of manmade trade costs
   (free trade agreements, etc.), and cultural barriers (common language, religion, etc.). The original
   contribution of Rose (2000) is to add a common currency dummy to the list. Thus, Rose (2000)’s
   preferred regression estimates (simplifying for clarity’s sake):

                        Vod        1−σ GDP  GDP
   (10)                      = τ od ( gdpo × gdpd ) ;                                        τ od = f (dist od , other stuff )
                        PUSA           Po    Pd
   where distod is the distance between o and d, PUSA is the US price index and the Pgdp’s are the nation-
   specific GDP deflators.

   5
     Since trade flows are observed as exports by the origin nation and imports by the destination flow, most trade flows have two statistically independent
   observations. Given that France both imports from and exports to Germany, this implies that typically four values are averaged to get bilateral trade.
   6
     Estimating them separately is possible, but rarely rewarding. The point estimates often jump around even though their sum is fairly constant since the
   exact estimates depend upon the ordering of the data set.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                           7


   Now if one estimates (10) when the theory tells you (7) is the true model, the estimates will be marked by
   omitted variable biases. In particular, the ‘gravitational un-constant’ (i.e. what Anderson-Van-Wincoop
   call the multilateral trade resistance, or Frankel-Wei call ‘remote-ness’) will be in regression residual.
   What is wrong with this? One big problem – the gold medal of classic gravity model mistakes – and one
   small problem – the bronze medal winner in the mistake race.
• The big problem is that the omitted terms are correlated with the trade-cost term, since τod enters Ωo and
Pd directly (see (2) and (6)). This correlation biases the estimate of trade costs and all its determinants
including, the currency union dummy.
• The small problem – what might be called the bronze-medal mistake – is the inappropriate deflation of
nominal trade values by the US aggregate price index. Since there are global trends in inflation rates,
inclusion of this term probably creates biases via spurious correlations. Fortunately, Rose (2000) and other
papers offset this error by including time dummies. Since every bilateral trade flow is divided by the same
price index, a time dummy corrects the mistaken deflation procedure.
   Note that when Glick and Rose (2001) run their regression without the time dummies, their estimated
   coefficient on the CU dummy is one standard deviation larger than it is with time dummies, so it can be
   important to correct the small problem. We present more direct evidence on this below.


3.2. Gold medal error
   To make the point more formally, we turn once more to the first-pass version of the gravity equation. The
   true model implies that Rose (2000) is estimating:

          Vod        1−σ GDP  GDP     P gdp P gdp 1
   (11)        = τ od ( gdpo × gdpd ) d1−σ o         ;                     τ od = f (dist od , other stuff )
          PUSA           Po    Pd     Pd    Ω o PUSA
   Here and subsequently, assume that the bronze-medal mistake – deflation by US price index – has been
   offset by time dummies so we can ignore PUSA. Again simplifying for the sake of illustration, suppose the
   true model of bilateral trade costs is:

                           τ od = DISTod b exp[CU od ,t ] −b Z od ,t b ;
                                            1                  2      3
                                                                              b1 , b2 > 0
   where CU is the currency union dummy and Z is the other (omitted) determinants of bilateral trade costs
   (suppose there is only one for simplicity’s sake). Then the true gravity model (in logs) is:

                                     y = x1 β1 + x 2 β 2 + ε
   where y is the trade flow, x1 includes the product of the real GDP’s, bilateral distance and the CU dummy,
   and x2 includes the ‘gravitational-unconstant’ terms, P and Ω, as well as that omitted determinants of trade
   costs Z.
   Thus what Rose (2000) was estimating was:

                                     y = β 0 + x1 β1 + u t
   where the error u consists of two parts, i.e. u= + q. Under the OLS version of true gravity model, is the
   zero-mean error of the regression and is uncorrelated with any of the regressors. By normalisation, the
   omitted term q also has zero mean. Thus E(u)=0 is also true. However since we demonstrated that q is
   correlated with regressors in X1, then so is u and we have an endogeneity problem.
   It is easy to calculate the bias determined by omitting the un-constant term. The linear projection onto the
   observable explanatory variables (Wooldridge 2002) is:
                                    q=   0+ 1x1+ 2x2+…+      kxk +r

   where, by definition of linear projection, E(r)=0, Cov(xj,r)=0, j=1,2,…,k .Plugging q into the Rose (2000)
   specification reported above, we can easily derive the ‘omitted variables bias’ on OLS regressors in X1 as:
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                             8



                                         plimβˆ          j   = β j + γδˆ j

   with   δˆ j = Cov( x k , q ) / Var ( x k ) . This formula allows us to determine the sign and magnitude of the
   bias in the estimators. If the omitted un-constant term is likely to have a positive effect on trade, i.e. >0
   and it is positively correlated with the other regressors, i.e. Corr(xk, q)>0, then the effect is likely to be
   overestimated (this is confirmed in our regression results below).
Bias on the ‘economic mass variable’
   Another result of ignoring the ‘gravitational un-constant’ is a measurement error in the economic mass
   variable. To see this, consider the GDP terms used in Rose (2000) as ‘noisy’ versions of the true size
   variables in the gravity equation specified in (7). Let suppose that in the relationship:

                                         y = x1β1 + ε t

   where x1 equals     (GDPo GDPd ) /( Pogdp Pdgdp ) and is the noisy version of the true variable x1* equal to
   (GDPoGDPd/      o   Pd1- ). Let assume further that the true model is:

                                         y * = x1*β1 + ε t
              *
   where Ex = 0 , with the star denoting the true values of the underlying variables and let’s suppose that
   the relationship x1= x1* + u holds. Finally, for simplicity’s sake assume that the measurement error is
   unbiased and uncorrelated with the disturbances in the true equation.
   Substituting the above relationship into the true regression we obtain.

                                         y * = x1β1 + ε t − uβ1
   This implies that = - u is not orthogonal to the mismeasured independent variable x1. To see this note
   that the above assumptions require

                                                η ) = E[ x1 '(ε − β u )] = − βσ u2
                                         E ( x1 '
   This negative covariance between x and entails that the OLS estimator of is asymptotically downward
   biased when there are errors in measuring the independent x variables. Indeed we have:
                                         N
                                     1
                                                ( xi* + u i )( βxi* + ε i )
                               ^
                                     N                                              βE ( x *2 )
                              β=         i =1
                                                                              →                     <β
                                             1     N
                                                                                  E ( x *2 ) + σ u2
                                                         ( xi* + u i ) 2
                                             N    i =1

   Below, we find evidence for a downward bias of the ‘economic mass’ variables in the mispecified gravity
   equation in our empirical testing in Section 4.
The currency union dummy coefficient is biased: Part 1
  We can be absolutely sure that the currency union dummy, CU, and x2 are correlated since x2 contains CU
  and all other determinants of bilateral trade costs. In short, omission of the relative-price-matters term
  produces biased results. But what is the likely direction of the bias? As shown above, it depends on the
  sign of and on the sign of the correlation between CU and x2.
   Stepping outside the model for a moment, suppose that not all goods are traded, so the GDP price deflators
   include non-traded goods prices. Since the P and Ω include only traded goods prices, x2 is proportional to
   the ratio of non-traded prices to traded prices in the trading nations. If non-traded goods are
   idiosyncratically high in these nations, they will be idiosyncratically open (consumers substitute away
   from nontraded goods). Next, suppose that nations that are idiosyncratically open are more likely to
   engage in pro-trade policies, like a currency union or FTA. If both of these conjectures are true, there will
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                              9


   be a positive correlation between CU and the relative-prices-matter term. In this case, the coefficient on
   the CU dummy is upward biased.
The currency union dummy coefficient is biased: Part 2
  A second bias in the CU dummy estimator stems from omitted determinants of bilateral trade costs.
  Bilateral trade costs are determined by many factors, ranging from personal relationships among business
  leaders that were developed as school children on cultural exchange programmes to convenient flight
  schedules. Clearly, there will always be omitted variables in the regression. This is not a problem unless
  the omitted variables are correlated with x1 variables. The key to the biases, however, it is very likely that
  the omitted pro-bilateral trade variables are positively correlated with the ‘variable of interest’, i.e. the CU
  dummy in this case. The point is that the formation of currency unions is not random but rather driven by
  many factors, including many of the factors omitted from the gravity regression.
   If the omitted variables and CU are positively correlated, the estimated trade impact will be upward biased
   for this second independent reason. The size of this bias is quite difficult to judge since it stems from
   factors that are unobservable to the econometrician.
Nuisances with nuisance variables
   Many researchers have found that the ‘nuisance’ variables in the gravity model (the coefficients on
   economics mass and distance) are indeed a huge nuisance. The simplest theory laid out above tells us that
   the GDP variables should have coefficients of unity, and while slightly more sophisticated theory explains
   why the elastiticites may deviate from unity, most people get suspicious when the point estimates on GDP
   fall below, say 0.5. It is plain from the reasoning above that we should expect the GDP elastiticites to be
   biased downward, since x2 contains the price index that is used to deflate nominal GDP. The correlation is
   not -1, however, since z includes many factors in common with P and Ω. Since the ratio of traded to
   nontraded goods will vary across country samples and time periods, the biases on the GDP coefficient
   need not be systematic. Moreover, GDPs are merely a proxy for the correct variables, namely expenditure
   on tradable goods for the destination nation and production of tradable goods for the origin nation. This
   tells us that the usual measurement errors will tend to bias the economic mass coefficients towards zero.


3.2.2. Examples from the literature
    We can see many examples in the literature of just how large the gold-medal mistake can be. Rose (2000)
    reports that the currency union trade effect is +235%, while using pair fixed effects on his original dataset,
    Rose (2001) shows that correcting for the gold-medal mistake makes the currency-union effect disappear.
    Specifically, when he includes pair dummies, the raw estimate on the CU dummy is -0.38 and the standard
    error is 0.67, compared 1.21 in Rose (2000). Glick and Rose (2001) use a massive dataset that includes
    annual data from 1948 to 1997 data on bilateral trade between 217 countries. Theoretically, that’s
    50(2172)/2=2,354,450 data points, but with missing observations and zero flows, the dataset has 219,558
    observations. When the gold-medal mistake is committed, i.e. the naïve gravity model specification is run
    on the pooled data, the point estimate on the currency-union effect is 1.30 with a standard error of 0.13.
    When the gold-medal mistake is partially corrected with pair dummies, the estimated drops about 5
    standard deviations to 0.65. When Micco, Stein and Ordoñez (2003 Table 1) estimate the size of the
    Eurzone’s trade impact on developed nation data, they find that the coefficient is 0.198 on pooled data (i.e.
    with the gold medal mistake), while it is 0.039 when pair dummies are included (a drop of 4 standard
    errors).
   In the next section we discuss various ways of correcting the gold-medal mistake, but first we highlight
   what is probably the most common error in the gravity literature, what we call the ‘silver medal’ mistake.


3.3. Silver medal mistake
   The basic theory tells us that the gravity equation is a modified expenditure function; it explains the value
   of spending by one nation on the goods produced by another nation. That is to say, the gravity equation
   explains uni-directional bilateral trade. Most gravity models, however, are not estimated on uni-directional
   trade, for example French exports to Germany. Rather, they work with the average of the two-way
   exports, for example the average of French exports to Germany and German exports to France. There is
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                             10


  nothing intrinsically wrong with this, but since it was done without reference to theory, most researchers
  mistake the log of the average for the average of the logs.
  Since gravity theory is so easy, it is trivial to check what the theory tells us about working with average
  trade flows. Multiplying the left and right hand sides of (7) by the isomorphic expression for Vdo and
  taking the geometric average, we get (dropping the time subscripts for notational convenience):

                                             τ od 1−σ τ do 1−σ
                            Vod Vdo =                                    Yo E d
                                                   1−σ        1−σ
  (12)                                    Ω o Po         Pd         Ωd
                                    ln Vod + ln Vdo
                              ⇔                     = (1 − σ ) ln τ odavg + ln Yo E d + Dot + Ddt
                                           2
  where the superscript ‘avg’ on the bilateral trade costs indicates the geometric average of τod and τdo. The
  key point here is that the theory tells us that the averaging should be done after taking logs, not before.
  Most researchers make the simple mistake of taking the log of the average of uni-directional flows rather
  than the average of the logs. Specifically, these authors estimate (simplifying to make the point):

                           Vod + Vdo       1−σ GDP  GDP
                                     = τ od ( gdpo × gdpd )
                               2               Po    Pd
  This can seriously bias the results.
  The sum of the logs is approximately the log of the sums, but the approximation gets worse as the two
  flows to be summed diverge. Defining δ as the ratio of the bilateral trade flows, i.e. Vod=δVod, the log of
  the sums ln[(Vod+Vod)/2] is equal to lnVod+ln(1+δ)-ln2. The proper way of averaging yields, namely
  (½)ln(VodVod), gives a different answer (ln(Vod)+ln(δ))/2. The wrong way minus the right way gives us the
  error as:
                                                    ln δ
                           error = ln(1 + δ ) +          − ln 2 ,                 δ >1
                                                     2
  In plain English, the error will not be too bad for nations that have bilaterally balanced trade – in which
  case δ is close to unity – but it can be truly horrendous for nations with very unbalanced trade. In the real
  world, bilaterally unbalanced trade is a huge issue especially for North-South trade flows.
  Note that this error is always positive, in other words the silver medal mistake means that researchers are
  working with overestimates of the bilateral trade. Since this error ends up in the residual, it will bias the
  point estimates if the error is correlated with included variables. If the error was evenly or randomly
  distributed, the silver medal mistake would have little effect. However, if bilateral trade imbalances tend
  to be systematically large for nations engaging in the policy under study, then the results can be biased.
  For example, one might conjecture that nations that share a common currency can run larger bilateral
  deficits in goods trade than other nations and in this case, the silver medal error results in an over-estimate
  of the trade effects of currency unions (we confirm this on real data below).
  Turning to the extra biases imparted by the silver medal mistake, we have that the true gravity model (in
  logs) is y = x1 β 1 + x 2 β 2 + ε where y, X1 and X2 are defined as above. But what authors using the log
  of the sums are estimating is   ~
                                  y = x1 β1 + x 2 β 2 + ε , where ~y is the incorrectly averaged bilateral trade
  flow, which is related to the true measure by ~ y = y + (Iδ ) , where δ is the vector of errors and I is the
  identity matrix. If the measurement error has a mean different from zero, it will affect estimation of the
  intercept 0 . More important is the relationship between the measurement error and the explanatory
  variables. If the measurement error in y is systematically related to one or more explanatory variables in
  the model, then the OLS estimator will be biased and possibly inconsistent. The OLS estimate of this will
  be:
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                                 11



                                 βˆ1 = β1 + E{x1 'x1 }−1 E{x1 '( β 2 x x + Iδ )}
   In short, the silver medal mistake will always result in a larger error variance than when the dependent
   variable is measured without error. Furthermore, it will introduce a new source of bias to the extent that
   the bilateral trade imbalance is correlated with included variables.
   Cross-section data. If one uses only cross-section data, then one can use the Anderson-Van-Wincoop
   trick of choosing units such that Ωo=Po1-σ, and the denominators in the right-hand sum are identical. Thus
   with cross-section data, the use of nation dummies will remove much of the silver mistake. The only thing
   to note is that the estimates refer to the arithmetic average of bilateral trade costs raised to the 1-σ. To see
                                                                                                         1−σ            1−σ
   what this implies, suppose       τ od = DISTod b exp[CU od ]− b Z od b
                                                         1               2      3
                                                                                    as before, so τ od         + τ do         equals

   (DIST   b1
                exp[CU ] −b2      ) (Z
                                  1−σ     b2
                                          od   + Z do
                                                   b2
                                                     ). Following our usual reasoning, the sum of the Z’s will end up
   in the residual and will bias the estimate of b2 in the usual fashion. What all this says is that on cross-
   section data, the silver medal mistake is not so bad.
   Panel data. If one uses panel data, however, the problem is more severe. The fact that Ωo≠Po1-σ for most
   years will mean that the complex sum of the uni-direction trade costs will end up in the residuals and thus
   bias the coefficients on the included variables as discussed above.



4. DUMMIES FOR GRAVITY EQUATIONS
   While the bronze and silver medals have not been widely appreciated in the literature, the gold medal error
   is now widely recognized and several standard ‘fixes’ are used to avoid it. The most common are:
• Nation dummies, i.e. a dummy that is one for all trade flows that involves a particular nation. The number
of dummies is R.
• Pair dummies, i.e. a dummy that is one for all observations of trade between a given pair of nations. This
is just the classic fixed effects estimator since the panel is made of time series for every pair’s trade. The
number of dummies is R(R-1)/2, if one has a balanced panel of R nations and is using averaged bilateral trade
data.
   This section considers the extent to which these redress the problems. We first look at the theory and then
   turn to some estimation results that allow us to compare the various approaches in a particular dataset.


4.1. Some theory
   The simplicity of the gravity model’s theoretical foundations allows us to see how the nation and pair
   dummy fixes affect the biases from a theoretical perspective.


4.1.1. Nation dummies (time invariant)
    Working with uni-directional trade flows to keep the notation simple, the true model can be written as:

                   τ od 1−σ                                                                                                   1−σ
         Vod =             1−σ
                                 Yo E d    ⇔ ln Vod ,t = (1 − σ ) ln τ od ,t + ln Yo ,t E d ,t − ln Ω o ,t − ln( Po ,t              )
                  Ω o Pd

   where the t’s are time sub-scripts; as before we assume          τ od = DISTod b exp[CU od ,t ] −b Z t b
                                                                                       1                       2    3
                                                                                                                         . Now if
   Ω and P are time-invariant – for example, if one is working with cross-sectional data, nation dummies will
   remove all the gold medal bias that is due to the fact that Ω and P include all measures of bilateral trade
   costs. In this case, the true model would be:
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                12



                   ln Vod = b1 (1 − σ )dist od + b2 (1 − σ )CU od + ln Yo E d + b3 Do + b4 Dd
   where the D’s are nation dummies.
   To see what is going on, it is useful to think of the regression as being done in two steps. First the left-
   hand side (LHS) variable is regressed on the time-invariant country dummies and then the residuals from
   that regression are regressed on the three other RHS variables, distance, the currency union dummy, CU,
   and the joint real GDP variable. For cross-section data, the time-invariant country-specific dummies will
   completely strip out the gravitational un-constant term in the first stage. However, this does not remove
   the bias in the CU coefficient stemming from the omitted determinants of bilateral trade.
Panel data implications
   Most recent gravity model estimations use panel data rather than cross section data. Since time-invariant
   nation dummies only remove part of the cross-section bias but not the time-series bias, country dummies
   are not enough in panel data. The point is that the omitted terms Ω and P reflect factors that vary every
   year. If the researcher ignores this point and includes time-invariant country dummies (as is common
   practice) then only part of the bias is eliminated. Quite specifically, CU varies over time, and assuming
   that CU affects bilateral trade costs, then its inclusion in the omitted terms (the gravitational un-constant)
   means that CU and the un-constant will always be correlated over time.
   This point probably explains why the second, harder way of correcting for the relative-prices-matter effect
   in Rose and Van Wincoop (2001) yields such a different result from the country-dummy approach. Given
   all the structure imposed on their expenditure system, they can actually generate data for the missing
   terms. When they do, the estimated currency union effect is radically reduced. Doing some rough
   calculations on the numbers in the paper suggests the coefficient on the common currency dummy fell to
   0.65, or about one standard deviation.


4.1.2. Pair dummies (time invariant)
    The second standard technique for redressing the gold medal problem is to include pair dummies. Of
    course this cannot work on cross-section data since the number of dummies equals the number of
    observations (at least with averaged bilateral trade). With panel data it is trivial to implement since it boils
    down to the classic fixed effect estimator (each bilateral flow is treated as a separate section). Using the
    theory to see what is going on with this, observe that:

                  τ od 1−σ
         Vod =
                 Ω o Pd
                          1−σ
                                Yo E d                                                           (
                                         ⇔ ln Vod ,t = (1 − σ ) ln τ od ,t + ln Yo E d − ln Ω o,t Po ,t
                                                                                                          1−σ
                                                                                                                )
   Plainly, estimating the model with pair dummies will remove some of the gold medal bias that stems from
   the exclusion of the last term (the gravitational un-constant). However, as with country dummies, the time-
   series correlations between the omitted variable, namely ln(ΩP1-σ) and the included variables is not
   eliminated; some bias remains.
   The point is made clearer by writing out the formula for the estimated coefficient:

                                    1                           ry t ⋅ x 2t    ry t ⋅ Z t
                                                                                            1
                   βˆ1 = − b1 (σ − 1) + ( X 1 'X 1 )      −1
                                                               dist ⋅ x 2t    dist ⋅ Z t
                                                                                            b3
                          b2 (σ − 1)                           CU t ⋅ x 2t    CU t ⋅ Z t
   where ry is real GDP. We can think of the inclusion of pair dummies as a two step regression. First the
   left-hand side variable is regressed on the pair dummies and then the residuals from the first-stage
   regression are regressed on the three right-hand side variables, ry, dist and CU. The first stage will strip
   out any time-invariant pair influences, including all omitted determinants of bilateral trade are time-
   invariant.
   If all the Z’s – the omitted determinants of bilateral trade costs – are time-invariant, then pair dummies
   will zero out the second column in the 3 by 2 matrix of biases. In most cases, however, ongoing trade
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                13


   liberalisation – on which the researcher does not have good data – implies that there will be a time-series
   component of the correlations in the second column even after the cross-section correlation has been
   stripped out. In the literature on the euro’s Rose effect, this point has been well appreciated. For example,
   Berger and Nitsch (2005) and Bun and Klaassen (2004) find strong evidence of a time-varying pair effect
   that is omitted from the standard Rose regression. In the case of the euro, the source of the bias is probably
   the ongoing Single Market liberalisation that is proceeding at a somewhat different pace for each EU
   member due to lags in implementing the Single Market Directives (i.e. the liberalising rules agreed at the
   EU level) into national legislation. As for the size of the bias, Berger and Nitsch (2005) find that inclusion
   of a time trend as proxy of EU integration dramatically reduces the estimated Rose effect and makes it
   statistically insignificant.
   When it comes to first-column biases, i.e. biases stemming from correlations with x2, we note that the pair
   dummy does at least as good a job of removing all cross-section correlation as does the nation dummy
   approach. The time-series correlation, however, remains equal for both the pair and nation dummy
   approaches.
   In summary, time invariant pair dummies will eliminate part of the gold-medal bias. Specifically it will
   eliminate the cross-section component of the first-column and second-column biases. In this sense, pair
   dummies are superior to nation dummies in panel data. On the downside, the inclusion of pair dummies
   means that no time-invariant parameters such as distance elasticity can be estimated. Furthermore, pair
   dummies means that the coefficient of interest, e.g. the Rose effect coefficient, will be identified solely on
   the time variation in the policy variable. This means that pair dummies only work when there has been
   significant time variation in the policy whose impact one is trying to estimate.


4.2. How important are the Gold, Silver and Bronze medal errors?
   We turn now to trying out the theory on a real data set. To be concrete, we focus on the question of the
   size of the euro’s trade impact. The paper we take as our reference point is Micco, Stein and Ordoñez
   (2003), the source of the best known estimates of the euro’s currency-union trade effect.


4.2.1. Data
    In the subsequent section we suggest some procedures to improve the estimation of gravity equations.
    Here, however, we start by using the theory to illustrate common mistakes taking as given the standard
    approach to gravity model implementation issues. This should be thought of as something of a thought
    experiment; given the standard data choices, the theory can help us understand the importance of the
    various dummy approaches to estimating the gravity model. In the simplest gravity model, the data set
    consists of the dependent variable and three main right-hand side variables, economic mass, bilateral
    distance and the policy variable of interest. We start by discussing some of the issues and common
    practices for the dependent variable.
   There are several sources for bilateral trade data. We use one that is convenient to access and widely
   available, the IMF’s Direction of Trade Statistics (DOTS) data base. Given its very nature, bilateral trade
   is observed and reported by two nations, the importer and the exporter. For most nations, there are
   therefore four observations on bilateral trade. Many authors average all of these to get their one estimate
   of bilateral trade, although there is an old tradition in the gravity literature of using only import data on the
   grounds that nations spend more on measuring imports than exports (to avoid tariff fraud). Since 1993,
   this point is reversed for the EU since trade data is gathered from VAT statistics. That is, exporters get
   paid to announce exports (they get a VAT rebate) while they have an incentive to disguise imports.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                  14


      Table 1: Data sources and manipulations.
Variable       Plain language                                                                           Source &
name           definition                   Exact definition                                            units
vod            Value of exports from        For most nations there are 2 observations for bilateral     IMF DOTS;
               o to d                       exports, one from the exporting nation’s statistics and
                                                                                                        units:
                                            one from the importing nation’s statistics.
                                                                                                        current USD
mod            Value of imports by d        For most nations there are 2 observations for bilateral     IMF DOTS;
               from o.                      imports, one from the exporting nation’s statistics and
                                                                                                        units:
                                            one from the importing nation’s statistics; ‘m’ denotes
                                                                                                        current USD
                                            the value of imports.
lv_avg         Wrongly       averaged       ln{(vod+vdo+ mod+mdo)/4}                                    authors’
               bilateral trade (silver                                                                  calculations;
                                            As noted above, usually there are 4 data series for
               mistake)
                                            bilateral trade; exports from o to d measured by nation-o   units:
                                            and nation-d, and exports from d to o measured by           current USD
                                            nation-o and nation-d.
lvus_avg       Wrongly     averaged         ln{1/cpi_us}+lv_avg                                         OECD for
               bilateral       trade;                                                                   US       price
                                            Following common practice in the literature, this
               wrongly deflated by                                                                      index (CPI);
                                            deflates the current dollar price value of trade by a US
               US price index (silver                                                                   authors’
                                            price index.
               & bronze mistake)                                                                        calculations;
                                                                                                        units: USD
                                                                                                        adjusted for
                                                                                                        US domestic
                                                                                                        inflation.
lv_prd         Correctly averaged           ln{ (vod ⋅ vdo ⋅ mod ⋅ mdo)^(1/4) }                         authors’
               value of bilateral                                                                       calculations;
               trade.
                                                                                                        Units:
                                                                                                        current USD
Lry            Log of the product of         enc / $ GDPonco         enc / $ GDPonco                    IMF;
               real GDP.                                         ×                                      units:
                                                   Pogdp                  Pogdp
                                                                                                        current
                                                                                                        USD.
Ld             log    of       bilateral    Geodesic (great circle) distance between capitals,          CEPII;
               distance.
                                                                                                        units:
                                                                                                        kilometres
Notes: USD = US dollars; DOTS = Direction of Trade Statistics.

      The basic theory tells us that the gravity equation is essentially an expenditure equation. The natural
      specification is therefore to relate the value of bilateral exports to the value of the importing nation’s
      expenditure – both measured in terms of the numeraire. However, it is common practice to use real GDP
      instead of GDP, as if the gravity equation were based on a demand equation instead of an expenditure
      equation. In fact some studies, such as Baxter and Kouparitsas (2006), do not bother reporting exactly
      which measure of GDP they use. As we shall see, however, the exact measure of GDP matters. The
      section below sticks with the common practice by using the product of real GDP for the trade partners,
      where real GDP means nominal GDP in national currency deflated by a national price index and then
      converted to US dollars at current exchange rates. The source is the IMF. Distance between nations is not
      a well defined concept. There are many efforts to improve measures of bilateral distance (see Head and
      Mayer 2000 for an example), but the simplest is the great circle distance between capitals. This is the most
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                                           15


  commonly used and so we follow the practice here. The ‘variable of interest’ in our regressions will be the
  pro-trade impact of common membership in the Eurozone. The dummy, EZ11, indicates that both partners
  use the euro.7 It is common practice to throw in a handful of variables that the author suspects may
  influence bilateral trade costs. The idea is to reduce the bias from omitted determinants of bilateral trade
  costs. Here we use a number of the most popular variables, namely adjacency (contig), landlocked
  (locked_i), and common official language (lang_off).


4.3. Estimates of the size of the bronze and gold medal mistakes




  7
    Note that all EU members are part of EMU (which stands for Economic and Monetary Union according to the Maastricht Treaty that launched the
  Eurozone), but only 12 (13 as of 2007) are members of the Eurozone (EZ); the distinction is similar to that of the ERM and the EMS.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                          16


  Table 2 shows the results of regressions on our dataset that is crafted to match that of Micco, Stein and
  Ordoñez (2003) in terms of country and year coverage. The first column includes all three errors since the
  bilateral trade data is wrongly averaged (silver) and wrongly deflated (bronze) and the gravitational un-
  constant term is ignored (gold).
  It is important to note that despite these errors, there is nothing overtly wrong with the estimates in the
  sense that it would fall well within most researcher’s priors. The Rose effect is estimated to be very small
  (0.01 indicates about a 1% bilateral trade boost) and insignificantly different than zero (the p-value is
  0.87). The economic mass variable, lry, has a reasonable if somewhat low point estimate of 0.77, and
  distance, ld, has a fairly standard estimate for European data of -0.76; both are highly significant. EU
  membership is estimated to boost bilateral trade by about 20%, which is a fairly common finding. The
  other bilateral trade cost controls have usual signs, magnitudes and p-values.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                                                    17


     Table 2: Dummies and gold and bronze medal mistakes, panel estimation.
              Mistakes:               (1)                   (2)                 (3)                 (4)                    (5)               (6)
                                Gold, Silver             Gold &              Partial          Partial Gold            Partial           Partial Gold
                                 & Bronze                Silver            Gold, Silver        & Silver             Gold, Silver         & Silver
                                                                            & Bronze                                 & Bronze

                                                                                                   Time &             Nation             Nation &
        Estimator:                   OLS              Time Only             Pair Only               Pair               Only               Time
Eurozone dummy,
EZ11                                 0.01                  0.17                0.05                 0.10               0.21                 0.26
                                     0.87                  0.00                0.00                 0.00               0.00                 0.00
Lry                                  0.77                  0.77                0.37                 1.13               0.27                 1.18
                                     0.00                  0.00                0.00                 0.00               0.00                 0.00
Eu                                   0.21                  0.18                0.09                 0.03               0.24                 0.21
                                     0.00                  0.00                0.00                 0.12               0.00                 0.00
Ld                                   -0.76                -0.76                                                        -0.86                -0.86
                                      0.00                 0.00                                                         0.00                 0.00
locked_o                             -0.34                -0.34                2.81                -3.03
                                      0.00                 0.00                0.00                 0.00
locked_d                             -0.12                -0.11                2.80                -0.13
                                      0.16                 0.21                0.00                 0.36
Contig                                0.32                 0.30                                                        0.17                  0.17
                                      0.00                 0.00                                                        0.00                  0.00
lang_off                              0.58                 0.59                                                        0.47                  0.47
                                      0.00                 0.00                                                        0.00                  0.00
_cons                                 13.8                -13.8                 -0.6               -36.9               14.5                 -33.4
                                       0                    0                  0.534                 0                  0                     0
Number of
observations                         2431                  2431                2431                 2431               2431                 2431
R2                                   0.92                  0.92                0.99                 1.00               0.95                 0.95
Notes: p-values under the point estimates. As in Micco, Stein and Ordoñez (2003), the nations in the sample are the EU15 plus the
Australia, Canada, Switzerland, Iceland., Japan, Norway, New Zealand and the USA; the time period is 1992 to 2002. There are no zeros
in this dataset since it involves only large nations.
Definitions: EZ11= common use of euro, lry = product of real GDPs in US $, eu = common membership in EU, locked_i indicates nation
i is landlocked (i=o for origin, i=d for destination), contig indicates the nations are geographically contiguous, lang_off indicates the pair
shares an official langage, and _cons is the constant.



     Time dummies only. Column two shows what happens when the time dummy only is included. This
     corrects the bronze medal mistake (incorrect deflation of bilateral trade). We see that this correction
     implies little changes for most coefficients but it implies a big jump in the size and significance of the
     ‘variable of interest.’ In other words, the bronze mistake in isolation would reverse the policy conclusion
     from the gravity equation regression. When one wrongly deflates bilateral trade – as is common practice –
     one finds that the euro had no effect on trade; if one offsets the error with time dummies – as is common
     practice – one finds that the euro had a strong pro-trade effect, so strong that it is estimated to be equal to
     the effect of EU membership. In fact when we re-do the column 2 estimation using trade data that has not
     been wrongly deflated, the point estimates with time dummies are exactly those in column 2.8
     Pair and Time dummies. Probably the most common estimator involves OLS with both time and pair
     dummies, for example this is preferred regression of Micco, Stein and Ordoñez (2003); this is shown in
     column four. As argued above, the time dummies eliminate the bronze mistake and the pair dummies


     8
        The     result,   not     reported   in the       table,    uses   lv_avg   instead   of    lvus_avg   as    the    dependent    variable   (see
     Table 1) but otherwise uses the same data and specification.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                           18


  reduce the severity of the gold-medal mistake by eliminating the cross-section correlation between the
  omitted Ω and P terms and the included variables. As argued in section 3.2, the cross-section correlation is
  likely to be positive so including the pair dummies reduces the estimated impact of the euro. Comparing
  column 2 to column 4, we see that indeed it falls from 0.17 to 0.10, with both highly significant. The point
  estimates on the economic mass variable also appears more in line with theory at 1.13 instead of 0.77.
  Again we argued in section 3.2 that underestimation of this coefficient should be expected since deflating
  the GDP by the GDP price deflator is a measurement error (or a noisy version) of the correct estimator, i.e.
  nominal GDP deflated by the gravitational un-constant term ‘ o d, if the theory is right. On the downside,
  the coefficient on EU membership drops enormously and becomes insignificant at the 10% level. The
  reason is that the data period includes only three switches in EU status (Austria, Finland and Sweden
  joined in 1994) and the pair dummy wipes out all the cross-section correlation between membership and
  bilateral trade. This, of course, is the downside of using pair dummies to estimate the impact of policies
  that have not varied much over time.
  A quick glance at column 3 re-confirms the importance of the bronze medal mistake. It displays the results
  with pair dummies when the incorrect deflation of trade is not offset with time dummies. The results seem
  to be all wrong; the economic mass coefficient is far too low and the landlocked controls have the wrong
  sign. One does not often see such results reported and it may explain why authors almost universally
  include time dummies in panel gravity regressions despite the lack of clear theoretical motivation.
  Nation and Time dummies. Nation dummies are the next most common correction for the gold-medal
  mistake (i.e. failure to account for what Anderson and Van Wincoop 2001 referred to as the multilateral
  trade resistance term, what we have been calling the gravitational un-constant). This estimator is shown in
  column six (when time dummies are also included). The column six results have one big advantage over
  those of column four (pair and time) and one big disadvantage. The disadvantage is that the country
  dummies do not control for idiosyncratic bilateral trade factors, as argued in section 4.1.1. While the
  omitted variable biases is always an issue, in the case at hand it operates with particular force due to the
  likelihood of reverse causality, i.e. nations adopted the common currency because they trade a lot for
  innumerable reasons on which the econometrician has no data. The main point of the disadvantage is that
  the coefficient on the ‘variable of interest’ EZ11 is almost surely biased upward. The advantage is that the
  EU membership variable fits better with priors that EU membership should have a big impact on trade
  flows.
  Another quick glance at the preceding column, column 5, reinforces the point about the bronze mistake.
  When only nation dummies are included, the point estimates on economic mass seem all wrong.


4.4. Estimates of the size of the silver medal mistake
  Next we turn to estimating the size of the silver-medal mistake on our particular dataset. For reasons that
  are not always made clear, many authors choose to work with trade that is averaged bilaterally instead of
  direction-specific trade as the theory would suggest. The theory asserts that the gravity models holds for
  each and every uni-directional trade flow, so averaging two trade flows should not cause problems if the
  averaging is done correctly. Because the gravity equation is basically a modified CES expenditure
  function, it is naturally multiplicative. The averaging of two trade flows should thus be geometric (i.e. the
  sum of the logs), but most authors take the arithmetic average (log of the sums).
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                            19


    Table 3: The silver medal mistake, panel estimation.
          Comments:              (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                              Wrong              Right trade    Wrong      Right trade    Wrong      Right trade
                               trade             averaging       trade     averaging       trade     averaging
                             averaging                         averaging                 averaging

                                                                Pair &       Pair &      Nation &    Nation &
        Estimator:                OLS                OLS        Time         Time         Time        Time
Eurozone dummy,
                                0.10                 0.04         0.10         0.04          0.26        0.21
EZ11
                                 0.03                0.41         0.00         0.02          0.00        0.00
    lry                          0.77                0.80         1.13         1.13          1.18        1.18
                                 0.00                0.00         0.00         0.00          0.00        0.00
    eu                           0.21                0.22         0.03         0.03          0.21        0.21
                                 0.00                0.00         0.12         0.15          0.00        0.00
    locked_o                    -0.34               -0.31         -3.03        0.58
                                 0.00                0.00         0.00         0.00
    locked_d                    -0.11               -0.25         -0.13        2.34
                                 0.19                0.01         0.36         0.00
    ld                          -0.75               -0.80                                   -0.86       -0.91
                                 0.00                0.00                                    0.00        0.00
    contig                       0.31                0.28                                    0.17        0.12
                                 0.00                0.00                                    0.00        0.01
    lang_off                     0.59                0.65                                    0.47        0.53
                                 0.00                0.00                                    0.00        0.00
    _cons                        14.0                15.1         -37.0        -39.9        -33.6       -33.5
                                  0                   0             0            0            0           0
Number of
                                2431                2431          2431         2431          2431       2431
observations
R2                              0.92                 0.92         1.00         1.00          0.95        0.95
Notes: p-values under the point estimates. See
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                                20


Table 2 for other details. The left-hand side variable is the log of nominal trade averaged arithmetically (wrong) and geometrically
(right).

    As argued in section 3.3, the empirical relevance of the mistake depends upon the correlation between the
    averaging error and the variable of interest, in our case, euro usage.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                           21


   Table 3 re-estimates our basic model using the three main estimators, OLS, pair and time dummies, and
   nation and time dummies with and without the silver medal error. Quite specifically, in columns 1, 3 and
   5, the dependent variable is lv_avg (which involves the log of the sum of uni-directional flows), while for
   columns 2, 4 and 6 the dependent variable is lv_prd (which involves the sum of the logs). In all cases, we
   have avoided the bronze medal mistake by not deflating the value of trade by the US price index (the time
   dummies absorb the correct deflation factors).
   To understand the results, note that column 1 displays the gold and silver mistakes. That is, the Ω and P
   terms are omitted and not addressed with dummies, and the dependent variable involves the arithmetic
   average. Column 2 displays the gold medal mistake only, since it uses the correctly averaged trade
   variable. Comparing the two, we see that the silver medal mistake leads to a serious over-estimate of the
   pro-trade impact of the euro. With the mistake, the euro is estimated to boost bilateral trade by about 10%
   and the effect is highly significant. When the silver mistake is corrected, we get an entirely different
   policy conclusion – the euro is estimated to have a small and statistically insignificant impact on trade.
   This is due to the fact that bilateral trade is not balanced in our data set and that the imbalance is, on
   average, higher among Eurozone nations. The other main variables are not significantly affected by the
   silver medal mistake.
   The same conclusion flows from the with-versus-without comparison for the other two estimators.
   Comparing column 3 and 4, we see that the silver medal mistake lowers the estimate of the Rose effect a
   great deal, from about 10% to about 4% (this is more than four standard deviations). It is important to note
   that the pair dummies already control for all other time-invariant unobservable factors affecting bilateral
   trade. Thus it is really the time-series correlation between the averaging error and the EZ dummy which is
   causing the bias.
   For the nation-dummy estimator with time dummies, we see that the silver medal mistake also produces
   an upward basis in the size of the Rose effect, but the magnitude of the mistake is less severe.
Why not test if bilateral trade is balanced?
  The results in
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                            22


  Table 3 suggest that the incorrect averaging of bilateral trade can be important. There is, however, a more
  direct way of looking at the importance of the silver error. By definition of the problem, the researcher can
  test whether bilateral trade is balanced. If trade is bilaterally balanced then there is no harm in taking the
  log of the sums instead of the sum of the logs (right way). There are several ways to test the trade-balance
  hypothesis, we focus on the relative imbalance defined as bijt=|Xij –Mijt|/|Xij+Mij|t, where the subscripts
  have the obvious interpretations and numerator and denominator are taken in absolute values. In our
  dataset – crafted to match that of Micco, Stein and Ordoñez (2003) in terms of country and year coverage
  – we tested for balanced trade by the relative measure bi. A simple test of the hypothesis that b=0 for all
  flows is strongly. Figure 1 shows the complete histogram in percentage terms. The x-axis shows the size
  of the trade imbalance as measured in bijt -- and transformed in percentage terms – while the y-axis shows
  what percentage of individual bilateral trade flows in the sample report a particular trade imbalance. From
  the histogram, it appears that only 6% of overall trade has an imbalance close to zero, while for
  approximately one-third of our bilateral trade flows imports are at least double the exports or vice-versa.
  Figure 1: Distribution of bilateral trade imbalance.




  Further investigation shows that the trade imbalance problem is not randomly distributed by nation. When
  it comes to the bilateral flows in our data, Greece imports about 60 percent more of than it exports while
  Ireland exports about 40 percent more than it imports. More generally, large countries tend to have a more
  balanced trade. Given the nation-specific variation for the Rose effect in Micco, Stein and Ordoñez (2003)
  and other studies, this finding is fairly important. It suggests that at least some of the variation in trade
  effect of the euro is due to varying severity of the silver medal mistake.



5. SOME SUGGESTED IMPROVEMENTS
  We turn now to considering some approaches that may reduce the biases discussed above.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                             23


Nominal trade and GDP data with time dummies
  Since the gravity model is based on an expenditure equation, it is natural to use the value of spending by
  nation-d on goods from nation-o as well as to use the value of total expenditure in nation-d with both – of
  course – measured in terms of a common numeraire. These choices imply that we should also use the
  value of total output of nation-o in the gravity equations, see (5). The immediate problem that this choice
  raises is the choice of numeraire. Since the value of GDPs and trade are in current dollars each year’s data
  uses a different numeraire. A common solution to this is to use real GDP (as we did above) which is
  measured in, say, 2000 dollars and so automatically rendered into a common numeraire. This solution,
  however, requires that the trade figures also be deflated back to 2000 dollars. Since few nations have good
  price indices for bilateral trade flows, the common solution has been to deflate the trade figures back to a
  common year using, e.g. a US price index, as was done above. As we saw, this procedure can introduce
  important biases. Flam and Nordstrom (2003) address this problem by using the exporting nation’s
  producer price index as a proxy for the bilateral export price index and using real GDP figures; they also
  always include time dummies.
   We suggest that the econometrician can estimate the proper conversion factor between US dollars in
   different years by including time dummies. To illustrate the basic point consider what the basic gravity
   equation would look like if everything were measured in current US dollars and multiplied by a
   conversion factor et,95 that converts the year-t dollars to base-year dollars, say 1995. If the elasticity of
   substitution, σ, is the same for all nations, then the e’s will just cancel out (the equation is homogenous of
   degree one); if it is not, then we need to include year dummies to control for the residual conversion
   factors.

                                     1−σ                             (et ,95Yo )(et ,95 E d )
                  et ,95Vod = τ od         (                                                                   )
                                               R              1−σ     et ,95 Ei         R        1−σ       1−σ
                                                      (τ oi                     1−σ
                                                                                    )( k =1 n k et ,95 p kd )
                                               i =1
                                                                    et1,−95σ Pi
   Plainly the time dummies will pick up other idiosyncratic year-specific shocks, so the conversion factors
   are not easily identified from the estimated time dummies.
Time-varying country dummies with pair dummies
   As noted in Section 4.1.1, the inclusion of country dummies removes the cross-section correlation
   between the unobservable ΩP1-σ term and the included variables and thus reduces that gold-medal bias.
   The time-invariant country dummies, however, do not remove the time series correlation. Since gravity
   models are frequently estimated over a period in which the determinants of bilateral trade cost are time-
   varying, these determinants are also in the unobservable ΩP1-σ term and this time-series correlation is a
   source of bias.
   One possible correction is to include time-varying country dummies. This involves a lot of dummies, viz.
   2NT for uni-direction trade data, where N is the number of nations and T is the number of years. However,
   with a square panel we will have 2N(N-1)T observations. If T and N are large, there will be many degrees
   of freedom, even with T time dummies. Note that the alternative of using time-varying pair dummies will
   make it impossible to estimate factors that affect bilateral trade costs even if they are time varying. Since
   most gravity models are aimed at identify trade barriers for various kinds, the time-varying pair dummy
   approach will rarely be useful.
   The time-varying country dummies do not remove the bias stemming from the correlation between
   included determinants of bilateral trade (like the Eurozone dummy) and the determinants that are
   unobservable to the econometrician. To this end, it is useful to included time-invariant pair dummies.
Estimates
   To try out the suggestions of using nominal trade and GDP and time-varying nation-role dummies, we re-
   estimate our standard gravity model on the same set of nations and years as in the previous tables.
   Specifically, the dependent variable is un-deflated uni-directional trade. On right-hand side, we use the
   product of current GDPs measured in dollars as the economic mass variable and we include all the usual
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                      24


  controls when possible. The results are shown in Table 4. Our preferred regression – with time-varying
  nation and pair dummies – is in the right-most column, but we discuss the other columns to begin with.
  The first column, shows the results when OLS is used. This regression features the gold-medal mistake
  (correlation between ΩP1-σ and the Eurozone dummy), so the point estimate of the Eurozone’s pro-trade
  effect is upward biased. Including only a time dummy does little to change the results. Including pair
  dummies along with time dummy lowers the currency union trade effect substantially. Including nation
  dummies or nation-role dummies raises the EZ point estimate. Although this is somewhat puzzling (since
  nation dummies should eliminate the cross-section part of the gold-medal bias), we saw the same thing in
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI    25


  Table 2. Note that both in Table 4 and
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                                       26


      Table 2 the nation and time dummy point estimates on GDP drop significantly, so we may be seeing a bias
      in one coefficient spilling over into another. One feature of the results that supports this interpretation is
      the fact that the EU dummy also jumps up compared to the OLS regression. The nation and time, and the
      nation-role and time dummy regressions yield very similar results.


      Table 4: Gravity estimates with uni-directional nominal trade and GDPs.
                                                                                                          Time-
                                                                                                         varying
                                                             Nation       Importer,         Time-        Nation
                                    Time        Pair &         &          Exporter         varying         and
                       OLS          only         Time        Time          & Time          Nation          Pair
 EZ11                    0.17         0.13         0.09        0.24            0.26           0.34          -0.09
 (Rose effect)           0.00         0.00         0.00        0.00            0.00           0.00           0.00
 ly                      0.81         0.81         0.57        0.65            0.70           0.98           0.94
                         0.00         0.00         0.00        0.00            0.00           0.00           0.00
 EU                      0.14         0.14         0.06        0.20            0.21           0.22           0.04
                         0.00         0.00         0.00        0.00            0.00           0.00           0.23
 locked_o               -0.26        -0.25         5.17
                         0.00         0.00         0.00
 locked_d               -0.49        -0.49        -5.87
                         0.00         0.00         0.00
 ld                     -0.86        -0.86                      -0.93            -0.93         -0.93
                         0.00         0.00                       0.00             0.00          0.00
 contig                  0.17         0.17                       0.11             0.11          0.11
                         0.00         0.00                       0.02             0.01          0.02
 lang_off                0.68         0.67                       0.53             0.53          0.53
                         0.00         0.00                       0.00             0.00          0.00
 _cons                 -15.50       -15.56         -7.23        -5.75            -8.18        -23.58       -30.77
                         0.00         0.00          0.00         0.19             0.00          0.00         0.00
 Observations           4837         4837          4837         4837             4837          4837         4837
 R2                      0.88         0.88          0.99         0.91             0.93          0.91         0.99
Notes: The dependent variable is uni-directional bilateral trade with no deflation; ly = product of GDPs in current dollars (no deflation).
All other variables as in
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                             27


Table 2. p-values under the point estimates.


    Moving on to our new estimators, the sixth column shows the estimates when we include time varying
    nation dummies. These dummies, which also absorb the time dummies, should completely eliminate the
    bias stemming from the gold-medal error, i.e. the omission of term that Anderson and Van Wincoop
    (2003) called multilateral trade resistance. It should also eliminate any problems arising from the incorrect
    deflation of trade and GDP figures. Looking at the point estimates in isolation, the estimator seems to do a
    fine job of eliminating biases. All variables are significant at any reasonable level of significant and have
    the right sign and roughly plausible magnitudes. The point estimate on the economic mass variable is quite
    close to unity as predicted by the simple theory (and tightly estimated). The point estimate on EU
    membership has a plausible size of 0.22 implying that intra-EU trade flows are boosted by 25%.9 The
    other standard explanatory variable, distance, is estimated at -0.93 which is quite close to the traditional
    prior of -1.0 (although this is not a theoretical prediction). The one point estimate that seems somewhat
    out of line is the Eurozone impact. At 0.34, or 40%, the figure seems a bit high; it is definitely much
    higher than the consensus estimate of 5 to 15 percent. This outcome, however, is not unexpected due to
    the second bias discussed in Section 3.2 – the correlation between the Eurozone dummy and unobservable
    pro-trade factors.
    The final column corrects for this bias by including time-invariant pair dummies in addition to the time-
    varying nation dummies. This has a radical impact on the currency union trade effect, turning it negative
    and statistically significant. This result, however, is somewhat suspect since the pair dummies also greatly
    reduce the estimated impact of EU members and render it statistically insignificant. One interpretation of
    these results turns on the fact that the pair dummies wipe out information in the cross-section variation, so
    all identification comes from time variation in the variables. Since EU membership varied very little
    during our period (Austria, Finland and Sweden became members in 1995), it is possible that the
    regression is having difficulty in distinguishing between the pair dummies which are absolutely time-
    invariant and the EU membership which is almost time-invariant. As always, the pair dummies absorb all
    time-invariant determinants of bilateral trade costs such as distance and common language.
    One solution to the high standard errors is to add data. In Table 5, we use data back to 1980 and this more
    than doubles the number of observations. The results are quite good. The Eurozone effect is negative but
    insignificantly different to zero, while the EU dummy takes on a plausible and significant magnitude while
    the log of the product of the GDP is estimated at 0.74. While this is somewhat low, it is not out of the
    range of commonly observed values and given the measurement errors this proxy involves we view it as
    plausible.
    Table 5: Gravity model estimated with time-varying nation & pair dummies, 1980-2004

                                 EZ11                     ly             EU               _cons
Coefficient
                                 -0.02                    0.74           0.24             -19.56
Standard Error                   0.03                     0.03           0.02             1.4
p-value                          0.38                     0.00           0.00             0.00
R2=0.98, N=10,788
Note: See text for details of the regression and variable definitions.




6. CONCLUDING REMARKS
    The gravity model is a very useful and popular tool in international empirical economics. This paper
    discusses the straightforward theory behind the equation and uses that theory to illustrate several mistakes
    that are common in the literature. There are surely many more theoretical and empirically advances to be
    made when it comes to the gravity equation. Of the many issues not addressed in this paper, the most



    9
        The formula is exp(coefficient)-1.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                  28


  important and interesting concerns the proper handling of zero trade flows, and the issues surrounding the
  estimation of the gravity model on disaggregated data.



REFERENCES
  Alho, K. (2002) "The Impact of Regionalism on Trade in Europe," Royal Economic Society Annual Conference 2003
    3, Royal Economic Society.
  Anderson, James, 1979, “The theoretical foundation for the gravity equation,” American Economic Review 69, 106-
    116.
  Anderton, Robert, B. Baltagi, F. Skudelny and N. Sousa (2002) “Intra- and Extra-Euro Area Import Demand for
    Manufactures” ECB working paper no. 532.
  Balassa, Bela (1965) “Trade Liberalisation and Revealed Comparative Advantage” The Manchester School of
    Economics and Social Studies, no.33, May.
  Barr, David, Francis Breedon and David Miles (2003) “Life on the Outside” Economic Policy, 573 - 613.
  Barr, David, Francis Breedon and David Miles, 2003, “Life on the outside: economic conditions and prospects outside
    Euroland,” Imperial College, University of London, manuscript
  Baxter, Marianne and Michael Kouparitsas (2006). "What determines bilateral trade flows?," NBER Working Paper
    12188.
  Berger, Helge and Nitsch, Volker (2005), "Zooming Out: The Trade Effect of the Euro in Perspective” CESifo
    Working Paper No. 1435.
  Bergstrand, J. (1985), ”The Gravity Equation in International Trade: Some Microeconomic Foundations and
    Empirical Evidence,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1985, 67:3, August, pp. 474-81.
  Bowen, H. P., E. E. Leamer, and L. Sveikauskas. 1987. Multicountry, Multifactor Tests of the Factor Abundance
    Theory. American Economic Review 77 (December): 791–809.
  Bun, Maurice and Franc Klaassen (2004). “The euro effect on trade is not as large as commonly thought”
    http://www1.fee.uva.nl/pp/klaassen/.
  Bun, Maurice J. G. and Franc J. G. M. Klaassen (2002) “Has the Euro Increased Trade?”, Tinbergen Institute
    Discussion Paper, TI 2002-108/2.
  Combes, P-P., Lafourcade M. and T. Mayer, 2005, “The Trade Creating Effects of Business and Social Networks:
    Evidence from France.”, Journal of International Economics, 66(1): 1-29.
  De Nardis, Sergio and Claudio Vicarelli (2003) “Currency Unions and Trade: The Special Case of EMU”, World
    Review of Economics, 139#%#: 625-649.
  De Sousa, Lucio V. (2002) “Trade Effects of Monetary Integration in Large, Mature Economies”, A Primer on
    European Monetary Union, Kiel Working Paper No. 1137.
  Deardorff, Alan, 1998, “Determinants of bilateral trade: does gravity work in a neoclassical world?,” in Jeffrey
    Frankel (ed.), The regionalization of the world economy, University of Chicago Press.
  Engel, Charles and John H. Rogers (2004) “European Product Market Integration after the Euro”, forthcoming
    European Policy.
  European Commission, 2000, REPORT FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE COUNCIL AND THE EUROPEAN
    PARLIAMENT, COM(2000) 28 final.
  Feenstra, Robert. (2003) Advanced International Trade. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
  Flam, Harry, and Hakan Nordstrom (2003) “Trade Volume Effects of the Euro: Aggregate and Sector Estimates”,
    Institute for International Economic Studies unpublished.
  Frankel, Jeffrey A. (1997). Regional Trading Blocs in the World Economic System. Institute for Internal Economics,
    Washington, D.C.
  Glick, Reuven and Andrew Rose (2002) “Does a Currency Union Affect Trade? The Time Series Evidence”,
    European Economic Review 46-6, 1125-1151.
  Gomes, T, Chris Graham, John Helliwell, Takashi Kano, John Murray, Larry Schembri (2004). “The Euro and Trade:
    Is there a Positive Effect?” pdf file of a preliminary and incomplete draft, not for quotation without permission.
  Hamilton, C. and Winters, A. (1992) "Opening up international trade with Eastern Europe,"Economic Policy.
  Harrigan, James, 1996. "Openness to trade in manufactures in the OECD," Journal of International Economics,
    Elsevier, vol. 40(1-2), pages 23-39, February.
  Head, K. and T. Mayer, 2000, “Non-Europe : The Magnitude and Causes of Market Fragmentation in the EU”,
    Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 136(2): 285-314.
  Helpman, Elhanan and Paul Krugman, 1985, Market structure and foreign trade, MIT Press.
  Hummels, David, Jun Ishii and Kei-Mu Yi, 2001, ”The nature and growth of vertical specialization in world trade,”
    Journal of International Economics 54, 75-96.
  James E. Anderson & Eric van Wincoop, 2001. "Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle," NBER
    Working Papers 8079.
GRAVITY FOR DUMMIES, BALDWIN & TAGLIONI                                                                                  29


  James E. Anderson & Eric van Wincoop, 2003. "Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle," American
    Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 93(1), pages 170-192, March.
  Journal of Political Economy 111, 52-102.
  Kenen, Peter B. (2002) “Currency Unions and Trade : Variations on Themes by Rose and Persson” Reserve Bank of
    New Zealand Discussion Paper 2002/08.
  Leamer, E. E. 1980. The Leontief Paradox Reconsidered. Journal of Political Economy 88 (June), 495–503.
  Leamer, E. E. 1984. Sources of International Comparative Advantage. Cambridge, MIT Press.
  Learmer, E. (1974). “The commodity composition of international trade in manufactures: An empirical analysis,”
    Oxford Economic Papers, 26, pp 350-374.
  Learmer, E. and R. Stern (1970). Quantitative international economics, Allyn and Bacon, Boston.
  Linneman, Hans (1966). “An econometric study of international trade flows, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
  Linnemmann, H. (1966). An Econometric Study of International Trade Flows, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
  Markusen, and Venables, Anthony "The General Theory of Inter-Industry-, Intra-Industry-, and Multinational
    Trade", Journal of International Economics 52 (2000), 209-234.
  McCallum, John (1995). “National Borders Matter: Canada–U.S. Regional Trade Patterns.” American Economic
    Review, June, 85 (3), pp. 615–23.
  Melitz, Jacques (2001) “Geography, Trade and Currency Union”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 2987.
  Micco, Alejandro, Ernesto Stein and Guillermo Ordoñez, 2003, “The currency union effect on trade: early evidence
    from EMU,” http://www.economic¬policy.org/paneldrafts.asp
  Micco, Alejandro, Ernesto Stein, Guillermo Ordonez (2003) “The Currency Union Effect on Trade: Early Evidence
    From EMU”, Economic Policy, 316-356.
  Pakko, Michael R. and Howard J. Wall (2001) “Reconsidering the Trade-Creating Effects of a Currency Union”,
    Federal Reserve Board of St. Louis Review, 83-5, 37-45.
  Persson, Torsten (2001) “Currency Unions and Trade: How Large is the Treatment Effect?”, Economic Policy 33,
    435-448.
  Persson, Torsten, “Currency unions and trade: how large is the treatment effect?,” Economic Policy 33, 435-448.
  Piscitelli, L. (2003) mimeo, available from UK Treasury.
  Poyhonen, Pentti (1963). “A tentative model for the volume of trade between countries,” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv,
    90, pp 93-99.
  Poyhonen, Pentti. 1963a. “A Tentative Model for the Volume of Trade Between Countries”, Welwirtschaftliches
    Archiv, 90 (1): 93-99.
  Poyhonen, Pentti. 1963b. “Toward a General Theory of International Trade”, Ekonomiska Samfundets Tidskrift, 16(2):
    69-78.
  Rose, Andrew K. (2000) “One Money, One Market: Estimating the Effect of Common Currencies on Trade”,
    Economic Policy 30, 9-45.
  Rose, Andrew K. and E. van Wincoop (2001) “National Money as a Barrier to Trade: The Real Case for Monetary
    Union”, American Economic Review 91-2, 386-390.
  Rose, Andrew K. and Eric van Wincoop, 2000, “National money as a barrier to international trade: the real case for
    currency union,” http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/arose/
  Rose, Andrew K., 2000, “One money, one market: the effect of currency unions on trade,” Economic Policy 30, 7-46.
  Rose, Andrew K., 2001, “Currency unions and trade: the effect is large,” Economic Policy 33, 449-461.
  Simon J. Evenett & Wolfgang Keller, 2002. "On Theories Explaining the Success of the Gravity Equation," Journal of
    Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 110(2), pages 281-316, April.
  Tenreyro, S. (2001) “On the Causes and Consequences of Currency Unions” Harvard University mimeo.
  Tenreyro, Silvana and Robert J. Barro, 2003, “Economic effects of currency unions,” NBER Working Paper 9435.
  Tinbergen, Jan (1962). Shaping the world economy: Suggestions for an international economics policy, The Twentieth
    Century Fund, New York.
  Wang and Winters (1991) "The Trading Potential of Eastern Europe", CEPR Discussion Paper 610.
  Westerlund, Joakim and Fredrik Wilhelmsson (2006). “Estimating the gravity model without gravity using panel
    data,” www.nek.lu.se/nekfwi/Estimating%20the%20gravity%20model.pdf.
  Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. (2002) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press
  Yi, Kei-Mu, 2003, “Can vertical specialization explain the growth of world trade?”
