NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TEMPORARY INVESTMENT TAX INCENTIVES:
THEORY WITH EVIDENCE FROM BONUS DEPRECIATION
Christopher House
Matthew D. Shapiro
Working Paper 12514
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12514

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2006

We gratefully acknowledge the comments of William Gale, Austan Goolsbee, James Hines, Peter
Orszag, Samara Potter, Dan Silverman and Joel Slemrod and participants at seminars at the NBER
and the Federal Reserve Board. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Christopher House and Matthew D. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Temporary Investment Tax Incentives: Theory with Evidence from Bonus Depreciation
Christopher House and Matthew D. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 12514
September 2006
JEL No. E22,E62,E66
ABSTRACT
Investment decisions are inherently forward-looking. The payoff of acquiring capital goods, particularly
long-lived capital goods, is governed almost exclusively by events in the far future. Because the timing
of the investment itself does not affect future payoffs, there are strong incentives to delay or accelerate
investment to take advantage of predictable intertemporal variations in cost. For sufficiently long-lived
capital goods, these incentives are so strong that the intertemporal elasticity of investment demand
is nearly infinite. As a consequence, for a temporary tax change, the shadow price of long-lived capital
goods must reflect the full tax subsidy regardless of the elasticity of investment supply. While price
data provide no information on the elasticity of supply, they can reveal the extent to which adjustment
costs are internal or external to the firm. In contrast, the elasticity of investment supply can be inferred
from quantity data alone. The bonus depreciation allowance passed in 2002 and increased in 2003
presents an opportunity to test the sharp predictions of neoclassical investment theory. In the law,
certain types of long-lived capital goods qualify for substantial tax subsides while others do not. The
data show that investment in qualified properties was substantially higher than for unqualified property.
The estimated elasticity of investment supply is high--between 10 and 20. Market prices do not react
to the subsidy as the theory dictates. This suggests either that internal (unmeasured) adjustment costs
play a significant role or that measurement problems in the price data effectively conceal the price
changes. While the policy noticeably increased investment in types of capital that benefited substantially
from bonus depreciation, the aggregate effects of the policy were modest. The analysis suggests that
the policy may have increased output by roughly 0.1 percent to 0.2 percent and increased employment
by roughly 100,000 to 200,000 jobs.
Christopher House
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
238 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
chouse@umich.edu
Matthew D. Shapiro
Professor and ChairDepartment of Economics
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
shapiro@umich.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Even modest reductions in the after-tax cost of capital purchases provide strong
incentives for increased investment. Indeed, for temporary investment tax subsidies that
apply to long-lived capital goods the incentive to invest is essentially infinite. This paper
presents a general equilibrium analysis of temporary changes in taxes that affect the
incentive to invest. Though the paper is motivated by recent changes in tax law, the
analysis has general implications for the equilibrium effects of temporary tax incentives.
Many results flow from a basic property of investment decisions: If firms are
sufficiently forward-looking and investment goods are sufficiently long-lived, the
elasticity of investment demand is nearly infinite with respect to temporary changes in
cost. This property rests directly on the forward-looking nature of investment. Since the
value of such an investment is anchored by long-run factors, variations in the timing of
these investments have only minor consequences for their eventual payoffs. As a result,
the decision of when to invest is highly sensitive to temporary changes in costs.
This insight leads to several results concerning temporary investment tax
incentives. First, if the supply of investment goods is highly elastic in the short run, the
quantity of investment will react dramatically to such policies. Second, temporary tax
changes are necessarily accompanied by offsetting changes in the pre-tax shadow price of
investment goods. In equilibrium the pre-tax shadow price of investment goods must
move one-for-one with the tax subsidy regardless of the elasticity of investment supply.
Observing price increases following a temporary tax incentive is therefore not
evidence that the supply of investment is relatively inelastic. Of course, the elasticity of
investment supply does matter for the equilibrium determination of quantity. Because
economic theory dictates that the underlying shadow price of investment moves one-forone with a temporary tax subsidy, the elasticity of supply can be inferred from quantity
data alone.
We test the theory by examining disaggregate investment data following the 2002
and 2003 tax bills. These bills provided temporarily accelerated depreciation, called
bonus depreciation that allowed firms to immediately deduct an increased fraction of
their investment. Under the 2002 bill firms could immediately deduct 30 percent of
investment and then depreciate the remaining 70 percent under the standard depreciation

schedule. Under the 2003 bill, the immediate deduction increased to 50 percent. This
investment subsidy was explicitly temporary. Only investments made through 2004
qualified for this tax treatment.
Using cross-section data on investment expenditures, we estimate the elasticity of
supply for investment. The data clearly show that the policy had a stimulative impact on
investment in capital that benefited most from the bonus depreciation. Our estimates of
the elasticity of supply are between 10 and 20. Market prices, on the other hand, show
little if any tendency to increase in the short run.
We use our estimates of the supply elasticity together with the general equilibrium
model to infer the likely aggregate effects of the policy. Our calculations suggest that,
while their aggregate effects were probably modest, the 2002 and 2003 bonus
depreciation policies had noticeable effects on the economy. For the U.S. economy as a
whole, these policies may have increased GDP by $10 to $20 billion and may have been
responsible for the creation of 100,000 to 200,000 jobs.
Section II presents the general equilibrium model used in our analysis. Section III
presents some general results for temporary investment tax incentives and discusses their
econometric implications. Section IV describes the tax changes called for by the 2002
and 2003 laws. Section V estimates the parameters of our model using the variation in
the data from the policy changes. Section VI uses the model and our estimates to
quantify the aggregate effects of the policy. Section VII offers our conclusions.

II. MODEL
In this section we present the general equilibrium model which we use to analyze
temporary investment tax subsidies. The model allows for a general type of investment
tax subsidy. Later we modify the model to consider bonus depreciation allowances like
those included in the 2002 and 2003 tax bills. We use the model to present some basic
properties of temporary investment tax subsidies and also to motivate our empirical
research design. Later we use the model to quantify the aggregate effects of the policy.
The model has a basic neoclassical structure. We begin with the household sector.

2

2.1 Households
Households behave competitively and maximize utility subject to their budget
constraints. Households derive utility from consumption (Ct) and disutility from labor
(Nt). Their utility functions take the form
1+ 1
⎪⎧⎪ C1− σ1
N t η ⎪⎫⎪
t
β ⎨ 1 −φ
⎬,
∑
⎪⎪1− σ
1 + η1 ⎪⎪
t =0
⎩⎪
⎭⎪
∞

(1)

t

where η is the Frisch labor supply elasticity, σ is the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution for consumption, and φ is a scaling parameter.
The households own the entire capital stock. Because the tax policies we analyze
provide different incentives for different types of capital, we include several different
types of capital in the model. Let m = 1,..., M be an index of capital types. For each type
m, let δ m be the economic rate of depreciation, and let K m be the stock of capital. New
capital goods are produced with units of the consumption good (the numeraire) as inputs.
Let the total cost of producing I tm units of type m capital be Φtm = Φ m ( I tm ) . The real

(

)

marginal cost of such capital is ϕtm = ϕ m ( I tm ) = ∂ Φ m ( I tm ) / ∂I tm . We assume that

ϕ m ( I tm ) is increasing. For the numerical simulations and for our empirical analysis we
assume that the functions ϕ m ( I tm ) are given by
(1/ ξ )

ϕ m ( I tm ) = ( I tm / I m )

,

(2)

where I m is the steady state level of investment for type m capital. Thus, the elasticity of
supply is ξ and the steady state real relative price is one.1 These costs can be interpreted
as external costs which are reflected in the market price of the good or as adjustment
costs which are internal to the firm and thus not reflected in the market price (Mussa
[1977]).
Abstracting from many issues of corporate finance, we assume that all taxes are
paid by the household. The household’s labor and capital income are both subject to
1

Our functional form differs from Hayashi’s [1982] assumptions that require zero-degree homogeneity in
the investment/capital ratio. Holding the capital stock fixed one can show that, if γ is the adjustment cost

parameter in the Hayashi form (i.e., γ = dQ / d(I / K )), then our elasticity is ξ = (γ δ )-1.

3

distortionary taxation. τ N is the tax rate on labor income. Capital income is taxed twice
—once as business profit and again when capital income is distributed to the households.

τ π is the tax rate on profit, and τ d is the tax rate on the distribution of capital income
(dividends and capital gains taxes).
The household chooses N t , Ct , K tm+1 , and I tm to maximize (1) subject to the

constraints
M

(1− τ tN )Wt N t + (1− τ td )(1− τ tπ )∑ Rtm K tm + Tt + St−1 (1 + rt−1 )
m=1

M

= Ct + St + ∑ Φ m ( I tm ) ⎡⎢⎣1− ζtm ⎤⎥⎦

(3)

m=1

and

K tm+1 = K tm (1− δ m ) + I tm , for all m .

(4)

Here ζtm is the total effective subsidy on new purchases of type m capital, and includes
the value of depreciation deductions and any investment tax credits. 2 Wt is the real wage.
Rtm is the real rental price of type m capital. I tm denotes investment in new type m

capital. Tt is a lump-sum transfer. St is the household’s holding of government debt in
one-period real bonds and rt is the real interest rate.
The household’s optimization requires the first-order conditions
φ N tη = Wt (1− τtN ) Ct σ ,
1

−1

−1

−1

(5)

Ct σ = β (1 + rt ) Ct +σ1 ,

(6)

−
qtm = β Ct +σ1 ⎣⎢⎡(1− τ tπ+1 )(1− τ td+1 ) Rtm+1 ⎤⎦⎥ + β (1− δ m ) qtm+1 ,

(7)

−
qtm = Ct σ ϕtm ⎡⎢⎣1− ζ tm ⎤⎦⎥ ,

(8)

1

and
1

where (7) and (8) hold for all m. The variable qtm , the Lagrange multiplier on constraint
(4), is the shadow value of an additional unit of type m capital. Equation (7) is the first2

The full cost of investment is subject to the tax subsidy. Depreciation deductions are allowed for internal
adjustment costs that are paid out of pocket by the firm. By law, such payments are to be depreciated along
with the purchase price.

4

order condition for the choice of K tm+1 and equation (8) is the first-order condition for the
choice of I tm . Equation (8) relates the shadow value of capital qtm to the pre-tax shadow
price of capital ϕtm .3

2.2 Firms

Firms produce the numeraire good with a constant returns to scale production function.
For simplicity we take the production function to be a generalized Cobb-Douglas form
α

⎡M
γm ⎤
1−α
Yt = A ⋅ ⎢∏( K tm ) ⎥ ⋅ ( N t ) .
⎣⎢ m=1
⎦⎥

(9)

Firms rent capital from the household. Each period, the firms choose K tm and N t taking
the rental prices Rtm and the real wage Wt as given. Profit maximization implies that the
marginal product of each input equals its marginal cost.
Rtm = αγ m

Yt
, for all m ,
K tm

Wt = (1− α )

(10)

Yt
.
Nt

(11)

2.3 Government Spending and Market Clearing

The government levies taxes and consumes units of the numeraire good. In our analysis,
government spending Gt is constant each period. The government’s intertemporal
budget constraint must hold in equilibrium. This constraint is
M

∞

∑

τ tN N tWt − Tt − G + ∑ ⎡⎢ Rtm K tm (τtπ + (1− τ t π ) τt d ) − τ t π (1− τ td ) Φ m ( I tm )ζ tm ⎤⎥
⎣
⎦
m=1
t −1

∏(1 + r )

t =0

= 0 (12)

s

s =0

3

Note that qm is not Brainard-Tobin’s Q. If adjustment costs were external, Q for type m capital would be
m
−
q m /(C ϕ m ) . Below, we argue that in response to temporary tax policies, movements in q are negligible.
1
σ

t

t

t

Because prices and marginal utility change in response to such policies, Qm will change even though qm
will not.

5

where it is understood that

∏

t −1
s =0

(1 + rs ) = 1 for t = 0. Like most tax changes, the

policies we consider have revenue consequences. We assume that the budget is balanced
with offsetting variations in the lump-sum transfers Tt . Because these transfers are lumpsum, their precise timing is irrelevant.
We require all markets to clear in equilibrium. In particular, the goods market
clearing condition requires
M

Yt = Ct + ∑ Φ m ( I tm ) + Gt .

(13)

m=1

III. TEMPORARY INVESTMENT TAX INCENTIVES
We now present some fundamental properties of temporary investment tax incentives.
This analysis sheds light on the basic economic incentives involved in such policies and
motivates for our empirical analysis of the 2002 and 2003 investment policies.
Let the economy begin in the steady state. Suppose the government then credibly
announces a temporary investment tax subsidy financed with variations in the lump-sum
transfer T. The tax subsidy temporarily increases ζtm for certain (or perhaps all)
investment goods. The precise form of the subsidy is not important at this point; it could
be an investment tax credit, a bonus depreciation allowance, etc.

3.1 Short-Run Approximations for Long-Lived Investment Goods

Although the model is complicated, two short-run approximations yield sharp, analytical
results about the effects of temporary investment subsidies. The accuracy of these
approximations rests on two conditions: First the policy must be temporary. Second, the
approximations are most accurate for long-lived investment goods, that is, goods with
low economic rates of depreciation. The approximations are less accurate and potentially
quite misleading for long lasting changes in policy or for capital that depreciates rapidly.
The exact solution to the model is complicated because it has both backward- and
forward-looking variables. For sufficiently temporary tax changes, it is a good
approximation to replace the forward-looking variables qtm , and the backward-looking
6

variables K tm , with their associated steady state values q m and K m . Replacing the capital
stock with its steady state value is standard in many settings. The stock of long-lived
capital is much bigger than the flow and thus changes only slightly in the short run.
Specifically, the percent change in the capital stock is approximately δ m times the
percentage change in investment. (With balanced growth it would be δ m plus the growth
rate.)
The justification for approximating qtm with its steady state value is more subtle.
Expanding equation (7), we can write qtm as
∞

{

}

−1
qtm = β ∑ Ct +σj +1 ⎢⎡β (1− δ m )⎥⎤ ⎡⎣⎢ (1− τtπ+ j +1 )(1− τ td+ j +1 ) Rtm+ j +1 ⎤⎦⎥ .
⎣
⎦
j =0
j

Because the policy change is temporary, the system will eventually return to its steady
state. While this may take some time, most of the terms in the brackets, particularly
those in the future, remain close to their steady state values. Put differently, the
difference between qtm and its steady state level q m comes entirely from the first several
terms in the expansion—the short-run terms. Provided that agents are sufficiently patient
(i.e., that β is close to 1) and that depreciation is sufficiently slow (i.e., δ m is sufficiently
low), the future terms dominate this expression and the short-run behavior of the system
has only minor influences on qtm .
This approximation has a natural economic interpretation. The decision to invest
is inherently forward-looking. As such, the benefits from investment are anchored by
future, long-run considerations. As long as the far future is only mildly influenced by
temporary policies, the benefit to any given investment is independent of the short run.

3.2 Response of Investment to Temporary Tax Subsidies

In this section, we analyze the equilibrium response of the price and quantity of
investment goods to temporary tax subsidies. Conventional supply and demand
reasoning can be misleading because capital is durable and therefore subject to a stock
demand. Expectations about the future dominate current investment decisions. Our
analysis should come as no surprise to careful readers of Jorgenson [1963], Abel [1982],

7

Summers [1985], or indeed, of Lucas’s [1976] critique, which took “investment demand”
as an example. As an example of how misleading conventional supply and demand
reasoning can be, we show that in response to a temporary tax subsidy, the shadow price
of investment goods moves one-for-one with the investment subsidy regardless of the
elasticity of investment supply. This result has important econometric implications.
In our model, equation (2) gives the real pre-tax price of new type m capital ϕtm
which includes all of the costs of investment. It includes costs of investment that are
external to the firm (the price of the good for instance) and any adjustment costs that are
internal to the firm (installation costs, disruption and so forth). Figure 1 plots this
equation for a single type of capital. The total pre-tax price of investment ϕt is on the
vertical axis and the quantity of investment I t is on the horizontal axis. The slope of this
curve is governed by the elasticity ξ .
Equation (8) relates the shadow price of capital ϕt to its shadow value qt , the
− σ1

marginal utility of resources Ct

, and the tax subsidy (1− ζt ) . Using our short-run

approximation, qt ≈ q , we have an equation relating the pre-tax price of investment
goods to the tax subsidy and the marginal utility of consumption. Note that this equation
does not involve the rate of investment. Plotting equation (8) gives a horizontal line with
shift variables C and ζ .
The equilibrium price and rate of investment for each m is determined by the
intersection of (2) and (8). Because qt ≈ q , the price can be recovered from (8) alone,
1

q mCtσ
ϕ ≈
,
1− ζtm
m
t

(14)

which is independent of elasticity of supply and the quantity of investment. If the policy
does not change aggregate consumption, then the shadow price of capital changes onefor-one with the subsidy. If the policy does have aggregate effects, all shadow prices
move depending on the change in the marginal utility of consumption. In this case,
changes in the relative pre-tax shadow prices fully reflect any differences in tax subsidies

8

(the relative after-tax shadow prices are unchanged).4 Thus, for temporary tax subsidies,
the pre-tax price of long-lived investment goods should fully reflect the tax subsidy
regardless of the rate at which the marginal costs of investment rises.
Let vt be the percent deviation of a variable v from its steady state value, that is,
vt ≡ dvt / v . Then, using the constancy of qtm under a temporary tax subsidy, condition

(8) and equation (2) imply that

ξ
ξ
d ζtm + Ct ,
(15)
m
1− ζ
σ
where d ζtm is the change in the investment subsidy. If the tax subsidy has no aggregate
Itm =

effects, Ct = 0 so the elasticity of investment supply ξ can be inferred directly from the
change in investment. If there are general equilibrium effects, one must control for the
change in aggregate consumption to make this inference.
The derivation of equations (14) and (15) requires very few assumptions. Among
other things, they require no reference to the production function, the marginal product of
capital, or the supply and demand for labor. All that is required is a stable supply curve
and the assumption that the investment is long-lived and that the policy is (sufficiently)
temporary. (Equation (16) requires a particular form for the marginal utility of
consumption, though this assumption can be relaxed. See Section V.) Because the
structural relationships do not require many strong assumptions, our theoretical
conclusions which form the basis for our econometric analysis, are robust to many
different sources of misspecification.

3.3 Accuracy of the Approximation.

The approximations qt ≈ q and K t ≈ K are exactly true only for either arbitrarily shortlived policies or for arbitrarily low depreciation rates (and discount rates). For realistic
policy durations and for real world depreciation rates, these approximations are
imperfect. To evaluate the accuracy of our approximations, we present a simple example

4

This finding has antecedents in the Q-theoretical investment literature, which typically considers partial
equilibrium settings. Abel [1982] shows that an instantaneous, temporary tax change has no effect on aftertax Q (which he calls q* ). Since after-tax Q is constant, pre-tax Q fully reflects the policy change. (See
also Hayashi [1982], Summers [1981, 1985], and Auerbach and Hines [1987].)

9

of the approximation for a variety of depreciation rates and policy durations. For
simplicity we focus on a single type of capital. We take the production function to be
Aktα and we hold the real interest rate and the marginal utility of consumption constant.

The firm maximizes the discounted value of after-tax profits. We assume that r = 0.02
(annually) and α = 0.35 . The supply of investment is given by equation (2).
Table 1 presents the equilibrium change in the shadow price of capital goods ϕ in
response to an investment tax subsidy of one percent ( ζ = .01 ). Our approximation says
that the change should be one percent (or equivalently that the change in the shadow
value q should be zero).
Consider a long-lived capital good with an annual depreciation rate of two percent
(comparable to many structures). If the elasticity of supply is 1.00 then, for a subsidy
that lasts one year, the price rises by 0.993 percent. The change in the shadow value (not
reported) is simply the difference between the subsidy and the price change. Thus the
percent change in q for this case is -0.007 percent. For higher elasticities, the
approximation deteriorates. If ξ = 10 , the change in ϕ is 0.954 percent. As the
discussion above suggests, the approximation is best for very temporary policies or very
long-lived durables. Moreover, that the approximation does not hold for longer-duration
policies with capital that depreciates rapidly is exactly what the theory predicts.

3.4 Implications for Observed Prices and User Cost

Price increases are a necessary accompaniment of a temporary investment subsidy. Thus,
observing increased investment goods prices following a temporary tax subsidy is not
evidence of a relatively inelastic supply curve. Theory suggests that the pre-tax price
should rise roughly one-for-one with the investment subsidy regardless of the elasticity.
Because theory has such sharp implications for the equilibrium determination of prices, it
is useful to consider what conclusions, if any, could be drawn from price data.
Recall that the shadow price of investment goods reflects both external and
internal marginal costs of new investment. This distinction does not matter for the
determination of investment, but it does matter for relating the predictions of the model to
observations in the data, which capture only market (i.e., external) prices. Let ptm be the

10

market price of type m investment goods. We assume that internal adjustment costs in
steady state are zero and that changes in the shadow cost are a reflection of changes in
external and internal adjustment costs. If θ is the fraction of external adjustment costs,
ptm = 1 + θ (ϕtm −1).

(16)

Movements in the shadow price affect market prices only to the extent that adjustment
cost are external to the firm. If θ were 1 so that all investment adjustment costs were
external, then we could test neoclassical investment theory by observing whether prices
increased one-for-one with a temporary tax subsidy. Alternatively, without knowledge of
the share of external adjustment costs, price data can be used to estimate θ . Clearly,
without knowledge of θ , price data cannot be used to estimate the elasticity of supply.
Our work relates to Goolsbee’s [1998] analysis of the effect of investment
incentives on prices of investment goods. He finds that increases in the Investment Tax
Credit (ITC) lead to increases in the price of equipment. Goolsbee concludes that the
price increases indicate that the supply of investment is relatively inelastic. Our analysis
leads to a different interpretation. Because the price elasticity of investment demand is
essentially infinite for long-lived capital, the equilibrium price is independent of the
supply elasticity. Price is determined by investment demand alone.
Often, the analysis of tax policy focuses on the user cost of capital.5 Though the
Jorgensonian user cost relationship holds in our model, it is uninformative for studying
the effects of temporary investment tax subsidies. Using (6), (7) and (8), we can write
the user cost expression as

⎪⎪⎧
Δ (ϕtm+1 ⎢⎣⎡1− ζ tm+1 ⎥⎦⎤ )⎪⎪⎫ m
m
m
⎪
⎪⎬ϕ ⎡1− ζ m ⎤ ,
(1− τ )(1− τ ) R = ⎨rt + δ − (1− δ )
(17)
t ⎢
t ⎥⎦
m ⎡
m⎤
⎪⎪
ϕt ⎢⎣1− ζt ⎥⎦ ⎪⎪ ⎣
⎪
⎩
⎭⎪
where Δ( xt +1 ) ≡ xt +1 − xt . This says simply that the after-tax marginal product of capital
π
t +1

d
t +1

m
t +1

equals the user cost (the right had side of (17)). In certain instances (17) can be used
directly to analyze the effects of policy changes. For instance, ceteris paribus, an
increase in ζtm implies a lower after tax marginal product of capital. For the marginal
product to decrease, the capital stock must rise, so net investment must increase
5

For example, Cohen, Hansen, and Hassett [2002] use this approach to analyze the potential impact of the
bonus depreciation policies that we consider later in this paper. They simulate the responses to change in
user cost under the assumption that prices are constant.

11

temporarily. Notice, however, that many assumptions are required to read the effect of
the policy from expression (17). The real interest rate rt , and the real price of new capital

ϕtm must remain constant. In addition, to the extent that the marginal product of type m
capital interacts with other factors of production, employment and other capital inputs
must also be held constant. In short, to use (17) for policy analysis requires that the
policy in question has very limited (if any) equilibrium effects.
The temporary investment tax subsidies that we analyze in this paper provide a
stark illustration of this point. Consider a temporary investment tax incentive that has no
effect on aggregate consumption ( Ct ≈ C ). For long-lived capital goods, qtm ≈ q m ,
which implies that ϕtm fully reflects the tax subsidy ζtm . Hence, ϕtm ⎡⎢⎣1 − ζ tm ⎤⎥⎦ is constant
and the equilibrium user cost of capital is unaffected by the policy. Equation (17)
determines the demand for capital. Temporary investment tax subsidies change neither
the demand for, nor the supply of, capital. Instead, they change investment, that is, the
timing of when capital is acquired. For long-lived capital goods, the user cost formula
provides no guidance for analyzing such policy changes.

IV. BONUS DEPRECIATION
We use the temporary bonus depreciation allowances provided in the 2002 and 2003 tax
bills to study the model’s predictions. In this section we describe the normal treatment of
depreciation in the U.S. Tax Code as well as the modifications provided in the 2002 and
2003 laws. We then use our model to analyze the bonus depreciation policies. Our aim
is to re-derive equation (15) for the special case of bonus depreciation policy. The
analysis provides the econometric relationships which we use in Section V.

4.1 The Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System
Under the U.S. tax code, depreciation deductions for tax purposes are specified by the
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS). For each type of property,
MACRS specifies a recovery period (R) and a depreciation method (200 percent
declining balance, 150 percent declining balance, or straight-line depreciation.) See the
appendix for more details on MACRS. The recovery period specifies how long it takes to
12

amortize the investment. Recovery periods differ substantially across investments and
are supposed to correspond roughly with the productive life of the property. Table 2 lists
selected types of property and their recovery periods. The recovery period for general
equipment is 7 years. Vehicles have 5-year recovery periods. Non-residential real
property, which includes most business structures, is depreciated over 39-years, and so
on.

4.2 Bonus Depreciation in the 2002 and 2003 Tax Bills
On March 9, 2002, the President signed the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act
(JCWAA) into effect. The most prominent provisions in JCWAA were intended to ease
the tax burden on businesses and thereby stimulate investment. These provisions came in
the form of increased depreciation allowances for certain types of business investments.
The 2002 law introduced bonus depreciation, which allowed firms to deduct 30
percent of the costs of investment from their taxable income in the first year of the
recovery period. The remaining 70 percent was depreciated over the standard recovery
period in accordance with MACRS. The 2003 Jobs and Growth Tax Relief

Reconciliation Act (JGTRRA), signed on May 28, 2003, increased the bonus depreciation
to 50 percent. Under both laws, to qualify for the bonus depreciation allowance, property
had to be depreciable under MACRS and had to have a recovery period of 20 years or
less. In addition, the property must have been placed in service after September 11, 2001
and prior to January 1, 2005. Firms that anticipated the policy would rationally increase
investment in the third quarter in 2001.6 We will return to the issue of the timing of the
policy when we present our results.
To illustrate, suppose a business buys a car and depreciates it according to
MACRS. The recovery period for cars is five years and the normal MACRS depreciation
in the first year is 20 percent. The 2002 law allows the firm to first deduct 30 percent and
then depreciate the remaining 70 percent according to MACRS. The deduction in the
first year is then 44 percent ( 30% + .2(70%) ).
Both the 2002 and 2003 laws included investment incentives targeted at small
6

JCWAA requires that the property be acquired (but not necessarily placed in service) after September 11,
2004. JGTRRA eliminated this requirement.

13

businesses that complicate the analysis. Prior to JCWAA, the U.S. tax system allowed
firms to expense investment up to $24,000 annually under Section 179 of the tax code.
The 2002 law increased this limit to $25,000. The 2003 law increased the 179 exemption
to $100,000 through the end of 2005. Like the bonus depreciation allowance, this
exemption only applied to property with a recovery period of no more than 20 years.7

4.3. Quantifying Accelerated Depreciation
Hall and Jorgenson [1967] analyze depreciation allowances by assuming that the firm
immediately recovers the present discounted value of depreciation deductions when it
invests. For any path of depreciation deductions Dj, the present discounted value of the
deductions would be
R

Dj

j =1

(1 + i )

z=∑

j

,

(18)

where i is the nominal interest rate. Let X be the tax reduction from purchasing a unit of
investment.8 The total tax reduction per dollar of investment from regular depreciation
allowances is X = (1− τ d ) τ π z . If this were the only investment subsidy, then the tax
subsidy defined in Section III would be ζ = X . Table 3, Panel A shows calculations of
the present discounted value of depreciation deductions z for various MACRS recovery
periods.
Table 3, Panel B shows the effects of the bonus depreciation policy measured as
the change in z times the statutory corporate tax rate. For property with very short
recovery periods, the investment subsidy is small. For five-year property the 50 percent
bonus depreciation reduces the cost of investment by at most 2.88 percent. For longer
recovery periods the bonus is worth more. 20-year properties get a subsidy between 5
and 10 percent with the 50 percent bonus depreciation deduction.

7

The bills also had other provisions. Because these provisions do not have strong effects across types of
capital, we do not analyze them in this paper. For an analysis of the income tax provisions of the 2001 and
2003 tax policies, see House and Shapiro [forthcoming].
8
The discounted value is calculated with the nominal interest rate because tax depreciation allowances are
not indexed for inflation.

14

4.4 Modeling Bonus Depreciation
Because doing so would entail tracking the vintage structure of investment in each capital
type, solving the model with the exact schedule of depreciation deductions Dj would be
excessively complicated. To get a tractable, recursive representation we approximate
each tax depreciation schedule with a constant geometric rate δˆ m . We use this
approximation again when we simulate the model in Section VI. In the econometric
work in Section V, we use the exact MACRS depreciation schedules to calculate z as in
equation (18).
Using the geometric approximation, MACRS without the bonus depreciation
reduces the cost of investment by X tm where X tm obeys the recursion

(1− τ td+1 )τ tπ+1δˆ m
1− δˆ m
X =
X tm+1
+
(1 + π )(1 + rt )
(1 + π )(1 + rt )

(19)

m
t

with (1 + it ) = (1 + π )(1 + rt ) . Note that we can write (19) as
m
t

−

X Ct

1
σ

j
⎧
⎫
1
1 ⎪
∞ ⎛
ˆ m ⎞⎟ j
−
−
δˆ m β ⎪⎪⎪
δ
1
−
⎪
π
π
d
d
⎜
σ
σ ⎪
⎟
C
C
τ
τ
β
τ
τ
(1
)
(1
)
=
−
+
−
⎜
⎨
∑
⎟
t +1
t +1 t +1
t + j +1
t + j +1 t + j +1 ⎬ ,
⎜
⎟
⎪
⎪⎪
⎜ 1+ π ⎠
1+ π ⎪
j =1 ⎝
⎩⎪
⎭⎪

where we have used
⎛ 1 ⎞⎟
⎜⎜ ⎟
+
=
r
(1
)
∏
t +s
⎝⎜ β ⎠⎟
s =0
j

1

j

⎛ Ct + j ⎞⎟σ
⎜⎜
⎟
⎜⎜ C ⎟⎟ .
⎝ t ⎠

If the tax depreciation rate on type m capital is sufficiently low, and if the policy is
−

temporary, arguments like those in Section III permit us to approximate X tmCt
m
t

−

X Ct

1
σ

−

1
σ

≈ C τ π (1− τ d ) z m .

1
σ

with
(20)

Let λ denote a bonus depreciation allowance for type m capital. As in the actual
m
t

legislation, for every dollar of investment in such capital, firms write off λtm immediately
and the remaining ( 1− λtm ) is depreciated according to the usual depreciation schedule.
The total subsidy on investment in type m capital ζtm is then

ζtm = λtm τtπ (1− τ td ) + (1− λtm ) X tm .

15

(21)

This calculation relies on the assumption that firms pay at least some income tax.
Furthermore, as long as the firm is not exclusively debt financed, the subsidy is effective.
That is, the analysis is unchanged even if the marginal investments are debt financed.
Using (20) and our short-run approximations for q and K, we can write (15) as
⎛ τ π (1− τ d )(1− z m ) ⎞⎟ m ξ ⎛
⎞⎟
1
m
⎜
⎜⎜

⎟
+
⎟ Ct .
λ
It = ξ ⎜
d
t
⎜⎝ 1− τ π (1− τ d ) z m ⎠⎟⎟
σ ⎜⎝1− τ π (1− τ d ) z m ⎠⎟⎟

(22)

The first term is the direct change in investment due to bonus depreciation. As before,
the second term captures the extent to which the policy has aggregate effects. If bonus
depreciation applies broadly, employment will increase (because the policy effectively
increases the real wage) and consumption will decrease (as households substitute toward
subsidized investment).9
The real relative prices of investment goods are also affected by the policy.
Because ϕtm = (1 ξ ) Itm , the pre-tax shadow price of type m capital is
⎛ τ π (1− τ d ) ⎡1− z m ⎤ ⎞⎟
⎛
⎟⎟⎞ 
1
⎜
⎣⎢
⎦⎥ ⎟⎟ d λ m + ⎛⎜ 1 ⎞⎟⎟⎜⎜
ϕtm = ⎜⎜
⎟ Ct .
⎜⎜⎝ ⎠⎟⎜⎜
t
π
d
m ⎟
σ ⎜⎝(1− τ π (1− τ d ) z m )⎟⎟⎠
⎜⎝⎜(1− τ (1− τ ) z ) ⎠⎟

(23)

As in Section III, this equation is independent of the elasticity of the supply of investment
goods. The first term is the discounted value of the tax subsidy itself. In the absence of
changes in Ct , the shadow price of investment goods increases one-for-one with the tax
subsidy.
Equations (22) and (23) can be used to illustrate the predicted effects of bonus
depreciation. Figure 2 plots deviations in investment and real relative prices implied by
(22) and (23) against the tax depreciation rate for ten different types of capital goods for
the quarters immediately after the legislation: 2002:2 and 2003:3. To generate the
9

Typically increases in wages have offsetting income and substitution effects. In this case however, the
temporary nature of the policy together with the forward looking behavior of the household implies that the
income effect is negligible (a fact embodied in our short-run approximations). Using (5), (9), (11), (13),
and (22) one can show that the change in employment is approximately
I m ⎜⎛ τ π (1 − τ d )(1 − z m ) ⎞⎟ m
⎟ d λt
⎜⎜
π
d
m ⎟
⎠⎟
m=1 Y ⎝ 1 − τ (1 − τ ) z
≥ 0.
N t =
m
M
⎧
⎛1
⎞⎟⎪
⎞⎟⎫
⎪
C ξ
I ⎛⎜
1
⎪
⎪
⎜
⎟
(1− α) + σ ⎜⎜ + α⎟⎟⎨ + ∑ ⎜⎜
π
d
m ⎟⎬
⎝η
⎠⎪
⎪ Y σ m=1 Y ⎝1 − τ (1 − τ ) z ⎠⎪
⎪
⎩
⎭
M

ξ ⋅∑

The inequality is strict as long as τπ < 1, σ < ∞, η > 0 and as long as zm < 1. The first-order approximation
of condition (5) then gives C = −(η −1 + α) σ N ≤ 0 .
t

t

16

figures, we chose parameter values for τ π , τ d and σ and calculated zm for each type of
capital according to the approximate MACRS tax depreciation rates. We set Ct to
−0.054 percent in 2002:2 and −0.077 percent in 2003:3. (These parameter values and

changes in consumption are taken from the simulations of the model presented in Section
VI.) We used the bonus depreciation rates λtm provided by the law and set ξ to 15 which
is roughly the midpoint of the estimates we get in the next section. In Figure 2, each
point represents the log deviation from steady state of a particular type of capital. Solid
circles indicate capital types that qualify for bonus depreciation. Empty circles indicate
capital types that do not qualify.
The top panels show the changes in real investment spending immediately after
the 2002 and 2003 laws go into effect. Properties with the lowest tax depreciation rates
do not qualify for the depreciation allowance. Because of the small aggregate effects of
diverting resources to investment in qualified capital, investment in unqualified types
falls slightly. Investment jumps up sharply for 20-year property, the qualified capital
with the lowest tax depreciation rate and therefore the highest benefit from the bonus.
Since the tax subsidy decreases as the tax depreciation rate increases, investment in
qualified capital declines steadily as a function of tax depreciation rates. The lower
panels graph the changes in real shadow prices against the tax depreciation rates. The
response is the same as for quantity except for scaling by the elasticity of supply.

V. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF BONUS DEPRECIATION
We use data on real investment spending and real investment prices to estimate the
parameters of equations (22) and (23). The estimates yield a value for the elasticity of
supply ( ξ ) and allow us to test whether investment prices reflect the tax subsidy.

5.1 Data
We use data from the BEA to construct a quarterly panel of investment quantities and
prices by type. We match the BEA investment data to IRS depreciation schedules. Once
we exclude BEA types that do not have clear matches to the IRS depreciation schedules,

17

our panel has 36 types of capital with quarterly observations from 1959 to 2005.10 We
construct real investment purchases by dividing nominal purchases of type m capital by
the price index for that type. The relative price for type m capital is defined as the mth
price index divided by the GDP deflator. (The appendix provides more information on
this data. See Appendix Table 2 for a list of the capital goods in our data set.)
For our econometric procedure we also use aggregate data on GDP and corporate
profits and data on type-specific investment tax credits.11 Finally, equations (22) and
(23) require the cyclical component of aggregate consumption Ct . For this series, we use
HP-filtered real consumption of nondurables and services with a quarterly smoothing
parameter of 1600.

5.2 Econometric Specification and Estimation
Equations (22) and (23) show how investment quantities and prices respond to bonus
depreciation. Before turning our attention to these structural equations, we first need to
estimate what investment and prices would have been in the absence of the policy. We
use several decades of data prior to the policy to forecast investment quantities and prices
for each type of capital. The resulting forecast errors serve as data for the structural
equations (22) and (23).
The forecasting equations we use to project investment quantity and price are
reduced forms. Our theory does not mandate what variables to include. Our aim is
simply to control for major determinants of investment quantities and prices unrelated to
the policy we are studying. We construct forecasts for horizons h = 1 … H using
forecasting equations of the form

and

ln ( I tm+h ) = BIh ,m Z tm + εIh,,tm

(24)

ln ( ptm+h ) = B ph,m Z tm + ε hp,,mt .

(25)

10

The BEA made changes to its series on private domestic investment in 1997. We therefore use
investment categories that were consistent before and after 1997. We exclude steam engines from the
analysis because it is a consistent outlier. The point estimates we report are similar with or without steam
engines.
11
We are grateful to Dale Jorgenson for providing us with the data on the ITC by capital type. These data
are constructed using methods detailed in Jorgenson and Yun [1991].

18

I tm+h and ptm+h are the investment quantity and price for horizon h and type m capital. The
vector Z tm includes the variables we use to construct the forecasts. BIh ,m and B ph ,m are the
corresponding parameters. Since (24) and (25) are simply auxiliary forecasting
equations, we are fairly agnostic about their specification. Our baseline specification for
the forecast equations includes the t and t −1 values of the following variables:
investment quantity and prices, the log of aggregate real GDP, the corporate profit rate,
and the type-specific Investment Tax Credit. It also includes a constant and a time-trend.
As a parsimonious alternative, we also consider forecasting equations with only the
constant and time trend in Z tm .
We estimate (24) and (25) over the sample period t = 1,...,T = 1965:1 to 2000:4.12
We then use these equations to project investment quantities and prices over 2001:1 to
2005:4. Because our forecasts for this period all condition on the same information (i.e.,
information at date t = 2000:4), we can suppress the subscript t and write the forecast
errors as εˆIh , m for investment and εˆ hp, m for prices. Each h = 1,…,H corresponds to a
quarter between 2001:1 and 2005:4 (h = 1 is 2001:1).
We now estimate (22) and (23) with the forecast errors as the left-hand-side
variables. Define Ψ1m and Ψ m2 as

Ψ =
m
1

τ π (1− τ d )

(1− τ

π

(1− τ ) z
d

m

)

⎡1− z m ⎤ and Ψ m2 =
⎣⎢
⎦⎥

1
.
(1− τ (1− τ d ) z m )
π

These parameters are constant across time, but differ across types of capital m.
Calculating Ψ1m and Ψ m2 requires values for τ π , τ d and z m which are observable.
Referring back to equation (22), our model implies
εˆIh , m = β I 0 + ξλhm Ψ1m +

ξ m
Ψ 2 Ch + eIh ,m
σ

(26)

where βI 0 , ξ , and ξ / σ are parameters to be estimated, and eIh ,m is an error unrelated to
the change in the policy. The bonus rate λhm is 0.3 or 0.5 for eligible capital during

12

For computer equipment, the estimation period begins in 1970:1.

19

2002:2 to 2004:1 and zero otherwise (i.e., λhm = 0 for ineligible capital and for all capital
prior to 2002:2 and after 2004:1). The corresponding version of (23) is

εˆ hp, m = β p 0 + β p1Ψ1mλhm +

1 m
Ψ 2 Ch + ehp,m .
σ

(27)

If investment adjustment costs were entirely external (and thus included in measured
prices) then the estimate of β p1 should be one. Since adjustment costs may be partially
internal, any value of β p1 between zero and one is consistent with the theory.
At a fundamental level, variation in tax policy across types and across time
identifies the structural parameters in the model. Investment also influenced by
aggregate conditions. Equations (26) and (27) show that the response to aggregate
conditions varies systematically across the type of capital. According to the model, the
appropriate control variable is marginal utility times Ψ m2 . To control for aggregate
conditions, we consider two measures of marginal utility. First, we use a specification
based on our model. In the model, marginal utility is proportional to Ch (HP-filtered
consumption of nondurables and services). Thus our first specification includes Ψ m2 Ch as
a control variable. Our second method allows for the possibility that marginal utility is
poorly-proxied by filtered consumption. We replace the consumption-based measure of
marginal utility with time-dummies scaled by the same type-specific factors. That is, in
this specification of equation (26), the term ξσ −1Ψ m2 Ch is replaced by

∑

H
k =1

βk Ψ m2 d h ,k

where βk are parameters that subsume ξσ −1Ck and d h ,k = 1 if h = k and zero otherwise
(i.e., d h , k are time-dummy variables) . We make a similar substitution for equation (27).
These estimates treat the marginal utility of consumption as an unobserved time-varying
object that is common across investment types. Obviously using time-dummies, the
parameter σ is not identified.
The disturbances eIh ,m and e hp,m are not independently and identically distributed.
Let Ωi and Ω p be the HM × HM covariance matrices for the disturbances eIh ,m and e hp,m .
There are three important features of these covariance matrices. First, within type, the
forecast errors are likely correlated across time. Second, there is substantial

20

heteroskedacity across types because some types are less predictable than others. Finally,
there is correlation across types because certain investment goods react to common
shocks in systematic way.
Clearly, with 36 types (M = 36) and 20 periods, (H = 20), we cannot estimate the
parameters of these matrices as each has more than 270,000 independent parameters.
Instead, we impose some additional structure on ΩI and Ω p . To pool the types across
time, we assume the covariance matrices have the following structure
ΩI = RI ⊗Σ I and Ω p = R p ⊗Σ p .

(28)

RI and R p are H × H matrixes giving the correlation of the disturbances across time
within a type. Σ I and Σ p are M × M matrices giving the covariance across types for a
given time. The ( h, h′ ) element of RI and R p can be estimated consistently by
rhI,h′ =

1
M

M

shm,h, I′

m=1

m, I
1,1

∑s

, rhp,h′ =

1
M

M

shm,h, p′

m=1

m, p
1,1

∑s

,

(29)

where shm, ,HI and shm, H, p are the sample covariances of the residuals from equations (24) and
(25) respectively. Similarly, Σ I and Σ p are the sample covariance matrices of the
residuals of (24) and (25) for horizon h = 1. These calculations provide consistent
estimates of ΩI and Ω p that we use to provide correct standard errors for our structural
parameter estimates.
We do not use the full covariance structure to estimate the structural parameters,
so our parameter estimates are robust to misspecification of ΩI and Ω p . We estimate
(26) and (27) by ordinary least squares (OLS) and also by weighted least squares (WLS)
using the inverses of the diagonals of ΩI and Ω p as weighting matrices. The WLS
estimates improve the efficiency of the estimates in light of the strong heteroskedacity in
the forecast errors across types.13

13

See Appendix A.5 for more details on our estimation procedure. Our specification differs from the
standard two-step procedure because we estimate the covariance matrix over a large sample (1965-2000)
and then use them to adjust our structural estimates in a separate, subsequent data set (i.e., 2001-2004).
Similarly, there is nothing to be gained from estimating the forecasting equations (24) and (25) jointly with
the structural equations (26) and (27).

21

5.3 Results

5.3.1 Scatterplots
Before turning to the structural estimates of (26) and (27), it is instructive to plot the data.
Figure 3 shows the log forecast errors from the baseline forecast specification. Each panel
represents a time period. The tax depreciation rates are on the horizontal axes. The panels
on the top row show the forecast errors for real investment while the lower panels show
the forecast errors for real relative prices. These plots correspond to the theoretical plots
shown in Figure 2. Each point in the figure is the forecast error for a single quarter and a
single type of capital. Since each panel includes multiple quarters, there are several
observations per type. Solid points are types that qualify for bonus depreciation. Empty
circles are types that do not qualify. We group the data into five time periods. The first
period, 2001:1 to 2001:3, was before the policy was discussed or in effect. The second
period, 2001:4 to 2002:1, was before the policy was law but during which the policy
applied retroactively. We refer to the second period as the anticipation period. The third
and fourth periods, 2002:2 to 2003:2, and 2003:3 to 2004:1 correspond to the periods of
the 30 and 50 percent bonus. The last period, 2005:1 to 2005:4 is after the policy
expired.
Consider that data for investment quantity shown in the top row of Figure 3. As
one would expect, in the first period (before the policy), there is no discernable
relationship between the tax depreciation rate and investment forecast errors. In the
anticipation period, the pattern predicted by the theory is clearly evident. There is a sharp
discontinuity between eligible property and ineligible property and there is a negative
relationship between the tax depreciation rate and investment among qualified properties.
This pattern remains in the third and fourth panels. In the fifth panel, after the expiration
of the policy, the data do not clearly return to normal. The negative relationship among
qualified types is not clear, but the discontinuity between unqualified types and qualified
types with low tax depreciation rates persists into 2005.
Overall, comparing the actual forecast errors for real investment in Figure 3 with
the simulated data in Figure 2 suggests that the tax policy had the predicted effects. In
Section 5.4 we discuss the expiration of the policy in 2005.

22

The bottom row of Figure 3 shows the same plots for the price data. Unlike the
quantity data, there is no discernable pattern of price movements across types of capital
or across time periods. The variability in the forecast errors suggests that it is not going
to be possible to test the theory using these data. We will confirm this below in the
econometric analysis.
5.3.2 Structural estimates of elasticity of supply
We now turn to the structural estimates of equations (26) and (27). We fit these
equations with the data plotted in Figure 3. The left-hand side variables are the forecast
errors and the explanatory variables are as defined in the equations. For these estimates,
the timing of the policy corresponds to the signing dates and the expiration date provided
by the law. Thus the 30 percent bonus goes into effect in 2002:2, the 50 percent bonus
goes into effect in 2003:3 and the policy expires in 2005:1.
Table 4 shows the estimates of the structural parameters. Panel A gives the
estimates of the investment equation (26). The rows give alternative macroeconomic
controls in the forecasting and structural equations. In row 1 of Panel A, the baseline
forecast specification, the WLS estimate of ξ is 11.64 with an adjusted standard error of
2.55. The OLS point estimate is similar, but with a somewhat larger standard error. (The
comparison of OLS and WLS is similar for all specifications, so we discuss only the
more efficient WLS estimates.) As expected, the standard errors in the specification with
only a time trend (rows 2 and 4) are larger because the forecasts are less precise.14 Lines
3 and 4 of Panel A, give the estimates for the specification where the scaled timedummies replace the consumption-based measure of marginal utility as the control for the
aggregate effects of the policy. The point estimates for ξ are uniformly higher—21.84 in
the baseline forecast specification.
The econometric estimates quantify what was evident from Figure 3. There is a
powerful response of the quantity of investment to the bonus for types of capital that

14

We experimented with several alternative specifications of the forecasting equations. The results were
not sensitive to these alternatives. Among the alternatives was a specification including contemporaneous
GDP and profits in (24) and (25) to control for systematic cyclical responses of investment. The resulting
change in our point estimates was negligible.

23

benefited substantially from the bonus. The strong movements in quantity yield high
estimates of the elasticity of supply—ranging between 11 and 21.
5.3.3. Structural estimates of implied bonus rate
In the estimation presented in Table 4, λhm is a known parameter of the tax policy—equal
to 0.3 or 0.5 for eligible capital during the period of the bonus and zero otherwise. The
exact timing of the bonus in these estimates is assumed to match with the enactment in
law, that is, zero prior to 2002:2 and after 2004:4. Alternatively, we can estimate the
time series of implied the bonus rates that best fits the cross-section of investment periodby-period. To do so, we relax the constancy of the response to the bonus across time
imposed in equation (26) and estimate the equation
ξ m
Ψ 2 Ch + eIh ,m .
(30)
σ
k =1
Here Λ k is the implied bonus rate for period k and d h,k is again a time-dummy equal to
H

εˆIh ,m = βI 0 + ∑ Λk ξΨ1m d h ,k B m +

one when h = k and zero otherwise. B m equals one for types eligible for the bonus and
zero otherwise. Since the implied bonus and the elasticity of supply cannot be identified
separately, in equation (30) we set ξ at a fixed value of 21, roughly the upper bound on
the estimates in Table 4. Figure 4 plots the estimates of Λ h , the implied bonus rate. The
dotted lines are one-standard-error bands. The thin solid line is the time path of the
statutory bonus depreciation rate (dashed during the retroactive/anticipation period). As
in Table 4, we consider specifications with either aggregate consumption (top panel) or
scaled time-dummies (bottom panel) to control for aggregate effects.
The implied bonus rate in the upper panel of Figure 4 closely tracks the actual
bonus rate. The estimates are close to zero in early 2001, but then jump in mid- to late2001. This finding is consistent with a credible anticipation of the enactment of the
retroactive policy. The implied bonus tapers off throughout 2003 and 2004. Empirically,
this means that the differential increase in investment in types of goods benefiting most
from the bonus is diminishing. By 2005, when the bonus has expired, the implied bonus
is approaching zero.

24

The diminishing effect of the policy in the upper panel of Figure 4 is not clearly
evident in the scatterplots in Figure 3. Indeed, when we re-estimate (30) using Ψ m2 scaled time-dummies instead of Ψ m2 Ct , the effects of the policy seem to persist even
throughout 2005. The lower panel of Figure 4 plots the implied bonus rate for this
specification. Looking back to Figure 3, it is clear that the evidence for 2005 is mixed. It
is therefore not surprising that our estimates also yield mixed results on this point.
5.3.4 Structural estimates of response of price of investment
We now turn briefly to the structural estimates for the response of observed investment
prices to bonus depreciation. It is clear from the scatterplots in Figure 3 that the sharp
pattern exhibited by the quantities is not present in the price data. Table 4, Panel B,
reports the structural estimates of equation (27). The theory implies that the shadow
price of capital should change one-for-one with the tax subsidy. If all adjustment costs
were external, and thus reflected in the purchase price, then β p1 in equation (27) should
be one. If a fraction θ of adjustment costs are internal, then β p1 should reflect this
fraction. In the table, the point estimates of β p1 are negative, and have large standard
errors. The standard errors are so large that we can reject neither 1 (pure external
adjustment costs) nor 0 (pure internal adjustment costs). Time-varying estimates for the
price data analogous to Figure 4 (not reported) similarly show uniformly negative point
estimates with wide confidence intervals.
It is not too surprising that we cannot detect the effect of the policy in the price
data. Even if adjustment costs were completely external, price changes of this magnitude
would be difficult to detect. The calculations in Table 3, Panel B indicated that the value
of the subsidy was at most 5 to 8 percent. Thus we should expect prices to rise by no
more than 8 percent for the most heavily subsidized goods. Such price changes are small
relative to the standard deviation of forecast errors for prices (roughly 10 to 20 percent
during the period 2002:2 to 2004:4). Thus, while price data can, in theory, provide a
good test of the model, in practice, the price data is simply too noisy to permit such an
assessment. In contrast, the quantity of investment of eligible types responds by many

25

times the value of the subsidy. Of course, this is why we estimate a high elasticity of
supply.

5.4 Discussion

Our research design uses two exogenous dimensions of variation in the data—the
differential value of the bonus depreciation allowance across type and the time-series
variation of the policy. While the cross-sectional investment data strongly supports basic
predictions of the model, the evidence from the timing of the changes, though generally
supportive of the theory, is not as sharp. Indeed, the data indicate that investment reacted
prior to the signing of the bill and that the expiration of the policy was not clear in the
data. We deal with the anticipation and expiration of the policy in turn.
Our scatterplots and econometric analysis clearly show that the effects of bonus
depreciation were evident prior to its enactment. While the bill was not signed until
March 2002, there were clear signals in the preceding months that such legislation would
be passed. The Economic Security and Recovery Act of 2001 was passed by the House
on October 24 and included the depreciation provisions.15 It is standard to make changes
in tax provisions retroactive because it is well-understood that failing to do so creates
incentives to delay economic activity. Usually, provisions are retroactive to date of a law
is introduced but in this case, the Congress chose the symbolic date of September 11,
2001. The continuing slow recovery of the economy from the 2001 recession made the
eventual passage of the legislation relatively certain.16 Hence, it seems reasonable that
the apparent anticipation of the policy in 2001:4 and 2002:1 in our results are genuine
responses of firms to the policy rather than a fluke of the data.
The expiration of bonus depreciation occurred on schedule at the end of 2004.
While our structural estimates depend critically on the public’s belief that the policies
would expire, as long as there was some probability that the policy would expire, firms

15

The depreciation provisions were the first items in the bill (see Joint Tax Committee, October 11, 2001).
These provisions—including the retroactivity to September 11, 2001—survived intact from the Ways and
Means Committee’s markup on October 12, 2001 to the bill as finally enacted.
16
“While it has gotten little attention, the so-called bonus depreciation is the one corporate tax break sure to
become law.” Boston Globe (December 7, 2001) p. E1.

26

still had a powerful incentive to invest prior to 2005.17 Our evidence on the expiration is
mixed. Neither the scatterplots in Figure 3 nor the time varying implied bonus rate in
Figure 4 provide clear evidence of the expiration. Moreover, in the top panel of Figure 4,
the implied bonus peaked well before the expiration of the policy. Several important
factors likely contribute to the lack of sharp evidence for the expiration of the policy.
First, many of the investment projects benefiting most from bonus depreciation—radio
towers, farm buildings, electricity distribution systems, telephone communication
systems, etc.—likely require substantial time-to-build and may have long lead times. In
recognition of the time-to-build of complex pieces of equipment, the original tax bill
permitted certain property to claim bonus depreciation as late as January 1, 2006.18
Second, projects that did not qualify for this extension needed to be installed by
the end of 2004 to receive the bonus. Thus many firms had an incentive to frontload the
projects to avoid missing the deadline. Many investment projects requiring more than
one year lead time were effectively not subsidized in 2004.
Third, the increased small-business exemptions under Section 179 undoubtedly
influence our results. The increased 179 exemption shares many of the features of bonus
depreciation. The 179 exemption is equivalent to a 100 percent bonus depreciation on
qualified investment up to the maximum deduction under 179.19 Prior to 2002,
businesses could expense $24,000 of investment per year. The 2002 bill raised this
ceiling temporarily to $25,000. This exemption, like bonus depreciation, was set to
expire at the end of 2004. The 2003 bill increased the ceiling further to $100,000 and
extended the expiration data to the end of 2005.20 Thus, in our data, the average effective
bonus rate exceeds the statutory rates of 30 or 50 percent that we assume in our structural
17

A National Association of Business Economics (NABE) survey in January 2004 found that 62 percent of
business economists expected the policy to be extended.
18
To qualify for the extended expiration date, the property had to have a recovery period of at least 10
years, and either have a production period of at least two years or cost more than $1 million, and have a
production period of at least one year.
19
Firms above the cutoff faced the 30 or 50 percent bonus rate. However, like many features of the U.S.
tax code, the 179 exemption has a phase-out range above its exemption cutoff. Thus, firms that are just
above the cutoff faced effective bonus rates between 100 and 30 or 50 percent.
20
The 2004 Working Families Tax Relief Act, approved by Congress in September 2004, extend the
$100,000 Section 179 ceiling to the end of 2007. It also extended several provisions that were scheduled to
sunset. The bonus depreciation allowance was not among the extensions. The extended provisions include
the child tax credit, the 10 percent tax bracket, marriage penalty relief and AMT relief, all of which were
set to expire under pre-existing law.

27

estimation. Moreover, because 179 was set to expire later, to the extent that it stimulates
investment, it will obscure the expiration of the 50 percent bonus at the end of 2004.
In summary, the pattern of changes our theory predicts is clearly evident in the
cross-sectional investment data. Likewise, our econometric model yields a high estimate
for the elasticity of supply. On the other hand, complications in the timing of the
expiration of the policy, the confounding differential expiration of the Section 179
expensing, and time-to-build of large projects make the time-series evidence less sharp.

5.5. Related Empirical Literature

We do not attempt to summarize the huge literature that uses tax changes to estimate
investment models. Instead, we focus on a few papers that are closely related to our
work.
Goolsbee [1998] presents evidence that increases in the Investment Tax Credit
bids up prices without sharp increases in real investment. This finding contrasts with our
results which show that investment spending reacted strongly to bonus depreciation, but
do not show a clear price reaction. Although we do not know exactly what is responsible
for the discrepancy, two important differences in the policies Goolsbee examines and the
bonus depreciation analyzed here could play a role. First, bonus depreciation was
explicitly temporary, while the ITC (the focus of Goolsbee’s paper) was more persistent.
On the one hand this suggests that investment spending should respond more but, on the
other hand, it also means that prices should respond more. Second, while the ITC applied
evenly to a broad class of equipment, bonus depreciation was concentrated on a narrow
portion of total investment. Because the tax policy gave strong tax incentives to certain
“quasi-structures” but not to business structures in general, there was substantial room for
substitution across these industries. For example, bonus depreciation provides a
substantial subsidy to farm structures. It is natural to think that firms that build other
structures (that were not subsidized) could easily switch temporarily to construct farm
structures while the policy was in effect.21

21

It is possible that price data imperfectly reflect high frequency variation that would arise from temporary
tax changes. If so, this measurement problem could be another source of the difference between our results
and Goolsbee’s, which were based on more persistent tax changes. Nevertheless, the predicted movements

28

Based on a difference-in-difference specification, Cohen and Cummins [2006] in
a paper written after the first draft of this paper was circulated, conclude that bonus
depreciation was largely ineffective. Some of the details of their analysis lead it to have
little power to detect the effects of the bonus. First, they aggregate investment into two
groups: five-year capital or less, and seven-year capital or more. The two groups
function as a treatment group and a control group. Because of the relative abundance of
five and seven-year capital in total investment, this aggregation implies that Cohen and
Cummins are effectively comparing five-year and seven-year capital, neither of which
gets much benefit from bonus depreciation (see Table 3, Panel B). Second, they date the
onset of the policy in 2003:2 and assume that the expiration is in 2005:1. Our results
show, however, that the policy was anticipated perhaps as early as 2001:4 and the
expiration, for reasons discussed above, was not a sharp cutoff.
Knittel [2005a, 2005b] presents evidence based on IRS tax returns that many
businesses—particularly small businesses—claimed neither bonus depreciation nor the
179 exemption to the fullest extent even though they had qualified investments.
Although Knittel’s finding presents a puzzle from the standpoint of basic economics, it
does not invalidate the central arbitrage argument underlying our analysis. Suppose
investment decisions were made by two groups of individuals: rational firms that react
the way theory dictates, and irrational firms whose spending is exogenous and thus
unresponsive to policy (perhaps because they do not understand the tax code and thus
frequently file in a manner that is not to their advantage). This modification would
change neither our main theoretical results nor our econometric approach nor the
aggregate effects of the policy. In equilibrium, the rational investors are indifferent as to
when they invest. Indeed, this near indifference is the heart of our empirical and
theoretical results. Even if they are in the minority, because they effectively arbitrage
predictable movements in the after-tax price, the behavior of the rational agents will
cause the after-tax price to stay at its steady state level. As before, price fully reflects the
subsidy and investment is determined by the supply curve.

in quantities are so large relative to those of prices (see Figure 3) that our test should still reveal the effects
of the policy in quantity data even if the price data used to construct them do not.

29

Finally, our estimates of the elasticity of investment supply are related to the
literature on the estimation of investment adjustment costs. Early estimates, based on
Brainard-Tobin’s Q suggested implausibly high adjustment costs (see Hayashi [1982],
Summers [1981], and Tobin [1981]). Estimates based on the firm’s first-order condition
typically lead to low to moderate adjustment costs (see Shapiro [1984] and Hall [2004]).
Similarly, more recent estimates based on the Q theory that take into account timing,
gestation lags, and measurement errors lead to more moderate adjustment costs (see
Erickson and Whited [2000] and Millar [2005]). Our estimates of an elasticity of
investment supply between 10 and 20 correspond to adjustment cost elasticities in the Q
framework of between 1 and 2.22 Hence, as with the more recent estimates, we find that
adjustment costs are quite low.

VI. AGGREGATE EFFECTS OF THE 2002 AND 2003 TAX LAWS
We now consider the possible aggregate effects of the tax laws. To do so, we use the
estimates from Section V to calibrate the general equilibrium model and then we simulate
the aggregate effects of the tax policy.
6.1 Calibration

We calibrate the model to match broad features of the U.S. economy and to match our
estimates from the previous section. Our estimates of the elasticity of investment supply
fall between 11 and 21. For our baseline calibration we take a value that is roughly in the
midpoint of this range and set ξ equal to 15. The remaining parameters are set as
follows. The annual discount factor ( β ) is 0.97, which gives a 3 percent annual real
interest rate. The annual rate of inflation ( π ) is 3 percent. The Frisch labor supply
elasticity ( η ) is 0.5 which is in line with recent estimates (see Farber [2003] and Kimball
and Shapiro [2003]). We set σ , the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, to 0.2, which
is roughly the average estimate in Hall [1988], Campbell and Mankiw [1989] and Barsky,
et al. [1997]. To calibrate labor’s share, we take the average value of total employee
22

Recall that ξ=(γ δ )−1 where γ is the elasticity of adjustment costs in Hayashi’s formulation (see

footnote 1). For an average depreciation rate of 5 percent, ξ of 10 or 20 corresponds respectively to γ of
2 or 1.

30

compensation as a fraction of total GDP less proprietors’ income over the post war
period. This gives 1− α = 0.62 . We set the share of government purchases in steady
state to 0.2 which is roughly the average over 1990 to 2005. We calibrate the capital tax
rates ( τ π and τ d ) to match the average marginal tax rates across income sources as
detailed in the appendix. This gives τ π = 0.22 and τ d = 0.30 . These calibrations
account for differences in forms of ownership and for differences in financial structure.
The baseline parameter values are summarized in Table 5. (The calibration of the labor
tax rate τ N , which is constant, has no influence on our results.)
We allow for ten different types of capital. Having this many types of capital
allows us to capture the heterogeneity in depreciation schedules in the U.S. tax code. The
economic rates of depreciation for each type of capital are based primarily on Fraumeni
[1997].23 The approximate MACRS depreciation rates ( δˆ m ) are defined to be broadly
consistent with IRS publication 946 and with Brazell and Mackie [2000]. The capital
share parameters ( γ m ) are set to match the relative investment shares from the U.S.
National Income and Product Accounts. Investment shares are not constant over the
post-war period. Since the policies we analyze are current, we choose γ m to match the
model’s investment shares with their empirical averages from 1990-2002. Table 6 lists
the capital types included in the model together with their economic and tax depreciation
rates and shares of total investment. See the appendix for more details on our calibration.
In the simulations, the timing of the bonus depreciation allowance follows the
timing of the enactment of the legislation and that all of the policy changes are
unanticipated. A simulation with anticipations of the policy during the retroactive period
would have similar aggregate effects, but with an onset two quarters earlier. The
simulation also has a sharp cutoff at the expiration of the bonus. Adding time-to-build
would move the effects of the bonus earlier.

6.2 The 2002 and 2003 Tax Laws: Baseline Simulation

Figure 5 shows the simulated reaction to the bonus depreciation allowances. The top two
panels show the responses of GDP, total employment, aggregate investment and
23

These rates are estimated using techniques established by Hulten and Wykoff [1981a, 1981b].

31

aggregate consumption. The lower panels show the response of investment for each type
of capital.
Employment, output, and investment increase after each policy change. The
biggest effects come after the 2003 law. In the quarter after JGTRRA passes, GDP is 0.18
percent above trend. Employment and aggregate investment are 0.19 and 1.80 percent
above trend. Consumption decreases by 0.06 percent relative to trend. To put these
figures in perspective, based on actual GDP in 2003 ($11 trillion) and total employment
in 2003 (130 million workers), bonus depreciation increased GDP by roughly $17.4
billion and increased employment by roughly 191 thousand jobs (assuming the increase
in employment is entirely at the extensive margin).
The modest effects of the policies are due to the fact that many types of
investment goods are not substantially affected. Housing, and (most) business structures
fail to qualify for bonus depreciation. Furthermore, most qualified investment is not
substantially affected by the policy. Five-year property, vehicles and computer
equipment for instance, get only small subsidies. For the U.S., the investments that are
significantly affected account for at most 9 percent of total investment.
The simulated effects of the policy are more striking when one compares
investment across types of capital (the bottom panels of the figure). At one extreme are
farming structures,24 rail structures, and electric power structures which increase by
almost 40.0 percent after JGTRRA. Telephone structures and other power and utility
structures increase by 30 percent. At the other extreme, residential investment and
commercial structures both contract by roughly 6 percent.
Note that aggregate investment does not fall below steady state when the policy
expires. First, there is an increase in investment in structures. (Industrial and residential
structures have essentially the same path, so only the line for residential structures shows
in the Figure 5.) During the period of the bonus, investment in capital that did not
receive the bonus is depressed by the aggregate scarcity of resources. Second, though
investment in qualified types falls below steady state, the reductions following the
expiration of the bonus are smaller that the high rates of investment during 2002:2 to
2004:4. There are two reasons for the lack of an investment slump following the
24

This category does not include single purpose agricultural structures.

32

expiration. First, while it is true that once the subsidy expires the stock of qualified
capital is above steady state, the stock is not far above steady state. The capital goods
that were affected most had very low depreciation rates and thus the stock is a slow
moving variable even when investment is abnormally high. Second, to bring these
capital stocks back to steady state, there is a gradual reduction in investment spread out
over many periods in the future rather than a sharp reversal in investment rates.

6.3 The 2002 and 2003 Tax Laws: Alternative Parameter Values

Table 7 considers several alternatives to our baseline calibration. For each specification
we document the change in GDP and total employment in 2003 predicted by the model.
The different specifications are described in the table. Parameters not explicitly stated in
the table are set at their baseline values.
As we decrease the elasticity of investment supply the aggregate effects decrease
moderately. Reducing ξ to 10 implies that GDP in 2003 increases by 0.145 percent and
employment in 2003 increases by 183 thousand jobs. Similarly, a higher elasticity
magnifies the changes in GDP and employment modestly. As discussed above, our
estimates are high relative to the literature on internal investment adjustment costs. In
this case the increase in 2003 GDP is only 0.098 percent and the increase in employment
is 132 thousand jobs.
Changing the tax structure of the model has strong effects on the outcome. For
instance, the 2003 tax law also reduced dividend and capital gains taxes to 15 percent for
most individuals. If we set τ d = 0.15 rather than 0.30 then the increase in GDP in 2003
is 0.207 percent and roughly 268 thousand jobs are created. Naturally, more elastic labor
supply causes the economy to expand more. A higher intertemporal elasticity of
substitution for consumption ( σ = 1 ) implies that households are more willing to reduce
consumption to finance investment. Thus, employment and production react less when

σ is higher. Variations in the nominal interest rate change the value of the bonus
depreciation allowance. When nominal interest rates are only 4 percent for instance, the
increase in GDP is only 0.114 percent in 2003.

33

The effects of the policy are modest across all of these specifications. For the
most part, the predicted increase in 2003 GDP lies between 0.10 and 0.20 percent of GDP
and employment increases by roughly 100,000 to 200,000 jobs.

VII. CONCLUSION
Because the value of long-lived capital is dictated by long-run considerations, it is not
sensitive to changes in the timing of purchase or installation. As a result, there are strong
incentives to alter the timing of investment in response to temporary tax subsidies. These
incentives are so strong that for a sufficiently temporary tax change, or a sufficiently
long-lived capital good, the shadow price of new investment changes to fully reflect the
tax subsidy regardless of the elasticity of investment supply. Observing that prices of
such capital goods rise following explicitly temporary tax incentives does not imply that
the supply of such goods is inelastic. Instead, the elasticity of supply can be inferred
from quantity data alone. While prices do not reveal the elasticity of supply, price data
can reveal the composition of internal versus external adjustment costs. If prices only
partially reflect the subsidy then a significant fraction of the cost of investment is internal
to the firm.
The high elasticity of intertemporal substitution implies a structural relationship
between investment and changes in the cost of capital goods that holds under very
general conditions. Because the relationship depends only on an arbitrage argument,
unlike approaches based on Q-theory, we do not require strong assumptions on the form
of the production function, returns to scale, or homogeneity of the adjustment cost
function. Instead, our results simply require an upward sloping investment supply
function and sufficiently temporary tax subsidies. The implied relationship also shows
precisely how to control for changes in the aggregate scarcity of resources and therefore
takes into account general equilibrium effects of the policy. For policy changes that have
broad effects, the general equilibrium channel can substantially attenuate the impact of
the policy on investment even with a high elasticity of supply (low adjustment costs).
The general results hold for only the specific circumstance of a sufficiently
temporary change in the cost of purchasing capital goods. Calculations show that for
long-lived durable capital goods, even changes in tax policy that last for several years can

34

safely be modeled as temporary. Given the frequency of changes in tax policy, our
analysis can be applied to many episodes.
The bonus depreciation allowance passed in 2002 and then increased in 2003
provides an opportunity to estimate the effective elasticity of investment supply and to
test the theory. Only investment goods with a tax recovery period less than or equal to 20
years qualify for the bonus depreciation. The theory suggests that there should be a sharp
difference in the response of investment spending between the 20-year investment goods
and those with more than a 20-year recovery period. In addition, among the qualified
investment goods, we should observe higher investment spending for goods with higher
tax recovery periods. The data support both predictions. Bonus depreciation appears to
have had a powerful effect on the composition of investment. Capital that benefited
substantially from the policy, namely equipment with long tax lives, saw sharp increases
in investment. In contrast, there is no evidence that market prices increased due to the
policy.
Although the policy expired in 2005, it is not clear whether investment spending
returned to normal as one would predict. This is likely due to the extension of bonus
depreciation for certain properties and the increased Section 179 exemption (a tax
incentive that shares many of the features of bonus depreciation).
Because the data indicate that qualified investment goods responded strongly to
the tax policy, the estimated investment supply elasticities are quite high—roughly
between 10 and 20. We use our estimates to assess the likely aggregate impacts of the
policy. Because the policy was narrowly focused on a small subset of investment
spending, we find that it had only modest effects on aggregate employment and output
despite the stark effects on the composition of investment.

35

REFERENCES
Abel, Andrew B. 1982. “Dynamic Effects of Permanent and Temporary Tax Policies in a
q Model of Investment.” Journal of Monetary Economics 9, May, pp. 353-373.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Hines, James R. 1987. “Anticipated Tax Changes and the Timing
of Investment.” In The Effects of Taxation on Capital Accumulation, Martin Feldstein ed.,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 163-196.
Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997.
“Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the
Health and Retirement Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2), pp. 537-579.
Brazell, David W., and Mackie, James B. 2000. “Depreciation Lives and Methods:
Current Issues in the U.S. Capital Cost Recovery System.” National Tax Journal 53(3),
pp. 531-562.
Campbell, John and Mankiw, N. Gregory. 1989. “Consumption, Income and Interest
Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 4: 185216.
Cohen, Darrel S. and Cummins, Jason. 2006. “A Retrospective Evaluation of the Effects
of Temporary Partial Expensing.” Federal Reserve Board, Finance and Economics
Discussion Series working paper No. 2006-19, April.
Cohen, Darrel S., Hansen, Dorthe-Pernille, and Hassett, Kevin A. 2002. “The Effects of
Temporary Partial Expensing on Investment Incentives in the United States.” National
Tax Journal, September, 55(3), pp. 457-466.
Erickson, Timothy and Whited, Toni M. 2000. “Measurement Error and the Relationship
between Investment and q.” Journal of Political Economy 108(5), pp. 1027 – 1057.
Farber, Henry S. 2003. “Is Tomorrow Another Day? The Labor Supply of New York
City Cab Drivers.” Princeton University, Working Paper No. 473.
Fraumeni, Barbara M. 1997. “The Measurement of Depreciation in the U.S. National
Income and Product Accounts.” Survey of Current Business, July, pp. 7-23.
Goolsbee, Austan. 1998. “Investment Tax Incentives, Prices, and the Supply of Capital
Goods.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(1), February, pp. 121-148.
Hall, Robert E. 1988. “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption.” Journal of Political
Economy 96(2), April, pp. 339-357.
Hall, Robert E. 2004. “Measuring Factor Adjustment Costs.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, August, pp. 899-927.
36

Hall, Robert E. and Jorgenson, Dale W. 1967. “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior.”
American Economic Review 57(3), June, pp. 391-414.
Hayashi, Fumio. 1982. “Tobin’s Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical
Interpretation.” Econometrica 50, January, pp. 213-224.
House, Christopher L. and Shapiro, Matthew D. 2006. “Phased-In Tax Cuts and
Economic Activity.” Forthcoming in the American Economic Review, also available as
NBER working paper No. 9832.
Hulten, Charles R., and Wykoff Frank C. 1981a. “The Estimation of Economic
Depreciation Using Vintage Asset Prices: An Application of the Box-Cox Power
Transformation.” Journal of Econometrics 15(3), April, 367-396.
Hulten, Charles R., and Wykoff Frank C. 1981b. “The Measurement of Economic
Depreciation,” in Charles R. Hulten eds. Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation of
Income from Capital. Washington, D.C: Urban Institute Press, 81-125.
Internal Revenue Service. 2003 How to Depreciate Property. Department of the
Treasury, IRS Publication 946.
Joint Committee on Taxation, Description of the “Economic Security and Recovery Act
Of 2001” (JCX-69-01), October 11, 2001
Joint Committee on Taxation, Summary of P. L. 107-147, the “Job Creation and Worker
Assistance Act of 2002” (JCX-22-02), March 22, 2002.
Jorgenson, Dale W. 1963. “Capital Theory and Investment Behavior.” American
Economic Review 53(2), May, pp. 247-259.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Yun, Kun-Young. Tax Reform and the Cost of Capital. Oxford
University Press, 1991.
Kimball, Miles and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2003. “Labor Supply: Are Income and
Substitution Effects Both Large or Both Small?” Unpublished paper, University of
Michigan.
Knittel, Matthew. 2005a. “Taxpayer Response to Partial Expensing: Do Investment
Incentives Work as Intended?” Department of Treasury Working Paper.
Knittel, Matthew. 2005b. “Small Business Utilization of Accelerated Tax Depreciation:
Section 179 Expensing and Bonus Depreciation.” Department of Treasury Working
Paper.
Lucas, Robert E. 1976. “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique.” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy (1) pp. 19-46.

37

Millar, Jonathan N. 2005. “Gestation Lags and the Relationship Between Investment and
Q in Regressions.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 2005-28. Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Mussa, Michael L. 1977. “External and Internal Adjustment Costs and the Theory of
Aggregate and Firm Investment.” Economica 44, May pp. 163-178.
NABE Industry Survey, January 2004. National Association for Business Economics,
Washington, D.C.

Shapiro, Matthew D. 1986. “The Dynamic Demand for Capital and Labor,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 101, August, pp. 513-542.
Summers, Lawrence H. 1981. “Taxation and Corporate Investment: a q-Theory
Approach.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1981(1), pp 67-127.
Summers, Lawrence H. 1985. “Requiem for the Investment Equation.” Unpublished
mimeo, Harvard University.
Tobin, James. 1981. “Discussion of ‘Taxation and Corporate Investment: a q-Theory
Approach.’” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 1981(1), pp 132-139.

38

APPENDICES
A.1. The Steady State
The model has a non-stochastic steady state equilibrium associated with constant tax rates
and a constant rate of government spending. Here we briefly outline how this steady
state is calculated.
In steady state K tm = K m , I m = δ m K m ∀m . As a matter of convenience, we
assume that the average cost of investment (like the marginal cost of investment) is 1 in
steady state. This requires placing assumptions on the production functions which
generate the supply functions ϕ m ( I tm ) .25 Thus ϕtm = 1 for all m. Equations (8) then
−1

imply q m = C σ [1− ζ m ] . We calculate the steady state subsidy ζ m according to equation
(21) in the text with no bonus depreciation rate. The approximate tax depreciation rates
δˆ m are the ratio of the declining balance rate for the type of capital in question divided by
the recovery period (e.g., for automobiles, the declining balance rate is 200 percent, and
the recovery period is 5 years so δˆ m is 40 percent).
The real and nominal interest rates are 1 + r = β −1 and 1 + i = (1 + r )(1 + π ) . The
Euler equations (7) give the real rental prices for each type of capital
(r + δ m )(1− ζ m )
.
Rm =
(1− τ π )(1− τ d )
With R m , we can express the steady state capital stocks K m in terms of one reference
capital stock. We take m = 1 as the reference capital stock. Then, (10) implies that that
any other capital stock is given by
⎡ R1 γ ⎤
K m = ⎢ mt m ⎥ K 1 = ψm,1 ⋅ K 1
⎢
⎥
⎣ Rt γ1 ⎦
R1 γ
with ψm ,1 ≡ mt m . Together with the production function (9), total output is
Rt γ1
α

Y = A ⋅Ξα ( K 1 ) ( N )

1−α

.

γm

with Ξ = ∏ m=1(ψm ,1 ) . Equation (10) pins down the equilibrium capital to labor ratios
M

and, with equation (11), the output to labor ratio. The pre-tax real wage is then,

25

The corresponding cost function is
1+ξ
⎫
⎪⎧⎪
⎪
ξ ⎛⎜ I tm ⎞⎟ ξ
1 ⎪
⎪
⎟
Φ (I ) = I ⎨
+
⎜ m⎟
⎬⎪ ,
⎟
⎜
⎪
⎪
+
+
1
1
I
ξ
ξ
⎝ ⎠
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩⎪
⎭
m

m
t

m

where ξ > 0. This function can be inverted to get the production function I m (Φtm ) . Note that this
formulation includes a flow fixed cost of production which is necessary to allow for an increasing marginal
cost but for equal marginal and average costs in the steady state. We assume that there are many firms
(measure 1) that produce investment goods each with the same cost/production function. The firms behave
competitively but there is no entry.

39

W = (1− α )

Y
.
N

Y (1− g )

Km
.
Let g be the ratio of government spending to GDP and let Γ ≡
−∑δ
N
N
m
Goods market clearing then implies C = N ⋅ Ψ which with (5) gives steady state
employment as
m

1

1+1
⎡W
−1 ⎤ η σ
.
N = ⎢ (1− τ N ) Γ σ ⎥
⎢⎣ φ
⎥⎦

A.2. Notes on Calibration
We set γ m to match the relative steady state levels of investment with the corresponding
investment rates in the data. We begin with the real rental prices R m and compare type 1
capital with the other types. We can write the relative rental prices as
γ1 K m
γ1 I m δ1
R1
=
=
,
Rm γm K 1
γm I 1 δ m
R m I m δ1
which implies γ m = γ1 ⋅ μm,1 , where μm,1 ≡ 1 1 m . Since
R I δ

∑

M
m=1

γ m = 1 , we set

−1

M
γ1 = ⎡⎢ ∑ m=1 μm,1 ⎤⎥ .
⎣
⎦

We use NIPA data to calibrate the investment ratios I m / I 1 ; we use depreciation figures
from Fraumeni [1997] to calibrate the depreciation ratios δ1 / δ m .
To calibrate τ π and τ d , we assume that, for all types of capital (other than
residential capital), payments, depreciation, transfers, and indirect business taxes are split
between proprietorships and corporations. The fraction of the corporate sector is
calibrated from NIPA data by taking the sum of corporate profits and net interest and
dividing by the sum of corporate profits, net interest and proprietors’ capital income as
defined in Section 5.3. For 1990-2002, the ratio of corporate capital income to total
capital income is Fcorp = 0.85. Proprietors deduct depreciation directly from their
personal income. We assume that marginal tax rates for proprietors are 0.30, which is
roughly the average tax rate for upper income individuals. This income is only taxed
once so, for proprietorships, τ π = 0.30 and τ d = 0 .
We treat the corporate sector as financed partially with debt and partially with
equity. We calculate the share of equity finance as the ratio of corporate profits (before
tax) to the sum of corporate profits plus net interest income. For 1990-2002, this fraction
is f eq = 0.60 . Equity is taxed first as corporate profits and then as dividend income.
The statutory tax rate on corporate profits is roughly 0.35. Because dividend income is
highly skewed, we assume that all dividends are paid to people at the top income tax
bracket. Thus, for equity, τ π = 0.35 and τ d = 0.35 . Debt financing avoids the corporate

40

tax but is subject to the income tax rate. We treat debt finance as τ π = 0 and τ d = 0.35 .
The overall tax rates are:
τ π = ⎣⎢⎡1− F corp ⎦⎥⎤ ⋅ 0.3 + F corp ⋅ { f eq ⋅ 0.35 + (1− f eq )⋅ 0} = 0.2235 ,
τ d = ⎡⎢⎣1− F corp ⎤⎦⎥ ⋅ 0 + F corp ⋅ { f eq ⋅ 0.35 + (1− f eq )⋅ 0.35} = 0.2975 .

A.3. Data
The data on investment by type are taken from the Underlying Detail Tables for the BEA
National Economics Accounts. Specifically, tables 5.4.4AU, 5.4.4BU, 5.4.5AU,
5.4.5BU, 5.4.6AU, 5.4.6BU, 5.5.4U, 5.5.5U, and 5.5.6U. For equipment, the investment
categories used are on lines: 5-11, 13, 15-20, 22, 25-28, 34, 35, 37-40; for structures, the
categories used are on lines: 4, 7, 14, 17-19, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 28, and 34. The category
for railroad structures (see Table 6) disappears after 1997. After 1997, railroad structures
are included in land, which the BEA describes as “primarily consisting of railroads”.
Data on the investment tax credit by asset type are from Dale Jorgenson. These data are
constructed using the methods described in Jorgenson and Yun [1991]. Data for real and
nominal GDP, the Federal Funds Rate, the 10-year Treasury rate, the CPI and the GDP
Deflator are taken from the FRED database at the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank.

A.4. The Recovery of Depreciation under the U.S. Tax System
This section provides additional details about the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery
System or MACRS. For more information the reader should consult IRS Publication 946
How to Depreciate Property.
Businesses deduct the costs of most capital investments from taxable income in
the years following the initial investment. Almost all tangible assets can be depreciated
provided that their primary use is in production.26 In general, deductions begin the year
the property is placed in service. Firms may depreciate the cost of the asset as well as
any installation fees, freight charges, and sales tax. Thus, the bonus depreciation
allowance applies to external and internal costs symmetrically.
MACRS has three depreciation methods: 200 percent and 150 percent declining
balance methods, and straight-line depreciation. The declining balance methods are
combinations of geometric depreciation and straight-line depreciation. In the early phase
of the recovery period, declining balance methods use fixed geometric depreciation rates.
If the recovery period is R, the 200 percent annual declining balance rate is 200
percent/R; the 150 percent declining balance rate is 150 percent/R. Only non-farm
property with recovery periods of 10 years or less may use the 200 percent declining
balance method. All farm property and all 15 and 20-year property uses the 150 percent
declining balance rate. Non-residential real property (business structures) and rental
property use the straight-line method.
26

Computer software, patents and other intangible assets are also eligible for depreciation. If the asset is
only partially devoted to business activity then only a fraction of the property is depreciable. Appendix A.4
provides a more detailed discussion of MACRS. For more details on depreciation in the U.S. tax system
see IRS Publication 946.

41

These rates, together with the original cost of the capital, dictate the tax
deductions each year until a straight-line depreciation rate (over the remaining part of the
recovery period) exceeds the declining balance rate (in continuous time, the switch to
straight-line depreciation would occur halfway through the assets recovery period).
Because depreciation deductions are made at discrete points in time, MACRS
often treats property as though it was acquired and placed in service in the middle of the
year. This is called a half-year convention.27 Firms deduct half of a year’s depreciation
in the year the property was purchased. Thus, even though five-year properties have a 40
percent annual MACRS depreciation rate, the firm only deducts 20 percent in the first
year (a consequence of half-year conventions is that property with a recovery period of R
is actually recovered over a period of R+1 years with the first and last years accounting
for half of a year). Table A.1 gives the exact schedule of MACRS depreciation
deductions for various recovery periods assuming a half-year convention. In the table,
year 1 is the year of the purchase.

A.5 Estimators
This appendix briefly discusses the OLS and WLS estimators used in Section VI. Write
B̂ as the vector of parameter estimates, Y as the vector of left-hand-side variables and X
as the matrix of right hand side variables in (26) and (27). Then, for j = I, p and for
weighting matrix W
−1
Bˆ = ( X 'W −1 X ) X 'W −1Y ,
(31)
j

j

( )

j

j

j

j

j

−1

ˆ W −1 X ( X 'W −1 X )−1 ,
Var Bˆ j = σˆ 2j ( X j 'W j−1 X j ) X j 'W j−1Ω
j
j
j
j
j
j

(32)

where
37

σˆ 2j =

20

∑∑ (e )

h,m 2
j

m=1 h=1

(

ˆ − X ( X 'W −1 X )−1 X 'W −1Ω
ˆ
trace Ω
j
j
j
j
j
j
j
j

)

(33)

ˆ = Rˆ ⊗Σ
ˆ and Ω
ˆ = Rˆ ⊗Σ
ˆ . The OLS estimator corresponds to W = I and
and Ω
I
I
I
p
p
p
j
ˆ ) for j = I , p .
WLS corresponds to W = diag(Ω
j

27

j

MACRS sometimes requires businesses to use mid-quarter or mid-month conventions.

42

TABLE 1: RESPONSE TO A TEMPORARY INVESTMENT SUBSIDY

Shadow Price (ϕ)

Duration Depreciation
Rate
ξ= 0

ξ = 0.5

ξ=1

ξ=5

ξ = 10

ξ = 15

ξ = 20

6 months

δ = .001
δ = .01
δ = .02
δ = .05
δ = .10
δ = .25

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

1.000
0.999
0.998
0.996
0.992
0.982

1.000
0.998
0.996
0.992
0.985
0.965

0.999
0.992
0.986
0.970
0.945
0.877

0.998
0.986
0.976
0.951
0.911
0.807

0.997
0.982
0.969
0.936
0.885
0.755

0.996
0.978
0.963
0.923
0.864
0.714

1 year

δ = .001
δ = .01
δ = .02
δ = .05
δ = .10
δ = .25

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

1.000
0.998
0.996
0.992
0.985
0.966

0.999
0.996
0.993
0.984
0.971
0.936

0.997
0.983
0.972
0.941
0.896
0.784

0.995
0.972
0.954
0.906
0.835
0.673

0.993
0.964
0.940
0.878
0.790
0.597

0.991
0.956
0.928
0.855
0.753
0.539

2 years

δ = .001
δ = .01
δ = .02
δ = .05
δ = .10
δ = .25

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

0.999
0.996
0.992
0.984
0.971
0.941

0.999
0.992
0.985
0.969
0.946
0.891

0.995
0.967
0.946
0.890
0.814
0.659

0.990
0.946
0.912
0.826
0.715
0.515

0.986
0.930
0.886
0.779
0.645
0.428

0.983
0.915
0.864
0.740
0.591
0.368

3 years

δ = .001
δ = .01
δ = .02
δ = .05
δ = .10
δ = .25

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

0.999
0.993
0.989
0.976
0.959
0.922

0.998
0.988
0.979
0.956
0.925
0.860

0.992
0.952
0.921
0.845
0.749
0.587

0.985
0.922
0.873
0.760
0.626
0.439

0.980
0.898
0.837
0.698
0.545
0.357

0.975
0.878
0.807
0.649
0.485
0.304

Permanent

δ = .001
δ = .01
δ = .02
δ = .05
δ = .10
δ = .25

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

0.986
0.929
0.908
0.888
0.879
0.872

0.972
0.872
0.839
0.808
0.794
0.783

0.884
0.637
0.578
0.528
0.506
0.489

0.806
0.513
0.453
0.405
0.384
0.367

0.749
0.443
0.387
0.341
0.322
0.306

0.704
0.396
0.343
0.300
0.282
0.267

Note: The table shows the equilibrium change in the shadow price of capital goods ϕ in response to
an investment subsidy of one percent ( ζ = .01 ). For the numerical calculations, the production
function is Aktα , r = 0.02 , and α = 0.35 . Investment supply is given by equation (2).

TABLE 2: RECOVERY PERIODS AND DEPRECATION METHODS BY TYPE OF CAPITAL
Type of Capital

Recovery Period (R)

Tax Depreciation Rate (Method)

Tractor units for over-the-road use, horses over 12 years old or
racehorses with over 2 years in service

3 years

66.7% (200% DB)

Computers & office equipment; light vehicles, buses and trucks

5 years

40.0% (200% DB)

Miscellaneous equipment,1 office furniture, agricultural
equipment2

7 years

28.6% (200% DB)
& 21.4% (150% DB)

10 years

20.0% (200% DB)
& 15.0% (150% DB)

15 years

10.0% (150% DB)

20 years

7.5% (150% DB)

39 years3

2.6% (SL)

Water transportation equipment (vessels and barges), single
purpose agricultural structures2
Radio towers; cable lines; pipelines; electricity generation and
distribution systems, “land improvements” e.g. sidewalks, roads,
canals, drainage systems, sewers, docks, bridges; engines and
turbines.
Farm buildings (other than single purpose structures); railroad
structures, telephone communications, electric utilities, water
utilities structures including dams, and canals
Non-residential real property (office buildings, storehouses,
warehouses, etc)

Note: DB is “Declining Balance;” SL is “Straight-Line.” Source: IRS Publication 946.

1

Property that is not explicitly catalogued under the MACRS system is given a seven-year recovery period.
All farm property uses the 150% declining balance method.
3
Property placed in service prior to May 13, 1993 has a 31.5 year recovery period.
2

TABLE 3. PRESENT VALUE OF DEPRECIATION ALLOWANCES (Z)

Recovery period
3-years
5-years
7-years
7-years (150DB)
10-years
10-years (150DB)
15-years
20-years

A. z with and without the 30% and 50% bonus depreciation
Nominal rate = .03
Nominal rate = .05
z +30%
z +50%
z +30%
z +50%
z
z
0.972
0.981
0.986
0.955
0.968
0.977
0.949
0.964
0.975
0.918
0.943
0.959
0.927
0.949
0.964
0.884
0.919
0.942
0.914
0.939
0.957
0.863
0.904
0.932
0.896
0.927
0.948
0.837
0.886
0.919
0.878
0.915
0.939
0.811
0.868
0.905
0.824
0.877
0.912
0.733
0.813
0.867
0.775
0.842
0.887
0.667
0.767
0.833

z
0.939
0.890
0.846
0.818
0.786
0.752
0.659
0.582

Nominal rate = .07
z +30%
z +50%
0.957
0.969
0.923
0.945
0.892
0.923
0.872
0.909
0.850
0.893
0.826
0.876
0.761
0.829
0.708
0.791

B. Tax Subsidy due to the Bonus Depreciation Allowance, Percent
Nominal rate = .03
Nominal rate = .05
Nominal rate = .07
30%
50%
30%
50%
30%
50%
Recovery period
Bonus
Bonus
Bonus
Bonus
Bonus
Bonus
3-years
0.44
0.74
0.72
1.20
0.97
1.63
5-years
0.81
1.35
1.28
2.15
1.71
2.88
7-years
1.15
1.92
1.79
3.02
2.36
3.99
7-years (150DB)
1.35
2.27
2.10
3.55
2.75
4.68
10-years
1.62
2.73
2.48
4.20
3.20
5.45
10-years (150DB)
1.88
3.17
2.85
4.85
3.67
6.26
15-years
2.66
4.52
3.91
6.70
4.89
8.42
20-years
3.36
5.72
4.78
8.24
5.83
10.11
Source: Authors’ calculations based on statutory MACRS recovery schedules and 0.35 corporate tax rate.

TABLE 4: STRUCTURAL PARAMETER ESTIMATES

Row
1
2
3
4

Row
1
2
3
4

PANEL A: Investment Equation (26)
ξ
Structural
Forecast Equation
Equation
WLS
OLS
11.64
10.30
Baseline
Baseline
(2.55)
(3.60)
10.87
12.48
Time trend only
Baseline
(5.48)
(8.58)
Time-varying
21.84
16.81
Baseline
MU(C)
(4.00)
(4.73)
Time-varying
22.21
20.52
Time trend only
MU(C)
(8.52)
(11.92)
PANEL B: Price Equation (27)
β p ,1
Structural
Forecast Equation
Equation
WLS
OLS
-2.06
-1.47
Baseline
Baseline
(1.50)
(1.84)
-1.39
-0.25
Time trend only
Baseline
(1.33)
(2.15)
Time-varying
-2.62
-1.68
Baseline
MU(C)
(2.16)
(2.67)
Time-varying
-1.96
-0.32
Time trend only
MU(C)
(1.68)
(2.98)

ξ /σ
WLS
15.42
(2.44)
14.89
(5.05)

OLS
11.03
(5.08)
15.84
(8.16)

1/ σ

WLS
0.21
(1.69)
-0.03
(1.28)

OLS
0.69
(2.04)
0.69
(1.76)

NOTES: The baseline forecast equation specification (rows 1 and 3) includes a constant, trend, and
two lags of real GDP, real corporate profits, type-specific real investment, type-specific real
relative prices and type-specific ITC. The trend only forecast equation specification (rows 2 and
4) includes only a constant and trend. The baseline structural specification (rows 1 and 2) uses
HP-filtered consumption to measure aggregate marginal utility. The time-varying MU(C)
specification (rows 3 and 4) uses time dummies. Estimates are by ordinary least squares (OLS) or
weighted least squares (WLS). Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for time-series and
cross-sectional dependence. See text and Appendix A.5 for details.

TABLE 5. BASELINE PARAMETERS FOR SIMULATIONS
Parameter

Baseline Value

Discount factor, annual rate ( β )

0.97

Capital share ( α )

0.38

Labor supply elasticity ( η )

0.50

Elasticity of intertemporal substitution of consumption ( σ )

0.20

Average inflation rate ( π )

0.03

Investment supply elasticity ( ξ )

15.00

Share of government spending in GDP (g)

0.20

Tax rate on capital earnings ( τ π )

0.22

Tax rate on earnings distribution ( τ d )

0.30

TABLE 6. CAPITAL TYPES USED FOR SIMULATION.
Tax
Economic
Depreciation
Depreciation
Type of Capital

m

δm

δˆ m

Fraction of
Investment
(percent)

1

Construction equipment and tractors

0.17

0.40

1.38

2

Vehicles; office and computing equipment

0.30

0.40

28.49

3

Agricultural equipment

0.097

0.21

1.16

4

General equipment (incl. rail, furniture, aircraft, instruments, mining
and oil, and household equipment)

0.100

0.29

21.66

5

Engines and turbines

0.079

0.10

0.40

6

Industrial buildings (incl. religious, education buildings, and
hospitals)

0.03

0.03

11.60

7

Farm structures; rail; and electric power structures

0.025

0.08

2.02

8

Telephone, telegraph and misc. power and utility structures

0.04

0.10

1.62

9

Mining, shafts and wells

0.056

0.20

1.73

10

Residential and other structures

0.02

--

28.46

Note: Authors’ calculations based on MACRS recovery schedules. For the calibration, these farm buildings do not include single
purpose agricultural structures. Single purpose agricultural structures have a 10-year recovery period and are depreciated with a 150%
DB method under MACRS. Farm structures other than single purpose structures are 20-year property (150% DB). In the data, farm
structures are aggregated into one category. The last column gives fraction of investment since 1990 accounted for by the type. These
types account for 98.5 of total investment. Excluded categories are water vessels, and lodging, recreation and amusement structures.

TABLE 7. SIMULATED EFFECTS OF A 50 PERCENT BONUS DEPRECIATION ALLOWANCE: ALTERNATIVE PARAMETERS
Parameters

GDP

Employment

Change from Trend
(percent)

Change
(billions of dollars)

Change from Trend
(percent)

Number
(1000s)

Baseline

0.158

17.4

0.147

191

Low Investment Elasticity, ξ = 10

0.145

16.0

0.141

183

“Adjustment Costs” ξ = 3

0.098

10.8

0.101

132

Low distribution tax, τ d = 0.15

0.207

22.7

0.206

268

High profit tax, τ π = 0.35

0.246

27.0

0.224

292

High Labor Supply Elasticity, η = 1

0.215

23.6

0.226

294

Log preferences (High IES), σ = 1

0.167

18.3

0.131

170

Low inflation, π = 1

0.114

12.5

0.108

140

Note: This table shows the results of simulating the effect of the 50% bonus depreciation provisions on 2003 GDP and employment.
Parameters other than those specified in the table are set at their baseline values in Table 5.

TABLE A.1: MACRS RECOVERY SCHEDULES BY RECOVERY PERIOD, PERCENT PER YEAR
Year
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22-27
28
29-39
40

3-year
33.33
44.45
14.81
7.41

5-year
20.00
32.00
19.20
11.52
11.52
5.76

7-year
14.29
24.49
17.49
12.49
8.93
8.92
8.93
4.46

10-year
10.00
18.00
14.40
11.52
9.22
7.37
6.55
6.55
6.56
6.55
3.28

15-year
5.00
9.50
8.55
7.70
6.93
6.23
5.90
5.90
5.91
5.90
5.91
5.90
5.91
5.90
5.91
2.95

20-year
3.750
7.219
6.677
6.177
5.713
5.285
4.888
4.522
4.462
4.461
4.462
4.461
4.462
4.461
4.462
4.461
4.462
4.461
4.462
4.461
2.231

27½-year
1.970
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.485

39-year
1.391
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
2.564
1.177

Notes: 15 and 20-year property are recovered with a 150% declining balance method. The 27.5
and 39-year property classes are recovered with a straight-line method with a half-year dating
convention. Source: IRS Publication 946, How to Depreciate Property.

TABLE A.2. ECONOMIC AND MACRS DEPRECIATION BY DETAILED TYPE OF CAPITAL
Type of Capital

Economic
Depreciation
Rate

Recovery
Period

Depreciation
Method

δm
Computers and peripheral equipment
Software
Communication equipment
Medical equipment and instruments
Nonmedical instruments
Photocopy and related equipment
Office and accounting equipment
Fabricated metal products
Internal combustion engines
Metalworking machinery
Special industry machinery
General industrial equipment
Electrical transmission and distribution,
industrial apparatus
Trucks, buses, and truck trailers
Autos
Aircraft
Ships and boats
Railroad equipment
Farm tractors
Other agricultural machinery
Construction tractors
Other construction machinery
Mining and oilfield machinery
Service industry machinery
Commercial, including office buildings
Hospitals and special care structures
Manufacturing structures
Electric structures
Other power structures
Communication structures
Petroleum and natural gas
Mining
Religious structures
Educational structures
Railroad structures
Farm structures

Tax
Depreciation
Rate

δˆ m

0.300
0.300
0.300
0.135
0.135
0.180
0.150
0.092
0.210
0.122
0.103
0.107

5
5
5
7
7
5
5
7
15
7
7
7

200
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
150
200
200
200

0.400
0.400
0.400
0.286
0.286
0.400
0.400
0.286
0.100
0.286
0.286
0.286

0.050
0.190
0.165
0.110
0.060
0.060
0.145
0.118
0.163
0.155
0.150
0.165
0.025
0.019
0.031
0.021
0.024
0.024
0.075
0.045
0.019
0.019
0.018
0.024

7
5
5
7
10
7
5
7
5
5
7
7
39
39
39
20
15
15
5
5
39
39
20
20

200
200
200
200
200
200
150
150
200
200
200
200
SL
SL
SL
150
150
150
SL
SL
SL
SL
150
150

0.286
0.400
0.400
0.286
0.200
0.286
0.300
0.214
0.400
0.400
0.286
0.286
0.026
0.026
0.026
0.075
0.100
0.100
0.200
0.200
0.026
0.026
0.075
0.075

Note: The table lists the types of investment goods in the data set used in our empirical specification.
All rates are annual. For the depreciation method, 200 indicates the 200 percent double declining
balance method; 150 indicates the 150 percent declining balance method; and SL is straight line
depreciation. The tax depreciation rate is the declining balance rate divided by the recovery period (for
SL it is simply the inverse of the recovery period).

FIGURE 1: PRICE REACTIONS TO TEMPORARY INVESTMENT SUBSIDIES.

ϕt

Equation (2) – Low ξ
(inelastic supply)
Equation (2) – High ξ
(elastic supply)

ϕ1
ϕ0

⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬ tax subsidy
⎪
⎪
⎭

I0

I1 | low ξ

I1 | high ξ

I

FIGURE 2: SIMULATED FORECAST ERRORS FROM BONUS DEPRECIATION POLICY
A: Investment Quantities

Real Investment Forecast Error

30 percent bonus

50 percent bonus

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

-0.1

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

-0.1

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
Tax Depreciation Rate

0.4

0.45

0.5

Relative Price Forecast Error

B: Investment Prices
0.04

0.04

0.035

0.035

0.03

0.03

0.025

0.025

0.02

0.02

0.015

0.015

0.01

0.01

0.005

0.005

0

0

-0.005

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
Tax Depreciation Rate

0.4

0.45

0.5

-0.005

0

Note: Simulated response of investment (top panels) and shadow prices (lower panels) for various types of
capital to the 30 percent (2002:2) and 50 percent (2003:3) bonus depreciation policy. The tax depreciation
rate ( δ̂ ) is on the horizontal axis. Percent deviation from steady state is on the vertical axis. Each circle
corresponds to approximate response to bonus depreciation based on equations (22) and (23). Solid circles
are for capital that qualifies for bonus depreciation. Empty circles represent unqualified capital. In panel A,
ξ = 15 .

FIGURE 3: FORECAST ERRORS FOR REAL INVESTMENT AND REAL PRICES
A: Investment Quantities

Forecast Error: Quantities

Pre-policy 2001:1-2001:3

Anticipation 2001:4-2002:1

30 percent 2002:2-2003:1

50 percent 2003:2-2004:4

Post-policy 2005:1-2005:4

1

1

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1

-1

-1

-1

-1.5

-1.5

-1.5

-1.5

-1.5

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Tax Depreciation Rate

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

B: Investment Prices

Forecast Error: Real Prices

Pre-policy 2001:1-2001:3

Anticipation 2001:4-2002:1

30 percent 2002:2-2003:1

50 percent 2003:2-2004:4

Post-policy 2005:1-2005:4

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0

0

0

0

-0.2

-0.2

-0.2

-0.2

-0.2

-0.4

-0.4

-0.4

-0.4

-0.4

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Tax Depreciation Rate

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

Note: The figure plots forecast errors for real investment (upper panels) and real investment prices (lower panels) by type of
capital. The forecast errors come from the baseline forecasting equations (24) and (25). Solid circles are types that qualify for
bonus depreciation. Empty circles are unqualified types. The tax depreciation rate ( δ̂ ) is on the horizontal axis.

FIGURE 4: TIME-SERIES ESTIMATES OF THE BONUS DEPRECIATION RATE
A: Baseline structural specification

0.8
0.7
0.6

Point Estimate
Standard Error Bands
Bonus Rate
Anticipation

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1

2001:1

2002:1

2003:1

2004:1

2005:1

B: Structural specification with time dummies (Time-varying MU)

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2

2001:1

2002:1

2003:1

2004:1

2005:1

Note: The figures plot the implied time path of the best fitting bonus depreciation rate ( λt ) for the
investment data in equation (30). The top panel controls for aggregate effects with Ψ mC while the
2

t

bottom panel estimates a time-varying marginal utility term (a time dummy) which is then scaled
across investment types by the tax term Ψ m2 described in the text.

FIGURE 5: SIMULATED AGGREGATE RESPONSE TO BONUS DEPRECIATION.
.01

0.025
Investment

GDP

Log deviation from steady state

Employment
.0075

Consumption

0.02

0.015
.005
0.01
.0025
0.005
0

-.0025
2001:1

0

2002:2

2003:3

2005:1
Aggregate Output and Employment

2011:1

0.5

-0.005
2001:1

2002:2

2003:3
2005:1
Aggregate Investment and Consumption

0.5
Const Equip & Tractors

Log deviation from steady state

Industrial Struc

Vehicles & Office/Computing Equip
Agricultural Equip

0.4

General Equip

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

-0.1

-0.1

2003:3

2005:1
Disaggregate Investment Spending

Mining, Shafts & Wells

0.3

Engines & Turbines

2002:2

Farm, Rail, & Pow er Struc
Teleph & Misc. Pow er Struc

0.4

0.2

-0.2
2001:1

2011:1

2011:1

-0.2
2001:1

Residential & Other

2002:2

2003:3

2005:1
Disaggregate Investment Spending

Note: The figures give the simulated reactions of the model in Section II to the bonus depreciation provisions of the 2002 and 2003
laws. See Tables 5 and 6 for the parameters underlying the simulation.

2011:1

