                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               LAND AND POWER: THEORY AND
                                  EVIDENCE FROM CHILE

                                          Jean-Marie Baland
                                          James A. Robinson

                                         Working Paper 12517
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12517


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2006




We are grateful to Mauricio Benitez-Iturbe and Sebastian Mazzuca for their outstanding research assistance.
Our greatest debt is to Jonathan Conning who persevered through at least three previous versions. We have
also benefitted from the suggestions and advice of Daron Acemoglu, Siwan Anderson, Arnold Bauer, Samuel
Bowles, Michael Carter, Eduardo Fajnzylberg, Jeffry Frieden, Tu Jarvis, Sebastian Laurent, Francois
Maniquet, Dina Mesbah, Sripad Motiram, Andrew Newman, Thomas Piketty, Timothy Scully, William
Summerhill, Werner Troesken, and numerous seminar participants, particularly Timothy Besley, Alberto
Diaz-Cayeros, Esther Duflo, Jim Fearon, Dilip Mookherjee, Jeffrey Nugent, T.N. Srinivasan and Barry
Weingast. Jean-Marie Baland would like to thank the MacArthur network on Inequality and Economic
Performance, the CRED for financial support and the Belgian Program on Inter-University Poles of
Attraction initiated by the Belgian State, Prime Minister's office, Science Policy Programming. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2006 by Jean-Marie Baland and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Land and Power: Theory and Evidence from Chile
Jean-Marie Baland and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 12517
September 2006
JEL No. D72, O54, Q15

                                            ABSTRACT


We study the connection between employment and political control. Many employment relationships
concede rents to workers. For example, when worker effort is crucial for production, but only
imperfectly observed. We show that, depending on the political institutions, the presence of such
rents allows employers to use the threat of withdrawing them to control their workers' political
behavior. We thus demonstrate that employment does not simply generate income, it also gives
power to control the behavior of others. The analysis focuses on the salient example of political
control, where landlords coerce the votes of their workers in the absence of a secret ballot. The
model we develop generates predictions about electoral outcomes which can be tested by
investigating the impact of the introduction of an effective secret ballot. Such an institutional reform
reduces landlords' control, and in consequence, we should observe changes in voting behavior, since
workers whose votes were previously controlled and sold can now vote freely. We test the
predictions of the model by examining in detail the effects of the introduction of the secret ballot in
Chile in 1958. We show that, consistent with our theory, the political reforms led to large changes
in voting behavior. Before the reforms, localities with more pervasive patron-client relationships
tend to exhibit a much stronger support for the right-wing parties, traditionally associated with the
landed oligarchy. After the reform however, this difference across localities completely disappeared.



Jean-Marie Baland
Cred, Department of Economics
FUNDP
8, rempart de la vierge
B5000 Namur
BELGIUM
jean-marie.baland@fundp.ac.be

James A. Robinson
Harvard University
Department of Government
N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu
       \It is the most cruel mockery to tell a man he may vote for A or B,
       when you know that he is so much under the in uence of A, or the
       friends of A, that his voting for B would be attended with the destruc-
       tion of him. It is not he who has the vote, really and substantially, but
       his landlord, for it is for his bene t and interest that it is exercised in
       the present system." David Ricardo ([1824], 1951-1973, p. 506)

1. Introduction

In this paper we study the connection between employment and political control.
Many employment relationships concede rents to workers. For example, when
worker e ort is crucial for production, but only imperfectly observed. We show
that the fact that employers already concede rents to workers may allow them,
depending on the political institutions, to use the threat of withdrawing these
rents to control their political behavior. We thus demonstrate that employment
does not simply generate income, it also gives power to control the behavior of
others.
    The most salient example of such a connection arises in the absence of a secret
ballot. When voting is not secret, it becomes feasible to buy, sell and coerce
votes. While there are recorded instances of an individualized market for votes,
the main stylized fact which emerges from the case study literature is that rather
than individuals freely selling their votes to politicians, employers usually control
and supply the votes of their employees in exchange for money, favors or policies.
More speci cally, as discussed by Ricardo (1824), employers are usually landlords.
    That landlords control the political activities of their workers has historically
been a pervasive characteristic of agrarian economies.1 In Britain, before the
introduction of the secret ballot in 1872, this factor was critical in determining
the outcome of rural elections. As observed by Lord Stanley in 1841,

       \when any man attempted to estimate the probable result of a county
       election in England, it was ascertained by calculating the number of
   1
    As Malefakis (1970, p. 98) summarized the situation in nineteenth century rural Andaluc a,
\a man's job depended on his vote."

                                              3
       the great landed proprietors in the county and weighing the number
       of occupiers under them."2

    Throughout the nineteenth century radicals and reformers complained about
the lack of a secret ballot in Britain (see Kinzer, 1982, Cox, 1987 and Gash, 1977).
In Germany, despite the fact that a democratic parliament was introduced in 1848
there is a mass of evidence that rural voters were controlled by landed interests.
Bismarck even supported an extension of voting rights in 1871 because he thought
that the control exercised by landlords over rural voters would o set the rising
in uence of urban workers (Bendix's, 1964, p. 97, Hamerow 1974, pp. 299-300).
    Landlords control over rural elections was greatly facilitated where balloting
was open (see Goldstein, 1983, p. 15). However, even when there was a supposedly
secret ballot (and not open voting), strategies were found to keep voting under
control. Thus, in the German case, political parties often printed their own ballots:
\given that ballots had to be obtained from the candidates themselves or from
their agents, it was often physically impossible for a poor man to vote for anyone
but the squire's choice." (Anderson, 1993, p. 1467)3 Even countries, such as
France which moved early to universal male su rage (after 1848) and free elections
(after 1871) only introduced an e ective (though non-Australian)4 secret ballot in
1913. Before this \the ballots frequently had subtle but distinct marks, such as
paper thickness, colour and size, from which the election o cials could deduce a
voter's decision. This information was then passed on to notables who could easily
punish such wayward voters since they frequently were his tenants or employees,"
(Kreuzer 1996, p. 108).
    Similar tactics were used and remain up to the present day in democratic third
   2
     Quoted in Kitson-Clark (1951, p. 112). O'Gorman (1989, p.20) estimates that by 1807 this
resulted in the outcomes of 300 parliamentary seats being a foregone conclusion. He describes
in detail the system of patronage linking high politicians such as Walpole with members of
parliament, typically Whig `oligarchs,' who controlled the local electorate.
   3
     For further evidence on the German case see Blackbourn (1988) and the section on Germany
in Gibson and Blinkhorn (1991).
   4
     The `Australian ballot' has become synonymous with perfectly secret voting and refers to
a situation where all political alternatives are on a single government produced ballot paper. It
derives its name from the fact that the rst use of such a ballot was in Australia in 1856.


                                               4
world countries.5 Nowhere is the evidence about landlord control of elections so
conclusive as in Latin America. Following independence most Latin American
countries adopted liberal constitutions committing themselves to regular elections,
yet, with few exceptions Latin American societies did not become consolidated
democracies with free regular elections contested by all adults until the 1980's.6
In Colombia, the country which has the longest experience of formal democracy in
Latin America and where the military has played the most marginal of political
roles, the equivalent of the Australian ballot was legislated only in 1988 and
introduced rst in 1990. In Chile the control of voting by landowners was very
frankly discussed in the debate leading up to the introduction of the secret ballot
in 1958 in language strikingly similar to that used by Lord Stanley quoted above.
For example, Socialist senator Martones argued in favor of introducing the secret
ballot because,

       \if that law [the old electoral law without a secret ballot] did not exist,
       instead of there being 9 Socialist senators there would be 18, and you
       [the Conservatives] would be reduced to 2 or 3 ... [laughter] you laugh,
       but the truth is that there would be not 2 Conservative senators from
       O'Higgins and Colchagua, which corresponds exactly to the number of
       inquilinos in the fundos which belong to the Conservative hacendados
       in that region. Conservatives would have only one or perhaps none."7

    We develop a model of labor contracting with moral hazard and limited liability
in the rural sector.8 Absent politics, landlords nd it optimal to concede rents
   5
     For evidence from India see Kohli (1990, pp. 227-228) and Breman (1974).
   6
     See Engerman and Sokolo (2005) and Hartlyn and Valenzuela (1998). For Brazil see Pang
(1973), Graham (1990) and Martins (1996).
   7
     A \fundo" is a large farm and a \hacendado" a large landowner and an inquilino was a
permanent worker on such farms. Quoted in El Mercurio, Saturday May 19, 1958, p. 20.
   8
     Why does electoral corruption seem to be more signi cant in rural as opposed to urban areas?
Our model suggests three factors which indicate that urban votes may be more expensive to buy
and hence political corruption relatively less attractive in urban settings. First, as suggested
by Marglin (1973) it may be the case that rents are lower in factories and urban environments.
This means that, to induce e ort, employers need to pay only a small wage premium. Second,
it may be harder to monitor voting and political activities in anonymous urban environments.


                                               5
to workers to induce e ort. Introducing politics, we show that the presence of
these rents allows landlords to pay less than the full opportunity cost of the votes
of their workers, and thus possibly to pro tably o er a contract stipulating both
economic and political (voting) behavior.9 This feature also implies that it is
cheaper for political parties to buy votes indirectly through landlords since this
means they can avoid fully compensating workers for the value of their votes. We
study the implications of these phenomena for the functioning of factor markets.
    The model we develop generates predictions about electoral outcomes which
can be tested by investigating the impact of the introduction of an e ective secret
ballot. Such an institutional reform reduces landlords' control, and in conse-
quence, we should observe changes in voting behavior, since workers whose votes
were previously controlled and sold can now vote freely.
    We examine these implications by considering the introduction of the secret
ballot in 1958 in Chile. We show in section 4 that the empirical predictions of
our model are highly consistent with the data. We rst demonstrate that before
1958 control of voting was endemic in the traditional `oligarchic' provinces of the
so-called North and Urban Central Valley provinces which were characterized by
long term patron-client relationships known in Chile as the inquilinaje system (see
e.g. Sadoulet, 1992). More precisely, we show that, before the reform, the support
for right-wing parties was substantially higher, but that it also fell substantially
more thereafter in precisely those municipalities where inquilinos formed a larger
share of the electorate.
    The case study literature on the secret ballot focuses very much on coercion
and corruption and has obviously noticed the fact that systematic biases can be
introduced into elections because of such phenomena (e.g., our discussion of nine-
teenth century Germany above). In the Chilean case, scholars such as Loveman
(1976), Scully (1992) or Bauer (1995), have noted the signi cance of the control
of inquilinos for the political power of the right before 1958, and linked the intro-
Third, workers in the cities may enjoy superior alternative employment opportunities, which
reduce the scope for political control by their employers.
   9
     Though we model political control in terms of voting, the analysis extends to other types of
political activities (such as types of protests, riots, demonstrations and other forms of collective
action). Such a model would have similar results to the one we present.

                                                 6
duction of the secret ballot to the rise of socialism. Our contribution here is to
provide a microfoundation for why landlords control voting behavior and provide
the rst systematic test of the impact of the 1958 reforms in Chile.
    The incidence of secret balloting has been understudied by the literature on
political economy and institutions (e.g., Cox, 1997, Persson and Tabellini, 2000,
2003, Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006). Piketty (1999, 2000) and Dekel, Jackson
and Wolinsky (2004) developed models of how an individualized market for votes
might work and have studied the circumstances under which vote buying is socially
undesirable. Related papers by Snyder (1991) and Grossman and Helpman (1996)
have looked at interest groups buying politicians with `campaign contributions.'
All of these theoretical papers focus on very di erent issues than those we study.
An important distinction is that these scholars, and most others in the political
economy literature, focus on the e ciency of government policy. We focus on why
vote buying is linked to employment and how this in uences factor markets. We
also provide empirical evidence supporting our model. Most closely related to our
research, Summerhill (1995) developed a simple model of the idea that political
rents accrue to landowners and tried to estimate the impact of electoral reform
on the economy using data from nineteenth century Brazil.


2. The Model
2.1. The Fundamentals

We consider a discrete time in nite horizon model of the rural sector. There is a
unit mass of agents and a proportion x of rural agents have access to the capital
market and can therefore purchase land and hire workers. All rural agents have
the option to be self-employed and earn an income of w. We let m denote the
proportion of rural agents who become agricultural workers, and 1 m x those
who remain self-employed.
   There are L units of land which are owned by landowners with each owning
L=x = l units of land. There is a single numeraire consumption good which is
produced from land and labor. The technology is characterized by a standard


                                        7
constant returns to scale neoclassical production function. On a farm, output of a
worker in any period is equal to ~g nl where n is employment, g is the intensive
form of the production function so that g 0 > 0 and g 00 < 0, and ~ is a plot-speci c
stochastic shock to output which is distributed independently across plots and
time and can take two values, and 0 (by normalization) (since we focus on
stationary equilibria we do not introduce time subscripts). The probability that
   occurs in period t depends on the e ort exerted by a worker in that period.10
E ort, ", takes two values, " 2 f0; eg. If " = e, occurs with probability h , while
if " = 0, occurs with probability l < h .
    While output is perfectly observable by the landlord, the level of e ort exerted
by the worker is not. This induces a moral hazard problem. We assume that
e ort can never be observed so that the only possible wage contract depends on
the realization of ~.
    There are also two political parties, `Left' (denoted L) and `Right' (denoted
R) competing for votes to win an election and all individuals have exogenous
preferences for one of these parties which means that they get utility from voting
for the party they prefer (as in a standard probabilistic voting model).
    All agents in the rural sector have utility functions which are linear in con-
sumption, c, e ort, ", and voting decision j for j = L; R which depends on the
ideological orientation of the agent. Thus, U (c; "; j ) = c " + j is the util-
ity of an agent of type j if they vote for the party they prefer, otherwise it is
U (c; "; j ) = c ". All agents maximize the expected present discounted value of
utility and discount the future at rate 2 (0; 1).
    Political party j, if it wins power, has per-period utility function,

                                Uj = W j     Mj ; j = R; L

and Mj otherwise, where W j is the gain in utility for party j if it wins the
election and Mj represents the amount of rents (income) transferred by party j
to other agents in the economy so that neither party is liquidity constrained. The
price that a party o ers for the vote of an agent will in general depend on the
  10
     We use a variant of a model which has become standard in the development literature, see
for example Banerjee, Gertler and Ghatak (2002)

                                             8
occupation of the agent: let pj` be the price paid by party j to a landlord, pjw be
the price paid by party j for the vote of a worker, and pjs be the price paid for the
vote of a self-employed agent.11 Let be the impact of one vote in party j's favor
on party j's chances of winning the election.12 From this we can deduce that the
maximal price that party j would be prepared to pay for a vote is W j .

2.2. Timing of the stage game

The stage game has the following timing:

      The political parties non-cooperatively announce a price at which they will
      purchase votes from each type of rural agent.

      The land market opens with each landlord deciding how much land to buy.

      Landowners hire workers by proposing a contract.

      Agents sell votes to the political parties.

      Workers vote and choose their e ort level.

      Production take place and the output shock ~ is observed.

      Landlords and the political parties observe voting behavior and the state of
      nature.

      Rents are distributed by the political parties, wages are paid and workers
      may be red and consumption takes place.

    We now characterize the stationary subgame perfect equilibrium of this game.
  11
     Though we focus our analysis on situations where political parties directly purchase votes,
the model is consistent with other interpretations. For example, instead of buying votes, parties
may o er policies which favor landlords, or give landlords elected positions.
  12
     In a previous version of the paper we provided microfoundations for this assumption with
an explicit model of voting under proportional representation and legislative bargaining (see
Austen-Smith, 2000, and Baron and Deirmeier, 2001).




                                               9
3. Electoral Corruption and Resource Allocation

For ease of exposition we rst characterize the outcome of political competition
for votes. We do so by assuming, as will be the interesting case, that landlords
control and sell the votes of their workers. In the next section we analyze the
circumstances under which this will happen in equilibrium. To keep the discussion
focused we assume that all landowners are right-wing while all other agents are
left-wing. In addition we assume that the right-wing party values winning more
than the left-wing party. This will have the implication that the right-wing party
will be prepared to pay more for votes than the left-wing party.
    The political parties engage in Bertrand competition. We rst consider the
situation in which the right-wing party will always wish to outbid the left-wing
party for votes. This implies that W R       W L + L and the following prices are
o ered by the parties in equilibrium,
                                         8
                                            R
                                              WL
                                         < p` =
                                         >                   R

                         Party R o ers >        pR
                                             = WLw
                                       : R
                                         ps = W L +          L


and,

                        Party L o ers pL` = pLw = pLs = W L

In this case, for any price that the left-wing party proposes for votes, the right-
wing party is always willing to outbid that o er for the three categories of rural
agents. As a result, in equilibrium, the left-wing party announces the maximal
price it is ready to pay for one vote, W L : Given this price, landlords will be
willing to sell their own votes to the right-wing party provided they can achieve
the same utility level that they could by selling their votes to the left-wing party.
This implies that the right-wing party must o er them a price at least equal to
pR
 ` = W
          L     R
                  : Landlords will also sell the votes of their workers if they are given
the same price that is o ered by the left-wing party, which is then the price the
right-wing party announces. Lastly, for the self-employed agents, the right-wing
party must compensate them for not voting for their own preferred party, which
implies that he has to pay a price pR  s = W +
                                                 L     L
                                                         to those agents.

                                           10
    Given these prices, all rural agents sell their votes to the right-wing party,
with right-wing landlords stipulating that their left-wing workers vote right-wing
in their employment voting contracts.
    In the case where W L + L        W R > W L ; then
                                        8
                                           R
                                        < p` =
                                        >         WL   R
                                                         ;
                                               R     L
                       Party R o ers >        pw = W ;
                                     :
                                              pR     R
                                               s = W ;

and,                                    8
                                        >
                                        <  pL` = W L ;
                        Party L o ers >    pLw = W L ;
                                      : L
                                        ps = W R       L
                                                         :
It is no longer optimal for the right-wing party to outbid the left-wing party for the
votes of the self-employed agents. Now, rather than buying the votes of all rural
agents, the right-wing party buys the votes of the landlords and their workers,
but the self-employed sell their votes to the left-wing party. Here, moving from
being self-employed to becoming a worker leads to a switch in voting behavior.
     Under either scenario we have the following result.

Proposition 3.1. It is cheaper for the right-wing party to buy votes from a
landlord than to buy votes directly from the self-employed.

    This result follows immediately from the fact that in equilibrium pR         R
                                                                           w < ps .
This proposition has the implication that it will never be pro table for a rural
agent to become a political entrepreneur, buying votes from individuals and then
selling them to parties. For the rest of the paper we focus on the situation where
 WR        W L + L , the analysis of the other parts of the parameter space follow
directly.


4. Employment and Power

We solve for the stationary subgame perfect equilibrium of this game which is
best from the point of view of landlords. In general a strategy for a landlord is a

                                         11
contract o er at date t which speci es wages as a function of ~, a voting decision
and the history of play up to t. For a worker a strategy determines an e ort and
voting decision as a function of the history and the contract o ered at t.
    We start by describing the optimal labor-voting contract. As is standard, we
endow the landlord with all the bargaining power with respect to workers and he
can therefore make take-it-or-leave-it contract o ers to his worker(s) specifying
his expected voting behavior and e ort level. As there are two dimensions to the
worker's behavior, there are four possible wages, corresponding to whether output
is high or low, and whether the worker is observed voting for the speci ed party
or not. We assume that liability is limited so that wages must be non-negative.
To ensure maximal incentives, a landlord will optimally propose a wage, w, and
continued employment if output is high and the worker is not observed voting for
the wrong party. If output is low or the worker votes for the left-wing party, the
landlord will pay zero and re the worker. We assume that if a worker is ever red
by a landlord he is never employed again by a landlord and is thus perpetually
self-employed.
    We focus here on the situation under which a worker is required by his landlord
to vote for the right-wing party. Given his voting behavior, the worker will exert
the optimal amount of e ort if the following incentive compatibility condition
is satis ed. Let Vw (" = e) be the value to the worker if he exerts e ort, while
Vw (" = 0) is the value if the worker shirks. The worker will exert e ort if

                               Vw (" = e)        Vw (" = 0)

First consider the value from exerting e ort which is,
                                                       0                   1
                 h                                 h
                                                            w + WL +   L
  Vw (" = e) =       (w + Vw (" = e)) + (1             )@                  A   e: (4.1)
                                                              1

Here, with probability h the realization of output is high, in which case at date
t the worker receives the wage w and is not red. In consequence the worker gets
                                                              h
the continuation value Vw (" = e). With probability 1           , even though the
worker exerted e ort, output is low. In this case the worker gets no wage and

                                            12
is red at date t, never to be re-employed. In this case from date t + 1 on, the
worker is self-employed getting an income of w in each period and also being able
to freely sell his vote to whichever party he wishes. The utility from this latter
action is maxfpR  s;
                      L
                        + pLs g, i.e. the self-employed agent can sell his vote to the
right wing party and sacri ce the utility bene t of voting for his preferred party,
or he can sell his vote to the left and get the utility bene t L . Now in equilibrium
we showed that pR  s
                         L
                           + pLs       W L + L and this explains the formula in (4.1).
We now consider the value of shirking, which is
                                                         0                                    1
                    l                                l
                                                                   w + WL +           L
     Vw (" = 0) =       (w + Vw (" = 0)) + (1            )@                                   A   (4.2)
                                                                         1

The interpretation of (4.2) follows immediately from the discussion of (4.1), noting
that now, since the worker is shirking, he does not incur any e ort cost and high
output arises with probability l . Hence, solving for the value functions, exerting
e ort is optimal if
                                                                     l
                                        L        L        (1             )
                         w      w+ W +               +         h     l
                                                                             e                    (4.3)

Next there is the participation constraint which shows that the worker prefers
accepting a contract to his outside option. This implies
                             w + WL +    L
                                                          w + WL +               L
                                                                                     +e
            Vw (" = e)                       or w                            h
                                                                                          :       (4.4)
                                1
    The two constraints are su cient to de ne a contract eliciting high e ort and
voting behavior that will be accepted by a worker. Indeed, if this contract is
o ered, the worker never chooses to vote against his landlord's wishes (whether
with high or low e ort), as this implies with certainty his getting a zero wage
and being red. This yields a utility to the worker that lies below his reservation
utility, so that, ex ante, the worker is better o not accepting this contract. As
a result, accepting the contract but voting freely is never chosen in equilibrium.
Therefore, the only relevant constraints to the landlord's problem are (4.3) and
(4.4). Note also that, to be optimal from the landlord's point of view, the contract
must be such that one of these two constraints holds with equality.

                                            13
    We now explicitly de ne the labour rents that are attributable to the existence
of a moral hazard problem in production. To do this, we consider the wage rate
that would be o ered by the landlord in a contract that stipulates the e ort
level, but not the voting behavior. In this contract, the e ciency wage under the
incentive compatibility constraint would be
                                                                     l
                                                   (1                    )
                                        w~ = w +        h            l
                                                                             e:              (4.5)

We consider the situation under which, with this contract, the participation con-
straint is satis ed, that is:
                                       w+e
                                 w~      h
                                            :                               (4.6)

Moreover, to simplify the exposition, we assume that it is optimal to propose this
contract which induces high e ort by paying an e ciency wage even if it concedes
rents to workers. We de ne r as the per period excess in expected utility compared
to the reservation utility, that is the per period labour rent under the incentive
contract:                                             !
                                                        l
                       h                                                            h
                 r=        w~       e     w=       h         l
                                                                 e           w (1       );

by using equation (4.5). We next de ne R as the present discounted value of labour
rents:
                                                             l
                        h       h 2              r
            R=r+          r+        r + ::: =        h
                                                       = h      l
                                                                  e w
                                              1
As can be inferred from condition (4.6), the participation constraint is satis ed if
and only if R > 0 under the e ciency wage.
   We need one more assumption before stating our main result.

Assumption 1:      WL >         h        L
                                             =(1   h
                                                        ).

   Assumption 1, which comes from W L > h ( W L + L ), says that the value
of a vote to the landlord must be large, relative to the ideological bias of the
worker.

Proposition 4.1. It is optimal for the landlord to also control the political be-
havior of his worker if and only if R > L :

                                                   14
Proof.     First note that if the wage had to be increased by the full disutility
of voting behavior being controlled, namely W L + L , then it could never be
pro table for the landlord to o er a contract which controlled voting. This is
because expected output would be the same but a vote can only be sold for W L .
    The wage that has to be paid to deter cheating when the landlord decides to
also control voting behavior must satisfy (4.3). Using (4.5), we can write:

                                   w       w~    ( WL +     L
                                                                )                           (4.7)

This wage has also to satisfy the participation constraint (4.4) and, using (4.6),
we obtain:
                                      WL + L       R
                           w w~           h         h
                                                      :                      (4.8)

Given that the contract must be optimal, one of those two conditions holds with
equality. First consider the case where (4.7) holds with equality. Paying this wage
is then pro table for the landlord if the expected increase in the wage is less than
the bene t from controlling a vote W L , i.e.:

                          WL        h
                                        (w      w)
                                                ~     h
                                                            WL +        L


which holds by assumption. Consider the situation such that the participation con-
straint is binding, so that (4.8) holds with equality. Paying this wage is pro table
to the landlord if :

                           WL          h
                                           (w   w)
                                                ~     WL +          L
                                                                        R;

which holds if and only if R > L .
   Intuitively, the simple fact that the labor market is plagued by moral hazard
and that liability is limited implies that the landlord must concede rents to his
workers. This occurs even though he is in a position to make take-it or leave-it
o ers to the latter. As long as the rents exceed the ideological bias, the increase in
wages landlords must concede to their workers in order to also control their voting
behaviour is lower than the price they receive for these votes from the parties.13
  13
     The surplus thus given to the workers also yields a comparative advantage to the employer
in other spheres, such as the credit market. This argument has been used in part of the literature
on interlinked contracts.

                                                 15
     It is interesting to observe that if workers are unideological, so that L = 0, as
long as the political parties attach a positive value to votes and there are rents,
Proposition 2 follows without any other assumptions. Note, however, in this case,
equilibrium the price paid by the right-wing party for the vote of any rural agent
is identical and therefore it is no longer true that it is strictly cheaper to buy votes
through landlords.
     We now have to consider whether it is optimal for landlords to pay the e -
ciency wage w which satis es both (4.3) and (4.4) with at least one equality. To
understand this we rst consider the optimal demand for labor in a farm of size l
with n workers. Pro ts are,
                                           !
                               h     l                 h
                                   g   n                   w n + W Ln                     (4.9)
                                     n

The rst term in (4.9) is expected revenues, the second the expected wage bill,
and the third the political rents that the landlord gets from selling the votes of
his n workers at the price W L . The optimal demand for labor is determined by
the rst-order condition,
                                   !               !       !
                       h     l             0   l       l           h
                           g           g                               w + WL = 0        (4.10)
                             n                 n       n

The equation (4.10) implicitly de nes the optimal demand for labor as a function
of parameters, which we write n(l; W L ; w ).
    It is always pro table for the landlord to pay this e ciency wage contract if
                                                               !
                   h       l          l
                               g        L
                                              + WL                           h
                                                                                 w   w   (4.11)
                                 n(l; W ; w )

We therefore assume that the expected increase in pro t from workers exerting
e ort, evaluated at the e ciency wage, plus the rents from selling their votes must
be greater than the expected increase in the wage bill.
   The model has interesting implications for the price of land, denoted : In the
model landlords hold land while workers have no access to capital markets and
cannot purchase land. Nevertheless, landlords could buy land from each other.

                                                   16
The equilibrium price of a plot of land must now adjust so that pro ts are zero
or,                           !               !
                                                        L
          h           l             h        L n(l; W ; w )
            g                         w + W                   =          (4.12)
               n(l; W L ; w )                         l
Equation (4.12) implies the following result.

Proposition 4.2. In equilibrium the price of land incorporates political rents.

    Acquiring land is desirable not only for productive purposes, but also for the
political rents attached to the political control of the workforce employed on it.
Equilibrium prices on the land market re ect this mechanism.
    It follows from Proposition 4.2 that a political reform which stops landlords
controlling the political behavior of their workers, such as the introduction of an
e ective secret ballot, removes the ability of landlords to sell their votes and has
interesting comparative static e ects.

Proposition 4.3. The introduction of a secret ballot leads to a fall in the price
of land and the vote share of the right-wing party.

     If all agents had access to capital markets then there would be no land con-
centration and all land would be farmed by smallholders with no workers getting
rents. The fact that, with perfect capital markets, smallholders are always willing
to outbid landowners for land follows from the fact that, through the participa-
tion constraint, the economic rents that landlords transfer to workers exceed the
political rents they receive from parties. Therefore, even though it is still true
that the ability of landlords to sell votes increases their demand for land, land is
still more valuable to smallholders.14
     The interaction of the market failures is crucial. Without moral hazard there
are no rents and even with imperfect capital markets electoral corruption would
not a ect the price of land, as workers would then have to be fully compensated
for the control of their votes. At the same time, with moral hazard but no capital
market imperfections there is no ine ciency either.
  14
    The ine ciency here stemming from imperfections in the capital market is related to the
results of Banerjee and Newman (1993), Legros and Newman (1996), Mookherjee (1997) and
Banerjee, Gertler and Ghatak (2002)

                                            17
5. A Study of Land and Power: Chile
5.1. The political impact of the 1958 electoral reform: an overview

Like most Latin American countries, upon gaining independence from Spain, Chile
adopted republican institutions. These became institutionalized in the 19th cen-
tury and elections determined presidential succession without military or other
intervention. Universal literate male su rage was introduced in 1874 but voting
was not secret. Interestingly, the 1874 su rage extension in Chile was opposed by
some more progressive Chileans as they \fully realized that in a predominantly
rural society with traditional landlord-peasant ties, the Conservatives would over-
whelm their opponents at the polls." (J. Samuel Valenzuela, 1985, see also Bauer,
1995, p. 30). The nineteenth century democracy collapsed in 1924 and the fol-
lowing period saw ve military coups before democracy was restored in 1932. The
intervening period was dominated by Colonel Carlos Iba~     nez. After 1932 demo-
cratic stability was based on an explicit compromise between the growing power
of urban groups and the power of the traditional landed elites. 15

5.1.1. Mechanisms of Control of Rural Votes

\Throughout the history of the Republic, the political in uence of the rural sector
in Chile was disproportionately greater than its size relative to the urban sector.
Congressional representation was heavily weighted in favor of rural districts where
the peasantry historically formed a pliable and controllable mass base for conser-
vative and reactionary groups" (Hellinger, 1978, p. 272). Landlords systemati-
cally controlled rural voting until the late 1950s. There is a consensus amongst
historians, political scientists and sociologists about how this system functioned
(see Kaufman, 1972, Bauer, 1975, Loveman, 1976, Petras and Zeitlin, 1968, and
Scully, 1992, ch. 4): \There was an absolute control of peasants by their pa-
trones, and elections in rural communes depended on the political preferences of
the landowners" (Millar, 1981, p. 172). Large landlords usually registered all
  15
    The Chilean pact is discussed in more detail in Valenzuela (1978), Collier and Collier (1991,
pp. 565-73) and Scully (1992, pp. 108-109).



                                               18
their employees, by teaching them how to sign their names (as literacy was a
condition for vote registration). The day of the election, the employer would go
vote with all their employees. \This type of control is pervasive ... The situation
was publicly accepted, and it was even used as an argument in electoral legal
complaints, particularly in order to show that any result against the preferences
of the latifundistas was fraudulent, or to justify an unanimous electoral result in
a rural locality" (Millar, 1981, p. 173). Part of the political pact which developed
after the 1930s also involved the banning of agricultural unions, a policy which
allowed severe labor repression to be carried on in the countryside, often backed
by the police (Bauer, 1995, p.32).
    In line with our model, the control of rural votes by landlords was made
possible by the relatively good working conditions of the inquilinos compared
to the possible alternatives: \They were free ... but they had no defence in the
face of expulsion; indeed, the threat of being cast out into the subproletariat of
migratory workers was the most powerful weapon at the landowner's disposal.
Most inquilinos families undoubtedly judged their welfare on the estate superior
to life outside or in the nitrate elds of the northern desert." (Bauer, 1995, p. 28).
The patron-client relationship was very developed (see in particular Bauer, 1995).
Thus, \anyone seen visiting the home of a resident laborer would be immediately
approached and questioned by the owner, who reserved the right to expel him
from the property" (Swift, 1971, p. 37).

5.1.2. The political equilibrium in the 1950s

By the 1950s the political landscape in Chile was dominated by several main par-
ties. There were the traditional nineteenth century parties, the Conservatives,
Liberals and Radicals. The Conservatives and Liberals were furthest to the right
and united in most things except in their attitudes to the Church (the Conserva-
tives were closely associated with the Catholic Church). The Radicals were more
towards the center politically and were strongly anti-clerical. Also in the center,
though small in the 1950s, were the Christian Democrats. To the left were the
Socialists and then the Communists (the latter were o cially banned between


                                         19
1948 and 1958 though they competed under di erent names). The landed oli-
garchy provided the traditional constituency of the two right-wing parties, the
Conservative and the Liberal (see, e.g., Gil, 1966 and Sinding, 1972). The existing
party system was shocked however by the return from exile of the former dicta-
tor Carlos Iba~nez as a populist presidential candidate in 1952. Iba~  nez formed a
very heterogenous coalition of mostly leftist groups and capitalized on the general
disillusionment with the traditional parties.
    Chilean electoral institutions in this period were based upon the D'Hondt
system of proportional representation for all elections, under the 1925 Constitution
(for more details, see Gil, 1966, Chapter 5, and Morodo, 1968). The constituencies
broadly coincided with the boundaries of Chile's provinces. Deputies were elected
for four year terms, senators for eight with half of the Senate being replaced every
four years. Prior to the reforms of 1958, parties issued their own ballot papers
and a closed list system was used. Thus to vote for the Socialist party, a voter
had to request the Socialist ballot which made it relatively easy to determine
his voting behavior.16 Until 1951 only literate males over the age of twenty-one
could vote; of those eligible to vote, approximately 50 percent usually registered,
and the vast majority of those registered cast ballots. Women were allowed to
exercise the franchise in installments, rst for municipal elections in 1935, then
for congressional contests in 1951, and nally for presidential races in 1952.17

5.1.3. The introduction of the secret ballot in 1958

There were several important electoral reforms undertaken in Chile in the late
1950s and early 1960s. The most important was Law 12.889 promulgated on May
31st 1958, amending the basic electoral law of 1925 (see Castro, 1941, p. 35 and
Cruz Coke, 1984, pp. 27-29 for a discussion of this law) and its most important
aspect was the introduction of the cedula unica (the uni ed ballot). After 1958,
the voter received a single, o cial ballot, which contained all party slates for
  16
     Loveman (2001, pp. 222-3) provides a detailed discussion of how party provision of ballots
before 1958 facilitated electoral corruption.
  17
     Note that registration and vote turn-out are very close in Chile, since once an individual
registers, voting is mandatory.


                                              20
any single type of election in his district and an open list system was adopted so
that voters did not have to respect any o cial ordering of candidates. Another
important law of 1958 banned electoral pacts between parties for deputies and
councilmen (a 1962 electoral law extended this prohibition to senatorial elections).
    The introduction of the secret ballot had an immediate impact on the balance
of political power in Chile. Loveman (1976, p. 219) notes, \The introduction
of a public ballot meant that landowners could no longer e ectively control the
votes of rural labor. The electoral hegemony of the Right in the countryside thus
gave way to forces that advocated social change in the rural areas ... In 1958 the
performance of the FRAP (Socialists and Communists) in rural districts left little
doubt that landowners' control over rural votes had considerably declined."
    If the lack of secret balloting had played an important role in guaranteeing
democratic stability in Chile since the 1930s, why was the secret ballot introduced
in 1958? Though this issue appears not to have been researched by political
scientists, the most plausible reason for this is a deliberate attempt to disrupt the
existing political equilibrium. As we noted above, the election of Iba~   nez in 1952
was based on a heterogenous coalition and an `anti-politics' platform.18 Iba~     nez
intended to forge a new political movement and though he failed in this, it seems
likely that the introduction of the secret ballot, with its easily anticipated e ects
on voting in the countryside, was a calculated gamble. It may also have been part
of a deal which he made with some of his key supporters, the Agrarian Labor party
(Agrario Laboristas) and the Popular Socialist party (Partido Socialista Popular)
both of which would have had an interest in mobilizing rural voters.
    Interestingly however, despite these changes, the Conservative Jorge Alessan-
dri won the presidential election in 1958, principally on a platform emphasiz-
ing conservative monetary policies which were a response to the populism of the
Iba~nez regime.19 Under Iba~  nez per-capita GDP had fallen by 2% and in ation
had averaged 45%, peaking at an annual rate of 76% in 1955 (see Ffrench-Davis,
  18
     His campaign was based on the symbol of a "broom" with which he promised to "sweep"
away political corruption and bad governments...
  19
     Though he polled only 33,416 votes (out of 1,235,552 cast) more than Salvador Allende,
the candidate for the Socialist and Communist alliance. Antonio Zamorano, a leftist defrocked
priest, deprived Allende of a victory by gaining 41,304 (3.3%) left-wing votes.

                                             21
1973, p. 242 and Table 35). However, the right began to disintegrate during the
1960s with the rise of the centrist Christian Democratic Party (Partido Democrata
Cristiano{PDC), founded in 1957 with the merger of three conservative elements:
the National Falange, founded in 1938; the Social Christian Conservative Party;
and the remnants of the Agrarian Labor Party that had backed Iba~       nez. In the
1960s, the Christian Democrats became more progressive, and espoused reformist
Catholic doctrines, which appealed strongly to the middle class, women and rural
voters. In 1966 the Conservatives and Liberals merged to form the National Party.
The Christian Democrat candidate, Eduardo Frei, won the presidency in 1964, and
in 1970 the Christian Democrats provided support to Allende, in exchange of his
guaranteeing strict adherence to democratic procedures.

5.2. Agrarian relations and electoral results across provinces

We collected data from the 1957, 1961 and 1965 electoral registries, the agri-
cultural census of 1935, 1955 and 1965 (see the Appendix) and the population
censuses of 1930 and 1940. The data were collected at the communa (municipal-
ity) level, which corresponds to the lowest level of electoral district as well as the
smallest administrative unit. As census units do not always strictly match the
electoral districts, and changed de nition over time, we had to exclude all the
communas for which we could not be certain of the correspondence, which left us
with a sample of 246 communas (out of 295). (This also explains why we do not
use data over a longer interval of time.) The main variables used throughout the
analysis are described in the Appendix (table A1).
    We focus on the 1957 parliamentary (all of the congress and half of the senate)
elections, as it allows a more direct comparison to the parliamentary elections that
occurred after 1958, and in particular the 1961 and 1965 elections.20 We describe
  20
    We do not take the 1953 congressional and senatorial elections because they were very
exceptional. After the election to the presidency of Carlos Iba~ nez in 1952, the 1953 elections
saw a transient collapse in the right-wing vote in the face of the Iba~nista bandwagon. Scully
(1992, p. 126) notes \The disruption of familiar patterns of party competition was also re ected
in the extreme fragmentation by the party system in the congressional elections of 1953. In
that year, 25 party organizations presented candidates, and 19 achieved representation. Party
proliferation weakened Chile's traditional parties. Whereas in the congressional elections of 1949


                                               22
in Table 1 the main trends at the level of the provinces. In the table, we report
the information over the three Central Valley regions, its two neighboring regions,
the Frontier and the Little North, and the other regions.
    INSERT TABLE 1 HERE
    The relationship between agrarian relations and electoral outcomes is striking.
In 1957, the landed oligarchy in Chile dominated the Urban and the North Central
Valley provinces: the proportion of inquilinos in the number of registered voters
in 1957 is 18.9 percent in the North Central Valley, and 17.2 in the Urban Central
Valley, but 11.2 in the Frontier and Little North, and 8.2 in the other provinces.
Unsurprisingly, the share of right-wing votes in 1957 in the North Central Valley
was 50.0 percent, and 40.8 percent in the Urban Central Valley, much higher than
in the other provinces.21
    After 1958, the fall in the right-wing votes occurs in provinces with a larger
proportion of inquilinos per worker (across provinces, the correlation coe cient
between the two is equal to -0.67). The fall in right-wing votes is dramatic in
the Central Valley provinces. Even the absolute number of right-wing votes fell in
those areas, in spite of an increase in registered voters. The fall is very pronounced
in some provinces, such as Colchagua (-48.1%) from an absolute majority of 70.2%
of the votes in 1957 to barely 22.5 % in 1965.22
the Conservative, Liberal, and Radical parties combined received more than 60% of the vote,
in 1953 they received barely on third." This was just a temporary phenomena however. Scully
goes on to add (1992, p. 126) \Though Iba~     nez had put the leadership of traditional parties on
the defensive in 1953, the situation was reversed between 1953 and 1957." Focusing on 1953
therefore has a tendency to underestimate the fall in conservative support after 1958. Moreover
the de nition of electoral circonscriptions changed through time, which would further restrict
our sample.
   21
      The relationship between right-wing votes in the 1957 elections and land concentration is
less clear however. This is due to the fact that in the arid, semi-arid and infertile provinces to
the north and to the south of the Central Valley (including the Frontier), land concentration
tends also to be high, as a result of the technological constraints on agriculture in these provinces
(ranching instead of farming).
   22
      Hellinger (1978) analyzed electoral change in the Chilean countryside for the two presidential
elections of 1958 and 1970, based on correlations from a restricted (and biased) sample of
municipalities. He points out the gradual erosion of support for the Right as the correlation
between the vote for the Nationalists as the proportion of inquilinos in the agricultural workforce
fell. He however fails to provide a consistent explanation for this change in rural voting pattern.


                                                 23
5.3. The political impact of the 1958 electoral reform: a test
5.3.1. The empirical strategy

The empirical strategy pursued in this paper can be described as follows. Before
the 1958 reform, the share of right-wing votes should be higher in communas
with more inquilinos since their votes are then controlled. However, after the
reform, the in uence of inquilinos on electoral results should disappear, so that the
di erence in voting patterns across the two types of communas should disappear.
In table 2 below, we report the electoral results in 1957 and 1965 for communas
with less and more inquilinos than the median.
    INSERT TABLE 2 HERE
    Over the period, right-wing votes in communas with less inquilinos fell by -
16.2 % while it fell by -30.3% in communas with more inquilinos. The impact of
the loss of control over inquilinos votes on the fall in right-wing votes corresponds
to the di erence between these two gures, -14.1%. The model below aims at
estimating this impact more precisely.
    In Figure 1, we present simple OLS scatter plot of the relationship between
right-wing votes and the proportion of inquilinos in each communa. The pattern is
striking, as the impact of inquilinos on right-wing votes is signi cantly diminished
after 1958.
    INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE

5.3.2. The empirical models

We now present the model used in the empirical analysis. We let RVi;t represent
the number of votes cast in favor of the right-wing party, Vi;t , the total number
of voters, and Vi;th , the total number of voters of type h at time t in communa i.
Voters can be of three di erent types: h = inq if the voter is an inquilino, h = agr
if the voter is not an inquilino but works in agriculture, and h = na if he is not
an agricultural worker. We can then write:
                       inq  inq             agr  agr             na   na
 RVi;t = ( i +   I;t + t )Vi;t +( i + I;t + t )Vi;t +( i + I;t + t )Vi;t +"i;t Vi;t   (5.1)



                                           24
where i is a communa speci c xed e ect, which represents the time-invariant
propensity to vote for the right-wing party in that communa, I;t is a provincial
level xed e ect at each time period which represents the propensity to vote
for the right-wing party in province I at time t; and th represents the speci c
propensity for a voter of type h to vote for the right-wing party at time t. The
error component, "i;t , satis es the usual conditions. Rearranging equation (5.1)
above, and using the fact that Vi;t = Vi;tinq + Vi;tagr + Vi;tna ; we obtain:

                             na               inq     na   inq        agr     na   agr
   RVi;t = (     I;t   +     t )Vi;t   +(     t       t )Vi;t    +(   t       t )Vi;t    + ( i + "i;t )Vi;t :


Dividing both sides of the equation by Vi;t , one gets:

                                                         inq                     agr
       RVi;t                  na        inq         na Vi;t         agr     na Vi;t
             =     I;t   +    t    +(   t           t )        +(   t       t )        +   i   + "i;t ;   (5.2)
       Vi;t                                             Vi;t                    Vi;t

that potentially can be directly estimated. However, we have no information on
the number of voters per category of occupation, Vi;th . Moreover, even between
1957 and 1965, the number of registered voters in the population varied.
    To address these issues we have to make assumptions in order to determine the
proportion of voters per occupational category, and we will investigate di erent
alternatives. In Model 1, we assume that the change in registration is homogenous
across all social classes in a given communa, but may di er across communas: VVi;ti;t
                                                                                    0
is speci c to communa i. Moreover, we also assume that, at time t0 , the probability
that an inquilino is registered as an elector is the same across all communas.23
            inq
Letting Ni;t    represent the number of inquilinos in communa i at time t, we can
then write:
                        Vi;tinq  Vi;t Vtinq
                                         0
                                               Vi;tinq  Vtinq
                                                          0
                                                               inq
                                                              Ni;t
                          inq =              ,         = inq       :
                        Ni;t     Vi;t0 Ntinq
                                          0
                                               Vi;t     Nt0 Vi;t0
  23
    As we shall see, this assumption is necessary to identify the impact of the prevalence of
inquilinos in the electorate. If the proportion of inquilinos voting in 1957 is arbitrary, identi ca-
tion becomes impossible, as the impact of the electoral reform on the 1965 electoral results can
always be explained by di erences in the registration of inquilinos in 1957 between communas.


                                                          25
        Vtinq                                                        Vi;t
where     0
        Ntinq
                is not speci c to communa i, and                     Vi;t0
                                                                           ,   the change in registration rate
          0
in communa i, is not speci c to an occupational category.
    We make a similar assumption for the other agricultural workers (though our
                                        agr
main tests do not require this), where Ni;t represents the number of agricultural
workers other than inquilinos in communa i at time t:
                                           Vi;tagr  Vtagr
                                                      0
                                                           agr
                                                          Ni;t
                                                   = agr       :
                                            Vi;t    Nt0 Vi;t0
Using these two expressions in equation (5.2), and rearranging those terms, we
obtain:
                                            inq !             inq      agr               agr !
RVi;t               na         inq     na Vt0               Ni;t     Ni;t  agr      na Vt0
      =   I;t +     t +
                      (        t       t ) inq                    + (               t ) agr
                                                                           + i +"i;t ;
                                                                           t
 Vi;t                                     Nt0               Vi;t0    Vi;t0             Nt0
                                                                               (5.3)
which represents the basic equation to be estimated. For further interpretation, it
is convenient to rewrite the latter by considering only two time periods, 1957 and
1965, as well as by introducing explicitly provincial dummies, DI , (which is equal
to 1 if communa i belongs to province I and zero otherwise) and a time dummy
t65 corresponding to year 1965. We then have:
        RVi;t                 X                               X
                                                     na                                  na
              =       i   +          I;57 DI   +     57   +          I; 65 DI t65   +     65 t65
        Vi;t                   I                                 I
                                inq                  inq                  agr                agr
                               Ni;t                 Ni;t                Ni;t               Ni;t
                      +   57           +       65           t65 +    57       +         65       t65 + "i;t ; (5.4)
                               Vi;57                Vi;57               Vi;57              Vi;57
                P           na
where i + I I;55 DI + 57       ; represents the (total) communa level xed e ect.
The basic test we want to carry out is the following. Before the secret ballot was
introduced, 57 > 0 and 57 > 57 so that the right-wing party gets more votes
in a communa with more inquilinos compared to other voters, and particularly
other agricultural workers. The main impact of the electoral reform is that, after
1958, inquilinos can vote freely. We therefore expect 65 < 0; as the in uence of
inquilinos on the electoral results of the right-wing party should fall signi cantly
after 1958. We also expect that inquilinos in 1965 will vote like the other agri-
cultural workers, so that 57 + 65 = 57 + 65 (or = 0 if we assume that the

                                                            26
other agricultural workers do not vote di erently than the non-agricultural social
classes): This last expression represents our main empirical test.
    As said above, the number of registered voters increased during those years.
In Model 1, we assume that, within a commune, the increase in registration is
identical across all social classes. However, if non-inquilinos are more likely to
be registered in 1965 than in 1957, this can then potentially introduce a bias in
our estimates if the registration of non-inquilinos is negatively correlated with the
proportion of inquilinos in the voting population at time t0 . In this case the 1965
e ect we are capturing may simply be the e ect of an increase in registration that
is biased against inquilinos. This is a di cult issue, to which we cannot provide
a simple answer. (Note however that what this argument points out is that the
e ect of the electoral reforms on the 1965 elections may be over-estimated. But it
leaves unbiased the coe cients associated with the inquilinos before the reform.)
    Model 2 assumes that, across all communas and across time, the proportion
of voting inquilinos in the inquilino population remains constant:

                        Vi;tinq       Vtinq
                                        0
                                              Vi;tinq   Vtinq
                                                          0
                                                               inq
                                                              Ni;t
                         inq      =         ,         =
                        Ni;t          Ntinq
                                         0
                                              Vi;t      Ntinq
                                                           0
                                                              Vi;t

This assumption implies that any increase in the proportion of registered voters
takes place among non-inquilinos (an extreme version of the above argument).
Under this assumption, it seems more reasonable to neglect the potential di er-
ence in voting behavior between the two other classes, the explicit incorporation
of which requires additional assumptions to determine which classes bene tted
most from the increase in registration. (In e ect, we therefore assume that the
other agricultural workers do not vote di erently from the other non-agricultural
classes.) Note that we still assume that, at time t0 , the probability that an in-
                                            Vtinq
quilino is registered as an elector,        Ntinq
                                                 0
                                                      ; is not communa-speci c. Rewriting
                                                 0
equation (5.3) under these assumptions, we obtain:
                                                             inq !    inq
           RVi;t             ninq          inq        ninq Vt0       Ni;t
                 =   I;t +   t      + (    t          t   ) inq           +   i   + "i;t ;   (5.5)
           Vi;t                                            Nt0       Vi;t


                                                 27
or, following eq(5.4):
           RVi;t                 X                       ninq
                                                                     X                           ninq
                 =       i   +           I;57 DI   +     57      +        I; 65 DI t65   +        65 t65
           Vi;t                   I                                  I
                                   inq                   inq
                                  Ni;t                  Ni;t
                         +   57           +        65           t65 + "i;t :                                (5.6)
                                  Vi;t                   Vi;t
The equation above can also be directly estimated, since the RHS variable is
simply the number of inquilinos at time t divided by the number of voters at time
t (instead of at time t0 as in model (1)). Again, the strategy consists in testing
  57 > 0;   65 < 0; and 57 +         65 = 0:
     In Model 3, we assume that the number of voting inquilinos remains constant
throughout the period, while keeping the assumption that, at time t0 , the prob-
ability that an inquilino is registered as an elector is not communa-speci c. We
have:
                             Vi;tinq     Vi;tinq
                                               0
                                                  Vtinq
                                                    0
                                                         inq
                                                        Ni;t0
                                      =          = inq        :
                              Vi;t       Vi;t     Nt0 Vi;t
This implies that any increase in the number of registered voters took place among
non-inquilinos. Once again neglecting potential voting di erences between the
other agricultural workers and the non-agricultural classes, equation (5.3) be-
comes:
                                                                       inq !    inq
           RVi;t                  ninq             inq          ninq Vt0       Ni;t0
                 =   I;t     +    t      + (       t            t   ) inq            +       i   + "i;t ;   (5.7)
           Vi;t                                                      Nt0       Vi;t
which we rewrite:


           RVi;t                 X                       ninq
                                                                     X                           ninq
                 =       i   +           I;57 DI   +     57      +        I; 65 DI t65   +        65 t65
           Vi;t                   I                                  I
                                   inq                   inq
                                  Ni;57                 Ni;57
                         +   57           +        65           t65 + "i;t :                                (5.8)
                                  Vi;t                   Vi;t
Equation (5.8) can also be directly estimated, using the number of inquilinos in
communa i in 1957 divided by the total number of voters in that communa at
time t. An extreme version of this model requires that, in 1957, all inquilinos were

                                                         28
                                                                    Vtinq
registered, thereby implicitly assuming that                          0
                                                                    Ntinq
                                                                            = 1 in equation (5.7) above, but
                                                                      0
leads to the same speci cation as in equation (5.8).
    In Model 4, we assume that the probability that an agent votes in municipality
i is identical across all classes, and equal to the share of agents of that class in
the population of the municipality (proportional registration). Registration rates
are communa speci c, however. We then have:

                                        Vi;tinq    inq
                                                  Ni;t   Vi;tagr    agr
                                                                   Ni;t
                                                =      ;         =      ;
                                        Vi;t      Ni;t Vi;t        Ni;t
where Ni;t represents the total population in that communa at time t. Combining
the latter expressions with equation (5.3), one gets:

                                                      inq                              agr
    RVi;t               na           inq       na    Ni;t             agr       na    Ni;t
          =   I;t   +   t       +    t         t          +(          t         t )        +       i   + "i;t ;   (5.9)
    Vi;t                                             Ni;t                             Ni;t
or; more explicitly:


       RVi;t                    X                              X
                                                     na                                  na
             =          i   +        I;57 DI   +     57    +         I; 65 DI t65   +     65 t65
       Vi;t                      I                              I
                                  inq                inq             agr                    agr
                                 Ni;t               Ni;t            Ni;t                   Ni;t
                        +   57           +     65          t65 + 57      +              65      t65 + "i;t : (5.10)
                                 Ni;t               Ni;t            Ni;t                   Ni;t
This equation requires to use the proportion of inquilinos in the population of
the municipality at time t as the measure of voting inquilinos. Note here that
assuming proportional registration for the other agricultural workers allows us to
introduce them separately in our estimation, as in equation (5.4).
    Model 5 requires that the proportion of voting members of a particular class
in the voting population is constant across time. As in Models 1, 2 and 3, we still
assume that the probability that a member of a particular class is a voter at time
t0 is not speci c to a particular municipality. We have:

              Vi;tinq   Vi;tinq
                              0
                                 Vtinq
                                   0
                                        inq
                                       Ni;t0
                                               Vi;tagr   Vi;tagr
                                                              0
                                                                  Vtagr
                                                                    0
                                                                         agr
                                                                        Ni;t0
                      =         = inq        ;         =         = agr        :
              Vi;t      Vi;t0    Nt0 Vi;t0 Vi;t          Vi;t0    Nt0 Vi;t0

                                                           29
Note that this assumption still allows inquilinos to be over-represented in 1957.
    A variant of Model 4 is to assume that, in 1957, inquilinos are over-represented
as voters to the point that all inquilinos are registered as voters, while, after the
1958 reform, the probability of voting is identical across classes. To simplify, we
also ignore di erences in voting behavior among the remaining social classes. We
then have:
                 Vi;tinq     inq
                           N57               Vi;tinq    inq
                                                       Ni;t
                         =       in 1957 and         =      in 1961, 1965:
                 Vi;t      Vi;57             Vi;t      Ni;t
This speci cation will be referred to as Model 6 in the estimations below.
    It is clear that not all models are equally defensible. Model 6 allows for the pos-
sibility of biased registration by landlords, whereby inquilinos are over-represented
in the voting population in 1957. This is also a feature of Models 1, 2, 3 and 5.
However, these last three models assume some stability for the subsequent elec-
tions: Model 1 assumes that the proportion of voting inquilinos increased at the
same rate as for the other social classes, Model 2, that the proportion of voting
inquilinos in the inquilino population remained constant, Model 3, that the num-
ber of voting inquilinos remained constant, and model 5 that the proportion of
voting inquilinos in the voting population remained constant. By contrast, Model
6 implies that a large number of inquilinos lost their registration as voters, which
runs against the facts. Indeed, even in 1965, voters represented only 25% of the
total population: this actually implies that, between 1957 and 1965, the number
of inquilinos increased four times or that more than 3/4 of the inquilinos were
de-registered ! (The number of inquilinos actually declined by 8% over the pe-
riod.) Similarly, the assumption in Model 3 that the number of voting inquilinos
remained constant is also not very satisfactory. Model 4 does not allow for biased
registration in favour of inquilinos before 1958. And Model 5 goes against the
idea that increased registration after 1958 mostly favored the other social classes.
As a result, the most relevant models are Models 1 and 2. As Model 1 allow us
to explicitly incorporate the other agricultural workers without any additional
assumptions, we will refer to it as our basic model. The other models will be
used mainly to show that our main results are not too sensitive to the particular
assumptions made on the registration process of inquilinos.

                                          30
5.3.3. The basic results

The information we have on inquilinos, total population, and the agricultural
labour force in a municipality comes from the two agricultural censuses of 1955
and 1965. For the elections of 1965, we used the information from the 1965 census,
while for the elections of 1957, we computed the corresponding gures, using linear
interpolation between 1955 and 1965.
    The results of the panel estimations, with a communa xed e ect, are given
in Table 3 below. Column (1) of Model 1 corresponds to equation (5.4) above,
without the province*year dummies. By doing so, we impose homogeneity on the
evolution of the votes across provinces (electoral results vary in the same way
in all provinces and are therefore picked by the year dummy), thereby assuming
that: I; 61 = I; 65 = 0; 8I:
    In column (2), we allow provincial e ects to vary with time, as a robust-
ness check, as well as to re ect possibly changing state policies that could a ect
provinces di erently (for instance, between cattle-raising and grain-growing ar-
eas). The inclusion of time-varying province e ects may however a ect the sig-
ni cance of our estimates, because of the provincial pattern in the prevalence of
the inquilino system (i.e. multicollinearity).24 In column (2), we also include the
following additional controls: total population and the proportion of land under
large farms in the municipality. Column (3) presents the same speci cation as in
column (1), but uses pooled OLS with a province xed e ect.
    The results obtained using Model 2 is given in columns (4) and (5), with
similar speci cations as in columns (1) and (2). The corresponding estimates under
Models 3, 4, 5 and 6 are given in columns (6)-(14).
    INSERT TABLE 3 HERE
    The results are striking, as they tend to con rm all the hypotheses made above.
First, communas with more inquilinos are more likely to display stronger support
in favour of the right-wing party in 1957. Thus, following column (1), in 1957,
in a communa where the share of inquilinos in the number of voters is greater by
 24
   As can be expected, the estimation results tend to be stronger in the absence of communa
 xed e ects (using pooled OLS) or in the absence of province*time dummies.



                                            31
one standard deviation (0.14), the expected share of the right-wing party is higher
by 6.1%. This represents a 15% increase in the average proportion of right-wing
votes. It is worth noting that the coe cient attached to inquilinos in 1957 di ers
signi cantly from that attached to the other agricultural workers, which implies
completely distinct voting behaviors between the two classes (and in many cases,
  57 > 0 and 57 < 0) .
     Moreover, the political in uence of inquilinos disappears in 1965. The coe -
cient estimated,      65 ; is negative and signi cant, but 57 +    65 does not di er
from 57 + 65 ; the corresponding coe cients for the other agricultural work-
ers, nor from 0 which corresponds to the voting behavior of the non-agricultural
classes. The imposition of secret ballot therefore had an important and signi cant
e ect, as the impact of inquilinos on right-wing votes completely vanishes in the
1965 elections. 25
     The results are consistent over the alternative speci cations. The main coe -
cients of interest always have the anticipated sign, but sometimes lose signi cance.
In particular, the results are weaker when we control for the interaction of province
and time e ects. This is a very demanding requirement however since in such a
model we are only using the intra-province variation to identify the causal e ect
and this speci cation also introduces a problem of multicollinearity with the vari-
ables of interest. Models 3 and 6 also produce less satisfactory results, however
these are the two models based on the least plausible identi cation assumptions.
     To further test the robustness of the above results, we ran similar regressions
using other indicators of the strength of patron-client relationships and of political
control by a traditional landed oligarchy. Instead of using the proportion of voters
of di erent types in the voting population, we used the proportion of inquilinos in
the agricultural labour force in 1957 and 1965 as a measure of the intensity of the
patron-client relationships in the communa, and a measure of land concentration,
the share of area owned by farms larger than 200 hectares in the total agricultural
  25
    Although not reported here, the provincial dummies attached to the `oligarchic' provinces
of O'Higgins, Aconcagua and Colchagua are always signi cant for the 1965 elections (equal to
-0.16, -0.19 and -0.26 respectively, all signi cant at the 1% level). (While we cannot estimate the
provincial xed e ect for 1957 with the panel regressions, the corresponding estimates obtained
with the pooled OLS for 1957 are 0.15, 0.27 and 0.33, all signi cant at the 1% level).

                                                32
area of the communa.26 We report the results of these estimations in table 4
below. The estimates, though less precise than in the basic model, are once again
entirely consistent with our main hypotheses. It must be noted, however, that
many coe cients associated with land concentration or agrarian relations in 1965
loose their signi cance when interacted time and provincial dummies are included
in the model, though they remain consistently negative. This once again may be
partly attributed to the multicollinearity with the interacted time and provincial
dummies, as well as to the less precise nature of the indicators used. Interestingly,
when we run a regression using both the proportion of inquilinos and the measure
of land concentration as in column (17), the latter looses all signi cance, contrary
to the former. This suggests that land concentration had less implications for
the political outcome of a municipality than the intensity of the patron-client
relationship, which is perfectly consistent with our model.27
    The last three columns of table 4 present the results obtained when one uses
the proportion of inquilinos in the population of a municipality in 1935. One can
argue that this variable is a good measure of the importance of inquilinos, as it
predates the elections under study, and is therefore less susceptible of a possible
endogeneity bias. The results fully support our assumptions. Note that, with a
panel xed e ect, we cannot estimate the coe cients attached to variables which
remain constant over time, in particular the one related to the 1957 elections.
They are estimated using pooled OLS in column (20).
    INSERT TABLE 4 HERE
    The above estimates excluded the 1961 elections. The problem comes from
the fact that the number of inquilinos are observed only in two years, 1955 and
1965, so that our main estimations cover the two closest election dates, 1957
and 1965. We now use the 1961 electoral results, where the number of inquilinos
  26
     Again the 1957 gures were obtained by linear interpolation between 1955 and 1965. These
land concentration measures are imprecise however, as the censuses only report at the communa
level the number of farms per size category. By taking the median of each size class, we computed
an estimate of the areas, that we used to compute the shares in area.
  27
     Note that large farms were also found in cattle-raising areas in the North and in the South
of Chile, where few inquilinos were found. The correlation between land concentration and the
proportion of inquilinos in the agricultural labour force is only 0.22.


                                               33
and the other relevant variables for 1961 were obtained by linear interpolation
between 1955 and 1965. In table 5, we present the results obtained under the ve
di erent models discussed above. Note that, since the 1961 elections were close to
the electoral reform and all political adjustments might not be instantaneous, we
expect 0 > 61          65 : we expect the impact of the electoral reform to develop
more fully in 1965 than in 1961. The results are presented in Table 5 below.
    INSERT TABLE 5 HERE
    The results follow closely our former results. The coe cients, and their stan-
dard errors, associated with the 1957 and 1965 elections are almost identical. For
the 1961 elections, the results are less conclusive, as the coe cient 61 associated
with the inquilinos in 1961 is almost everywhere negative, but not systematically
signi cant. As expected, the coe cients associated with the 1961 election are
smaller (in absolute value) than the corresponding ones in 1965. The last column
presents the results obtained when using the proportion of inquilinos in the pop-
ulation in 1935, with signi cant and negative coe cients for the 1961 and 1965
elections.

5.3.4. Christian Democratic votes

We ran similar regressions using the vote share of the Christian Democratic party
as the dependent variable. One can argue that, after the introduction of the secret
ballot, inquilinos are more likely to vote for that party than for any other party.
(We also ran similar regressions on the socialist and the Christian Democratic
parties together, with very similar results.) The focus on the Christian Democratic
party follows from the fact that, historically, peasant and female voters constituted
their political base, while the socialist party drew more support from men and
blue collar workers.
    The estimates are given in table 6 below, where we followed the speci cation
used in the six models above. The results are once again supportive of our hypothe-
sis. While, before 1958, the communas with a higher proportion of inquilinos tend
to vote less in favour of the left-wing parties, this impact completely disappears
in 1965. The estimates are consistent across the various speci cations, though


                                         34
not always signi cant, particularly when time*province dummies and additional
controls, such as land concentration or population are used.
   INSERT TABLE 6 HERE


6. Conclusions

In this paper we have investigated how the employment relationship, if it gener-
ates rents, may allow employers to control the political behavior of their workers.
The salient example of this is voting behavior when there is no secret ballot, so
that political behavior is observable. Interestingly, the rents conceded by em-
ployers to workers gives the former a comparative advantage in controlling the
political activities of the latter, relative to political parties. We showed that this
helps to explain one of the big stylized facts about polities with endemic electoral
corruption, namely that employers supply votes to parties rather than the parties
buying most votes separately from individuals. The ability to sell votes increases
the demand for labor and generates an added incentive to own land, driving up
its price.
    We test the predictions of the model by examining in detail the e ects of the
introduction of the secret ballot in Chile in 1958. We show that, consistent with
our theory, the political reforms led to large changes in voting behavior. Before the
reforms, localities with more pervasive patron-client relationships tend to exhibit
a much stronger support for the right-wing parties, traditionally associated with
the landed oligarchy. After the reform however, this di erence across localities
completely disappeared. This evidence suggests to us that electoral corruption,
and the economic and political incentives that it created, is an important part of
the story for why inequality has been so high historically in Latin America and
possibly also an important part of the story about why long-run economic perfor-
mance in Latin American has been so disappointing (on which see Engerman and
Sokolo , 2005, and Posada-Carbo, 2000, who argue for the central importance
of electoral corruption in Latin American political history). Though our analysis
focused on vote buying, this can be thought of as a metaphor for a wide variety
of political favors or policies that transfer rents to the landlords. Moreover, the

                                         35
political control that rents allow employers to exercise applies much more gen-
erally, even in situations where there is an e ective secret ballot. Any type of
observable political activity, collective actions, demonstrations, trade unionism,
political activism, can all be controlled by the threat of losing ones employment
and the rent that it provides.




                                       36
                                 References

    Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006) Economic Origins of
Dictatorship and Democracy, New York; Cambridge University Press.
    Anderson, Margaret L. (1993) \Voter, Junker, Landrat, Priest: The Old
Authorities and the New Franchise in Imperial Germany," American Historical
Review, 98, 1448-1474.
    Austen-Smith, David (2000) \Income Redistribution under Proportional
Representation," Journal of Political Economy, 108, 1235-1269.
    Banerjee, Abhijit V., Paul J. Gertler and Maitreesh Ghatak (2002)
\Empowerment and E ciency: Analysis of a Tenancy Reform in West Bengal,"
Journal of Political Economy, 110, 239-280.
    Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Andrew F. Newman (1993) \Occupational
Choice and the Process of Development," Journal of Political Economy, 101, 274-
298.
    Baron, David P. and Daniel Diermeier (2001) \Elections, Governments,
and Parliaments in Proportional Representation Systems," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 933-967.
    Bauer, Arnold J. (1975) Chilean Rural Society from the Spanish Conquest
to 1930, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
    Bauer, Arnold J. (1995) \Landlord and Campesino in the Chilean Road
to Democracy," in Evelyn Huber and Frank Sa ord eds. Agrarian Structure and
Political Power: Landlord and Peasant in the Making of Latin America, University
of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, PA.
    Bendix, Reinhard (1964) Nation-Building and Citizenship, John Wiley and
Sons, New York.
    Blackbourn, David (1998) The Long Nineteenth Century: A History of
Germany, 1780-1918, Oxford University Press, New York NY.
    Breman, Jan (1974) Patronage and Exploitation: Changing Agrarian Rela-
tions in South Gujarat, India, University of California Press, Berkeley CA.
    Buchanan, James and Gordon Tullock (1962) The Calculus of Consent,
Ann Arbor; University of Michigan Press.

                                      37
    Castro, Jose Luis (1941) El Sistema Electoral Chileno, Nascimento, Santi-
ago.
    Collier, Ruth Berins and David Collier (1991) Shaping the Political
Arena, Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ.
    Cox, Gary W. (1987) The E cient Secret: The Cabinet and the Develop-
ment of Political Parties in Victorian England, Cambridge University Press, New
York NY.
    Cox, Gary W. (1997) Making Votes Count, Cambridge University Press,
New York, NY.
    Cruz-Coke, Ricardo (1984) Historia Electoral de Chile, 1925-1973, Edito-
rial Juridicia de Chile, Santiago.
    Dekel, Eddie, Matthew O. Jackson and Asher Wolinsky (2004) \Vote
Buying," Unublished California Institute of Technology.
    Engerman Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokolo (2005) \The Evolution
of Su rage Institutions in the New World," Journal of Economic History, 65,
891-921
    Ffrench-Davies, Ricardo (1973) Pol ticas Economicas en Chile, 1952-
1970, Ediciones Nueva Universidad, Santiago Chile.
    Gash, Norman (1977) Politics in the Age of Peel, Harvester Press, Hassocks
UK.
    Gibson, Ralph and Martin Blinkhorn (1991) Landownership and Power
in Modern Europe, Harper Collins, New York NY.
    Gil, Frederico G. (1966) The Political System of Chile, Houghton Mi in,
Boston MA.
    Goldstein, Richard J. (1983) Political Repression in Nineteenth Century
Europe, Croon Helm, London UK.
    Graham, Richard (1990) Patronage and Politics in Nineteenth Century
Brazil, Stanford University Press, Stanford CA.
    Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1996) \Electoral Compe-
tition and Special Interest Politics," Review of Economic Studies, 63, 265-286.
    Hamerow, Theodore S. (1974) The Social Foundations of German Uni-
  cation, 1858-1871: Struggles and Accomplishments, Princeton University Press,

                                      38
Princeton NJ.
    Hartlyn, Jonathan and Arturo Valenzuela (1998) \Democracy in Latin
America since 1930," in Leslie Bethell ed. Latin America: Politics and Society
since 1930, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
    Hellinger, Daniel (1978) \Electoral Change in the Chilean Countryside:
the Presidential Elections of 1958 and 1970", The Western Political Quarterly,
31(2), 253-73.
    Kaufman, Robert E. (1972) The Politics of Land Reform in Chile, 1950-
1970: Public Policy, Political Institutions, and Social Change, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge MA.
    Kinzer, Brian L. (1982) The Ballot Question in Nineteenth Century English
Politics, Garland, New York NY.
    Kitson-Clark, G.S.R. (1951) \The Electorate and the Repeal of the Corn
Laws," Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 1, 109-126.
    Kohli, Atul (1990) Democracy and Discontent: India's Growing Crisis of
Governability, Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ.
    Kreuzer, Marcus (1996) \Democratization and Changing Methods of Elec-
toral Corruption in France from 1815 to 1914," in Walter Little and Eduardo
Posada-Carbo eds. Political Corruption in Europe and Latin America, MacMil-
lan, London.
    Legros, Patrick and Andrew F. Newman (1996) \Wealth E ects, Dis-
tribution, and the Theory of Organization," Journal of Economic Theory, 70,
312-341.
    Loveman, Brian (1976) Struggle in the Countryside: Politics and Rural
Labor in Chile, 1919-1973, University of Indiana Press, Bloomington IN.
    Loveman, Brian (2001) Chile: The Legacy of Hispanic Capitalism, 3rd
Edition, New York; Oxford University Press.
    Malefakis, Edward E. (1970) Agrarian Reform and Peasant Revolution in
Spain, Yale University Press, New Haven CT.
    Marglin, Stephen A. (1974) \What do Bosses Do?" Review of Radical
Political Economy, 6, 60-112.
    Martins, Jose de Souza (1996) \Clientalism and Corruption in Contempo-

                                       39
rary Brazil," in Walter Little and Eduardo Posada-Carbo eds. Political Corruption
in Europe and Latin America, MacMillan, London.
    Millar Carvacho, Rene (1981) La Eleccion Presidencial de 1920: Ten-
dencias y Practicas Pol ticas en el Chile Parlamentario, Ediciones Universitaria,
Santiago.
    Mookherjee, Dilip (1997) \Informational Rents and Property Rights in
Land," in John E. Roemer ed. Property Rights, Incentives and Welfare, MacMil-
lan, London UK.
    Morodo, Raul (1968) Pol tica y partidos en Chile. Las elecciones de 1965,
Madrid: Taurus.
    O'Gorman, Frank (1989) Voters, Patrons and Parties: The Unreformed
Electoral System of Hanovarian England, 1734-1832, Clarendon Press, Oxford
UK.
    Pang, Eul-Soo. (1973) \Coronelismo in Northeastern Brazil," in Robert
Kern ed. The Caciques: Oligarchical Politics and the System of Caciquismo in
the Luso-Hispanic World, University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque NM.
    Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics: Ex-
plaining Economic Policy, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
    Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2003) The Economic E ects of
Constitutions, forthcoming MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
    Petras, James and Maurice Zeitlin (1968) \Agrarian Radicalism in Chile,"
British Journal of Sociology, 19, 503-531.
    Piketty, Thomas (1999) \The Information-Aggregation Approach to Polit-
ical Institutions," European Economic Review, 43, 791-800.
    Piketty, Thomas (2000) \Voting as Communicating," Review of Economic
Studies, 67, 169-191.
    Posada-Carbo, Eduardo (2000) \Electoral Juggling: A Comparative His-
tory of the Corruption of Su rage in Latin America, 1830-1930," Journal of Latin
American Studies, 32, 611-644.
    Ricardo, David ([1824], 1951-1973) \Defense of the Plan of Voting by
Ballot," in Maurice H. Dobb and Piero Sra a eds. The Works and Correspondence
of David Ricardo, Volume 5, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.

                                      40
    Sadoulet, Elisabeth (1992) \Labor-Service Tenancy Contracts in a Latin
American Context," American Economic Review, 82, 1031-1042.
    Scully, Timothy R. (1992) Rethinking the Center: Party Politics in Nine-
teenth and Twentieth Century Chile, Stanford University Press, Stanford CA.
    Sinding, Steven W. (1972) \The Evolution of Chilean Voting Patterns: A
Re-Examination of Some Old Assumptions," The Journal of Politics, 34, 774-796.
    Snyder, James M. (1991) \On Buying Legislatures," Economics and Poli-
tics, 2, 93-110.
    Summerhill, William (1995) \A Note on Some Economic Consequences of
Electoral Reform in Imperial Brazil," Unpublished, Department of History UCLA.
    Swift, Jeannine (1971) Agrarian Reform in Chile: An Economic Study,
Heath Lexington Books, Lexington MA.
    Valenzuela, Arturo (1978) The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes: Chile,
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore MD.
    Valenzuela, J. Samuel (1985) Democratizion via Reforma: La Expansion
del Sufragio en Chile, Ediciones del IDES, Buenos Aires, Argentina.




                                     41
                   Appendix 1 Sources and methodology

    `Agricultural workers' and `inquilinos' are the total number of agricultural
workers and the total number of inquilinos working in the agricultural sector in
1935, 1955 and 1964-5 respectively. Source:II Censo Nacional Agricola Ganadero,
1935, Vol. 1-6, Servicio Nacional de Estadistica y Censos, Republica de Chile; III
Censo Nacional Agricola Ganadero, 1955, Vol. 1-6, Servicio Nacional de Estadis-
tica y Censos, Republica de Chile; IV Censo Nacional Agro-pecuario 1964-65,
Vol. 1-26, Direccion de Estadistica y Censos, Republica de Chile. Population
  gures came from the 1940, 1952, 1960 and 1970 Censo de Poblacion, Centro
Latinamericano de Demogra a. `Right-wing votes' is the proportion of votes in
favor of the `Conservador', `Conservador Tradicionalista' and `Liberal' parties in
the total number of valid votes, in the parliamentary elections of 1957, 1961, and
1965 respectively; `radical' refers to the proportion of votes in favor of the `Rad-
ical' and `Radical Doctrinario' parties in the total number of valid votes, in the
parliamentary elections of 1957, 1961, and 1965 respectively; `christian democrat'
is the proportion of valid votes in favor of the `Falangia Nacional', the 'Agrario
Laboristas' and 'Partido Social Christiano Conservador' in 1957 and the `De-
mocrata Christiano' party for the years 1961, 1965 and 1969. The `left' includes
the proportion of valid votes in favor of the `Communista', `Socialista' and `Social-
ista Popular' parties in 1957, 1961 and 1965 respectively. The regrouping of the
political parties was made according to the methodology followed by Valenzuela
(1978). The number of voters is the number of valid votes in the 1953 and 1957
elections. We chose parliamentary elections only because of their comparability
across years and the stability of the major parties over the years. Presidential and
Municipal elections in those years followed very closely the pattern followed by
the parliamentary elections. Sources: Direccion del Registro Electoral, Election
ordinaria de senadores y diputados al Congreso Nacional (periodo constitucional
1953-7), Chile; Direccion del Registro Electoral, Variacion Porcentual de los Par-
tidos Politicos, 1957-1971, Chile.




                                         42
Figure 1: Right-wing votes in 1957 and 1965 and the ratio of inquilinos to registered voters in 1955
(scatter plot and simple regression line)
           .6




                                                                                    .4
           .4
 right wing votes 1957




                                                                          right wing votes 1965
                                                                                         .2
                .2




                                                                                0
      0




                                                                                    -.2
           -.2
           -.4




                         0           .2                    .4        .6                           0            .2                    .4     .6
                                  proportion of inquilinos 1955                                             proportion of inquilinos 1955


                             Right57 =    0.319+ 0.523 Inq/voter55                                    Right65 =   0.149+0.145 Inq/voter55
                                          (0.017)(0.078)                                                          (0.010)(0.047)
  Table 1: Agrarian relations, land concentration and electoral results in Chile

                              Proportion Proportion Proportion        Proportion    Proportion Proportion Proportion      Share of
                                  of           of         of           of right-     of right-     of            of      total area
                              inquilinos inquilinos inquilinos        wing votes    wing votes christian-    christian- operated by
                                in the       in the     in the          in 1957       in 1965  democratic democratic farms over
Region                        population agricultural number of        elections     elections votes in the votes in the 200 has in
                               in 1935      labour    registered                                  1957         1965        1955
                                           force in     voters                                  elections    elections
                                             1955     (1955-57)
                                 (%)          (%)        (%)             (%)           (%)           (%)       (%)         (%)
North Central Valley             4.8          19.6       18.9            50.0          17.3          4.8       40.8        75.7
(O’Higgins, Colchagua,
Curico, Talca)
Urban Central Valley             3.8          19.1          17.2         40.8          16.0          8.6       47.1        88.5
(Valparaiso, Santiago,
Aconcagua)
South Central Valley             4.5          12.7          14.6         40.5          17.2          4.9       39.0        60.1
(Maule, Linares, Nuble)

All Central Valley               4.3          17.4          17.1         44.4          16.9          6.0       42.1        74.9
Provinces
Frontier and Little North        3.2          10.8          11.2         31.2          11.8          7.4       33.7        68.9
Provinces (Concepcion,
Bio-bio, Arauco, Malleco,
Cautin, Atacama,
Coquimbo)
All other provinces              3.0           5.7           8.2         26.6          15.1          14.7      29.6        69.4
(Valdivia, Osorno,
Llanquihue, Chiloe,
Aysen, Magallanes,
Tarapaca, Antofagasta)

Chile (average across all       3.8         11.8          12.6         35.0            14.8           8.7      35.8        71.4
provinces)
 Note: For the Santiago province, we excluded the four exclusively urban districts of the city of Santiago.
Table 2: Impact of agrarian relations on right-wing votes before and after the 1958 electoral reform

                               1957                    1965              Difference 65-57
Ratio of inquilinos to
the number of
                               0.321                   0.159                  -0.162
registered voters in
1955 below median
(<0.134)
Ratio of inquilinos to
the number of
                               0.491                   0.188                  -0.303
registered voters in
1955 above median
Difference                     0.170                   0.029                  -0.141
   Table 3: Impact of inquilinos on right-wing votes in 1957 and 1965



                     The dependent variable is the proportion of right-wing votes in the 1957 and 1965 parliamentary elections
                                             Model 1                                         Model 2                             Model 3
                              (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                  (5)           (6)                   (7)
Inquilino/voter             0.438**           0.259*           0.451***          0.424***              0.318**      0.760***               0.590***
                            (0.173)           (0.153)           (0.072)           (0.144)              (0.129)       (0.201)               (0.184)
1965*Inquilino/voter*      -0.435***         -0.294***        -0.278***          -0.369**              -0.156         -0.093                -0.020
                            (0.082)           (0.090)           (0.986)           (0.144)              (0.155)       (0.172)               (0.172)
Other agricultural         -0.102***          -0.016            -0.006             ___                  ___            ___                   ___
workers/voter
                            (0.031)           (0.030)           (0.010)
1965*Other agric.          0.047***            0.005             0.001             ___                  ___            ___                   ___
workers/voter
                            (0.012)           (0.013)           (0.013)
Time dummy:1965            -0.197***         -0.160***        -0.157***          -0.268***         -0.154***        -0.168***          -0.165***
                            (0.019)           (0.047)           (0.056)           (0.016)              (0.046)       (0.016)               (0.045)
1965*Province                 ___               Yes              Yes               ___                  Yes            ___                   Yes
Other controls                ___               Yes              Yes               ___                  Yes            ___                   Yes
Communa fixed effect          Yes               Yes         No (pool. OLS)         Yes                  Yes            Yes                   Yes
Provincial dummies            ___               ___               Yes              ___                  ___            ___                   ___
# obs.                        492               492               492              492                  492            492                   492
   Table 3 (ctd): Impact of inquilinos on right-wing votes in 1957 and 1965



                     The dependent variable is the proportion of right-wing votes in the 1957 and 1965 parliamentary elections
                                       Model 4                                       Model 5                                        Model 6
                               (8)                 (9)              (10)               (11)              (12)               (13)                (14)
Inquilino/voter             3.533***             2.095*             ___                ___             0.448***            0.016               0.126
                             (1.306)             (1.188)                                                (0.072)           (0.126)             (0.115)
1965*Inquilino/voter*       -4.705***         -3.034***          -0.492***          -0.303***         -0.304***          -4.010***            -2.194**
                             (0.688)             (0.801)          (0.076)            (0.082)            (0.098)           (0.995)             (1.071)
Other agricultural          -0.644***             0.032             ___                ___              -0.006              ___                 ___
workers/voter
                             (0.232)             (0.240)                                                (0.010)
1965*Other agric.            0.364**              -0.076         0.038***             0.003              0.000              ___                 ___
workers/voter
                             (0.112)             (0.141)          (0.011)            (0.012)            (0.014)
Time dummy:1965             -0.182***            -0.121**        -0.203***          -0.158***         -0.155***          -0.157***          -0.145***
                             (0.021)             (0.050)          (0.018)            (0.046)            (0.056)           (0.016)             (0.045)
1965*Province                  ___                 Yes              ___                Yes                Yes               ___                 Yes
Other controls                 ___                 Yes              ___                Yes                Yes               ___                 Yes
Communa fixed effect           Yes                 Yes              Yes                Yes         No (pool. OLS)           Yes                 Yes
Provincial dummies             ___                 ___              ___                ___                Yes               ___                 ___
# obs.                         492                 492              492                492                492               492                 492
   Note: Standard errors under brackets, ***indicates significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level. The additional controls for equations
   (2), (3), (9), (11) and (12) are the proportion of land under large farms and the population in the municipality; for equations (5), (7) and (14), they also include the
   agricultural labour force. For the fixed effect estimates, the within R-square ranged between 0.69 and 0.84, while the between R-square ranged between 0.02 and
   0.26. For equations (1) and (12), the adjusted R2 were 0.69.
Table 4: Impact of inquilinos on right-wing votes in 1957 and 1965: alternative measures and robustness checks

                            The dependent variable is the proportion of right-wing votes in the 1957 and 1965 parliamentary elections

                                        (15)             (16)            (17)            (18)             (19)            (20)            (21)             (22)
Inquilinos/total agricultural        1.063***          0.440*            ___             ___             0.461*           ___             ___              ___
workers                               (0.260)          (0.249)                                          (0.250)
1965*Inquilinos/total                -1.023***          -0.317           ___             ___            -0.440*           ___              ___             ___
agricultural workers                  (0.210)          (0.224)                                          (0.259)
Proportion of land under large          ___              ___            0.228*          0.041            0.028            ___              ___             ___
farms                                                                  (0.120)         (0.105)          (0.105)
1965*Proportion of land under           ___             ___           -0.181***         0.004            0.056            ___              ___             ___
large farms                                                            (0.051)         (0.051)          (0.059)
Inquilinos/population in 1935           ___             ___              ___             ___              ___          1.502***            ___             ___
                                                                                                                        (0.384)
1965*Inquilinos/population in           ___             ___              ___             ___              ___          -1.646***       -1.792***        -1.343***
1935                                                                                                                    (0.507)         (0.459)          (0.445)
Time dummy:1965                      -0.112***       -0.163***        -0.097**        -0.211***        -195***         -0.177***       -0.167***        -0.163***
                                      (0.021)         (0.049)          (0.039)         (0.060)          (0.060)         (0.058)         (0.021)          (0.049)
1965*Province                           ___             Yes              ___             Yes              Yes             Yes             ___              Yes
Other controls                          ___             Yes              ___             Yes              Yes             Yes              ___             Yes
Provincial Dummies                      ___             ___              ___             ___              ___             Yes              ___             ___
Communa fixed effect                    Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes         No (pooled          Yes              Yes
                                                                                                                        OLS)
# obs.                                  492             492              492             492              492            422               422             422
Notes: Standard errors under brackets, ***indicates significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level. The additional controls for equations
(14), (18) and (19) were the agricultural labour force, the proportion of land under large farms and the population; for equations (16) and (17), the agricultural
labour force and the population. For the fixed effect estimates, the within R-square ranged between 0.65 and 0.84, while the between R-square ranged between
0.02 and 0.24. For equation (18), the adjusted R2 was 0.70.
Table 5: Impact of inquilinos on right-wing votes in 1957, 1961 and 1965

     The dependent variable is the proportion of right-wing votes in the 1957, 1961 and 1965 parliamentary elections (standard errors under brackets)

                                   Model 1           Model 2           Model 3           Model 4           Model 5           Model 6         Using 1935
                                                                                                                                            inquilino data
                                        (23)            (24)               (25)            (26)              (27)               (28)             (29)
Inquilino/voter                      0.248*          0.340***          0.511***           1.920*             ___               0.076             ___
                                     (0.137)          (0.107)           (0.150)          (1.057)                             (0.094)
1961*Inquilino/voter                -0.190**           -0.025             0.033         -2.080***          -0.174**           -0.918             ___
                                     (0.076)          (0.084)           (0.088)          (0.688)            (0.072)          (0.877)
1965*Inquilino/voter               -0.271***           -0.196            -0.074         -2.806***         -0.304***         -2.433***            ___
                                     (0.080)          (0.119)           (0.147)          (0.703)            (0.074)          (0.895)
Other agricultural                    -0.016            ___                ___            0.090               ___               ___              ___
workers/voter                        (0.027)                                             (0.203)
1961*Other agricultural                0.017            ___               ___             0.115             0.015              ___               ___
workers/voter                        (0.010)                                             (0.116)           (0.011)
1965*Other agric.                     -0.004            ___               ___             -0.119            0.003              ___               ___
workers/voter                        (0.011)                                             (0.124)            (0.11)
1961*Inquilinos/population              ___             ___               ___              ___               ___               ___            -1.068***
in 1935                                                                                                                                        (0.379)
1965*Inquilinos/population            ___               ___               ___              ___               ___               ___            -1.373***
in 1935                                                                                                                                        (0.398)
Time dummies (1961, 1965)             Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Time*Province dummies                 Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Other controls                        Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Communa fixed effect                  Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
# obs.                                738               738               738              738               738               738               633
Notes: Standard errors under brackets, ***indicates significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level. The within R-square ranged between
0.77 and 0.79, while the between R-square ranged between 0.01 and 0.08. The additional controls for equations (23), (26) and (27) are the proportion of land
under large farms and the population; for equations (24), (25), (28) and (30), they also include the agricultural labour force.
Table 6: Impact of agrarian relations on votes for the Christian-Democratic parties

The dependent variable is the proportion of votes for the Christian-Democratic parties in the 1957 and 1965 parliamentary elections

                              Model 1                      Model 2             Model 3       Model 4       Model 5       Model 6         Using
                                                                                                                                      inq./pop. in
                                                                                                                                         1935
                          (30)         (31)          (32)          (33)           (34)         (35)          (36)           (33)          (34)
Inquilino/voter        -0.268**       -0.123      -0.238**      -0.189**       -0.308**       -0.881         ___          -0.073          ___
                        (0.125)      (0.101)       (0.104)       (0.083)        (0.123)      (0.795)                      (0.076)
1965*Inquilino/vo     0.403***      0.224***      0.356***        0.089          0.025      1.927***       0.190***       1.225*          ___
ter                     (0.059)      (0.060)       (0.104)       (0.091)        (0.115)      (0.536)        (0.055)       (0.713)
Other agricultural       0.016        -0.010         ___           ___            ___        -0.109           ___           ___           ___
workers/voter           (0.023)      (0.020)                                                 (0.161)
1965*Other agric.     -0.030***       -0.011         ___             ___         ___         -0.090        -0.142*         ___            ___
workers/voter           (0.008)      (0.009)                                                 (0.094)       (0.008)
1965*Inquilinos/p         ___          ___           ___             ___         ___           ___           ___           ___          0.567*
opulation in 1935                                                                                                                       (0.298)
Time                  0.204***      0.284***      0.253***      0.264***      0.277***      0.280***       0.280***      0.268***      0.289***
dummy:1965             (0.015)       (0.031)       (0.011)       (0.032)       (0.030)       (0.033)                      (0.030)       (0.033)
1965*Province            ___           Yes           ___           Yes           Yes           Yes          (0.031)         Yes           Yes

Other controls                          Yes                          Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

Communa fixed             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
effect
# obs.                    492          492            492            492           492           492            492           492          422
Note: Standard errors under brackets, ***indicates significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level. The within R-square ranged between
0.88 and 0.95, while the between R-square ranged between 0.01 and 0.11. The additional controls are as in Table 3.
Table A1: Description of the main variables used

Variable                                  # obs.   Mean       Standard Dev.   Minimum    Maximum

Right-wing votes in 1957                    246       0.407       0.195            0        0.914
Right-wing votes in 1961                    246       0.352       0.160            0        0.846
Right-wing votes in 1965                    246       0.174       0.111            0        0.577
Left and Christian-Democrat votes in        246       0.161       0.141            0        0.778
1957
Left and Christian-Democrat votes in        246       0.330       0.134          0.041      0.792
1961
Left and Christian-Democrat votes in        246       0.575       0.140          0.212      0.891
1965
Christian-Democrat votes in 1957            246       0.069       0.144            0        0.736
Christian-Democrat votes in 1961            246       0.138       0.094          0.007      0.594
Christian-Democrat votes in 1965            246       0.371       0.111            0        0.629
Ratio of inquilinos in 1957 to the          246       0.165       0.144            0        0.832
number of registered voters in 1957
Ratio of inquilinos in 1961 to the          246       0.118       0.107            0        0.599
number of registered voters in 1961
Ratio of inquilinos in 1965 to the          246       0.083       0.084            0        0.449
number of registered voters in 1965
Proportion of inquilinos in 1957 in the     246       0.162       0.104            0        0.552
agricultural labour force in 1957
Proportion of inquilinos in 1961 in the     246       0.020       0.016            0        0.076
agricultural labour force in 1961
Proportion of inquilinos in 1965 in the     246       0.088       0.059            0        0.327
agricultural labour force in 1965
Proportion of inquilinos in 1957 in the     246       0.021       0.017            0        0.068
population in 1957
Proportion of inquilinos in 1961 the        246       0.020       0.016            0        0.076
population in 1961
Proportion of inquilinos in 1965 in the     246       0.018       0.017            0        0.086
population in 1965
Ratio of other agricultural workers in      246       1.368       1.019          0.005      6.874
1957 to the number of registered voters
in 1957
Ratio of other agricultural workers in      246       1.204       0.862          0.004      4.267
1961 the number of registered voters in
1961
Ratio of other agricultural workers in      246          1.066            0.866            0.002             5.066
1965 to the number of registered voters
in 1965
Proportion of inquilinos in 1935 in the     211          0.038            0.025               0              0.136
population in 1935
Proportion of inquilinos in 1957 in the     246          0.117            0.065               0              0.298
agricultural labour force in 1957
Proportion of inquilinos in 1961 in the     246          0.095            0.053               0              0.227
agricultural labour force in 1961
Proportion of inquilinos in 1965 in the     246          0.078            0.049               0              0.246
agricultural labour force in 1965
Number of other agricultural workers        246          2219              1714               0              11857
in 1957
Number of other agricultural workers        246          2641              1963              89              14896
in 1961
Number of other agricultural workers        246          3063              2275             102              17934
in 1965
Population in 1957                          246         22918             31720            1164             246067
Population in 1961                          246         25657             37219            1076             259130
Population in 1965                          246         28182             42255             965             281851
Number of votes in 1957                     246          2876              4054              65              43599
Number of votes in 1961                     246          4299              5470             131              34901
Number of votes in 1965                     246          7248             11440              76              86664
Share of total area operated by farms       246          0.741            0.213               0              0.997
over 200 hectares in 1957
Share of total area operated by farms       246          0.724            0.213               0              0.994
over 200 hectares in 1961
Share of total area operated by farms       246          0.706            0.223               0              0.998
over 200 hectares in 1965
Note: Population, occupation and land concentration figures for 1957 and 1961 were obtained by linear interpolation from
the 1955 and the 1965 agricultural censuses.
