NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMMIGRATION AND AFRICAN-AMERICAN EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES:
THE RESPONSE OF WAGES, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCARCERATION TO LABOR SUPPLY SHOCKS
George J. Borjas
Jeffrey Grogger
Gordon H. Hanson
Working Paper 12518
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12518

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2006

We thank Eli Berman, Melissa Famulari, and seminar participants at UCSD for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and d not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by George J. Borjas, Jeffrey Grogger, and Gordon H. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Immigration and African-American Employment Opportunities: The Response of Wages,
Employment, and Incarceration to Labor Supply Shocks
George J. Borjas, Jeffrey Grogger, and Gordon H. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 12518
September 2006, Revised May 2007
JEL No. J2,J3,J6,K42
ABSTRACT
The employment rate of black men, and particularly of low-skill black men, fell precipitously from
1960 to 2000. At the same time, the incarceration rate of black men rose markedly. This paper examines
the relation between immigration and these trends in black employment and incarceration. Using data
drawn from the 1960-2000 U.S. Censuses, we find a strong correlation between immigration, black
wages, black employment rates, and black incarceration rates. As immigrants disproportionately increased
the supply of workers in a particular skill group, the wage of black workers in that group fell, the employment
rate declined, and the incarceration rate rose. Our analysis suggests that a 10-percent immigrant-induced
increase in the supply of a particular skill group reduced the black wage by 4.0 percent, lowered the
employment rate of black men by 3.5 percentage points, and increased the incarceration rate of blacks
by almost a full percentage point.
George J. Borjas
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu
Jeffrey Grogger
Irving B. Harris Professor of Urban Policy
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jgrogger@uchicago.edu

Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS 0519
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu

2
IMMIGRATION AND AFRICAN-AMERICAN EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES:
THE RESPONSE OF WAGES, EMPLOYMENT, AND
INCARCERATION TO LABOR SUPPLY SHOCKS
George J. Borjas, Jeffrey Grogger, and Gordon H. Hanson*
After a wave of raids by federal immigration agents on Labor Day weekend, a
local chicken-processing company called Crider Inc. lost 75% of its mostly
Hispanic 900-member work force. The crackdown threatened to cripple the
economic anchor of this fading rural town. But for local African-Americans, the
dramatic appearance of federal agents presented an unexpected opportunity.
Crider suddenly raised pay at the plant. An advertisement in the weekly ForestBlade newspaper blared “Increased Wages” at Crider, starting at $7 to $9 an
hour—more than a dollar above what the company had paid many immigrant
workers. (The Wall Street Journal, January 17, 2007)
I. Introduction
The employment rate of African-American men—defined as the fraction of weeks
worked during a calendar year by the typical black male—fell from 74.9 percent in 1960 to 67.9
percent in 2000.1 This drop stands in sharp contrast to the slight decline observed among white
men during that period, from 87.0 to 85.2 percent. The racial employment gap widened even
more for low-skill persons: the employment rate of black high school dropouts fell by 30
percentage points, from 72.1 to 42.1 percent, as compared to an 18 percentage point drop for
white high school dropouts, from 82.7 to 64.3 percent.
The decline in labor market participation among black men was accompanied by a rapid
increase in the number of black men in correctional institutions. As recently as 1980, only 0.8
percent of black men (and 1.4 percent of black high school dropouts) were incarcerated. By

*

Borjas: John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, and National Bureau of Economic
Research; Grogger: Harris School of Public Policy Studies, University of Chicago, and National Bureau of
Economic Research; Hanson: Graduate School of International Relations and Pacific Studies and Department of
Economics, University of California, San Diego, and National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Eli Berman,
Donald Cox, Melissa Famulari, Peter Gottschalk, Richard Freeman, Larry Katz, and seminar participants at Boston
College, Harvard University, and UCSD for helpful comments.
1

Throughout the paper, the “employment rate” gives the average fraction of weeks worked during the
calendar year prior to the Census (i.e., the ratio of weeks worked, including zeros, to 52). The “incarceration rate”
gives the fraction of persons who are institutionalized at the time of the Census. The data will be described in greater
detail in the next section.

3
2000, 9.6 percent of black men (and 21.2 percent of black high school dropouts) were
incarcerated.2
A large academic literature examines these trends. One strand of the literature
emphasizes the impact of government programs, such as the Social Security disability program
or the minimum wage, in driving black men out of the labor market (Bound and Freeman, 1992;
Bound, Schauenbaum, and Waidmann, 1995; Parsons, 1980; Stern, 1989; and Welch, 1990).
Another focuses on the possibility that the changes in the wage structure, and particularly the
decline in the real wage of low-skill workers, may have discouraged low-skill black men from
entering the labor market (Juhn, 1992, 2003). Finally, some analysts note that the trend in black
incarceration rates was shaped by the crack epidemic of the 1980s and early 1990s. The
invention of crack cocaine in the early 1980s represented a technological innovation that greatly
increased the profitability of the cocaine trade. As illegal drug markets expanded, crime rose
(Grogger and Willis, 2000). Many jurisdictions responded by increasing both drug arrests and
the likelihood of imprisonment for convicted arrestees (Boggess and Bound, 1997). Crack and its
consequences were concentrated in African-American communities, in part because pre-existing
black gangs acted to profit from the expanding drug trade (Fryer et al, 2005).
Remarkably, as far as we know, no study has examined if there is a link between the
resurgence of large-scale immigration and the employment and incarceration trends in the black
population.3 Although it is well known that immigration has disproportionately increased the
number of low-skill workers in the United States, there is disagreement over whether this influx
has adversely affected competing native workers (Borjas, 2003; Card, 2001). The conflicting
evidence hinges crucially on the nature of the empirical exercise: Studies that measure the impact
of immigration by looking at wage trends across local labor markets tend to find small effects,
while studies that examine the evolution of the national wage structure find large effects.
Regardless of the geographic unit used to analyze the impact of immigration, any such impact
would presumably be larger in the black workforce. In fact, some of the early studies in this

2

Western and Pettit (2000) show that ignoring the prevalence of incarceration rates provides a very
misleading picture of employment trends in the black population.
3

Using cross-section data from the 1980s, Butcher and Piehl (1998) find that metropolitan areas with larger
immigrant populations had higher crime rates, but this relationship disappears once they control for the demographic
characteristics of the underlying populations.

4
literature (Borjas, 1987; Altonji and Card, 1991; and LaLonde and Topel, 1991) specifically
attempted to measure the impact of immigration on black wages.
This paper examines the relation between immigration and black employment outcomes.
The empirical analysis shows that immigration has indeed lowered the wage of blacks. Our main
interest, however, is on the behavioral consequences of this reduction of economic opportunities
in the “formal” labor market. In particular, we investigate if the immigration-induced reduction
in the black wage may have encouraged some black men to exit the labor force and shift to
illegal activities.4
We use data drawn from the 1960-2000 U.S. Censuses. These data reveal a strong
correlation between immigration and black wages, black employment rates, and black
incarceration rates. As immigrants disproportionately increased the supply of workers in a
particular skill group, we find a reduction in the wage of black workers in that group, a reduction
in the employment rate, and a corresponding increase in the incarceration rate. Moreover, these
correlations are found in both national-level and state-level data. In fact, our theoretical
framework links the state- and national-level analysis and helps to resolve the conflict between
the local and national studies in the literature. We show that the differences result from a
remediable omitted-variable problem in the state-level regression. When the state-level
regression is properly specified, it should (and, in fact, does) produce results that are very similar
to those from the national-level regressions.
Our study suggests that a 10-percent immigrant-induced increase in the supply of a
particular skill group is associated with a reduction in the black wage of 4.0 percent, a reduction
in the black employment rate of 3.5 percentage points, and an increase in the black
institutionalization rate of 0.8 percentage points. Among white men, the same ten-percent
increase in supply reduces the wage by 4.1 percent, but has much weaker employment and
incarceration effects: a 1.6 percentage point reduction in the employment rate and a 0.1
percentage point increase in the incarceration rate. It seems, therefore, that black employment
and incarceration rates are much more sensitive to immigration than those of whites.

4 We are aware of only one study that has linked immigration, wages, and incarceration rates. In their
replication of the Borjas (2003) study, Raphael and Ronconi (2005) claim that adding incarceration rates as an
explanatory variable in a regression of wages on immigrant shares attenuates the wage impact of immigration in
national-level data. The Raphael-Ronconi empirical exercise, however, may have the logic backwards: shifts in
incarceration rates are likely endogenous and may be partly caused by immigration.

5
These findings can obviously generate a great deal of controversy in the immigration
debate and can be easily misinterpreted. As a result, we are extremely cautious in both the
presentation and interpretation of the evidence. Although we have attempted to control for other
factors that may account for the large shifts in black employment and incarceration rates over the
four-decade period that we examine, it should be obvious that no study can control for all
possible factors. It is equally important to emphasize that although the evidence suggests that
immigration played a role in generating these trends, much of the decline in employment or
increase in incarceration in the black population remains unexplained. Put differently,
immigration seems to have an effect and this effect seems to be numerically important, but we
would have witnessed a sizable decline in black employment and the concurrent increase in
black incarceration rates even if there had been no immigration in the past few decades.

II. Data and Descriptive Trends
Our data are drawn from the 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000 Integrated Public Use
Microdata Samples (IPUMS) of the decennial Censuses. The 1960 and 1970 files represent a 1
percent sample of the U.S. population, and the 1980 through 2000 files represent a 5 percent
sample. In most of the paper, the empirical analysis is restricted to men aged 18 to 64. The Data
Appendix describes the construction of the sample extracts and variables used in the study.
We use the convention of defining an immigrant as someone who is either a noncitizen or
a naturalized U.S. citizen. All other persons are defined as natives. Similarly, we use information
contained in the census race variable to classify persons as “black” or “white.” Unless otherwise
specified, persons whose race is neither black nor white are excluded from the analysis.
As in Borjas (2003), skill groups are defined in terms of both educational attainment and
years of labor market experience. We classify workers into four distinct education groups: (1)
high school dropouts (workers who have less than 12 years of completed schooling); (2) high
school graduates (workers who have exactly twelve years of schooling); (3) workers who have
some college (thirteen to fifteen years of schooling); and (4) college graduates (workers who
have at least sixteen years of schooling).
We group workers into a particular years-of-experience cohort by using potential years of
experience, roughly defined by Age – Years of Education – 6. We assume that age of entry into
the labor market is 17 for high school dropouts, 19 for high school graduates, 21 for persons with
some college, and 23 for college graduates, and then calculate years of experience accordingly.

6
The analysis is restricted to persons who have between 1 and 40 years of experience. Workers
are aggregated into five-year experience groupings (i.e., 1 to 5 years of experience, 5 to 10 years,
and so on) to capture the notion that workers who have roughly similar years of experience are
more likely to affect each other’s labor market opportunities than workers who differ
significantly in their work experience. For national-level cohorts, the resulting data set contain
160 observations (4 education groups, 8 experience groups, and 5 years).
The cell corresponding to educational attainment (e), experience level (x), and calendar
year (t) defines a skill group at a point in time for the U.S. national labor market, or, later in the
analysis, for a U.S. state labor market. The immigrant supply shock experienced by a particular
skill group is given by:

pext =

(1)

M ext
,
M ext + N ext

where Mext gives the total number of immigrants in the workforce in the particular skill group;
and Next gives the corresponding number of native workers.5 The variable pext then gives the
immigrant share (i.e., the fraction of the relevant workforce that is foreign-born).
Figure 1 summarizes some of the (well-known) information regarding trends in the
immigrant share, by education and experience group, for the 1960-2000 period. The fraction of
the workforce that is foreign-born increased most for high school dropouts. Within any given
census year, the increase in the immigrant share is largest for workers with lower levels of labormarket experience, due to the preponderance of young adults in the immigrant population. By
2000, 14.7 percent of the male workforce and 39.8 of high school dropouts were foreign-born.
Among high-school dropouts with 10 to 15 years of experience, 47.5 percent of the workforce
was foreign born.
It is useful to begin our analysis by illustrating racial differences in national-level trends
in employment and incarceration across race, education, and experience groups.6 The top panel

5
6

The counts of immigrants and natives in each Census include persons of all races.

To provide some context to the discussion, it is instructive to report the share of black and white workers
in each of the education groups. In 2000, 18.8 (8.9) percent of blacks (whites) were high school dropouts, 43.7
(33.2) percent were high school graduates, 26.4 (29.0) percent had some college, and 11.1 (28.9) percent were
college graduates.

7
of Figure 2 reports the education-and-experience-specific trends for the black employment rate,
while the bottom panel presents the corresponding figure for white men. As noted above, the
employment rate is defined as the average fraction of weeks worked during the preceding
calendar year (including non-workers). Both figures are drawn to the same scale so that the large
racial differences can be grasped easily. Since employment rates and incarceration rates tend to
be lower for men in their mid-50s or older, we mainly discuss the trends for those with up to 30
years of labor market experience.
In 1960, the employment rate was 81.1 percent for black workers with at least a high
school diploma and 1 to 30 years of labor market experience, and close to 80 percent for all but
the youngest and oldest black high school dropouts. The relative similarity in employment rates
among the various groups began to diverge in the 1970s. By 2000, the average employment rate
of black high school dropouts was 40.5 percent, that of high school graduates was 64.4 percent,
and that of workers who had more than a high school diploma was 80.9 percent (in each case for
workers with 1 to 30 years of experience). While all black education groups had seen a drop in
employment rates, the decline was most dramatic for the least educated.
The bottom panel of Figure 2 shows the corresponding trend for white men. As with
blacks, there has been a decline in employment propensities for the least educated workers, but
the decline is modest relative to that seen in the black population. Among the most educated
whites, average employment rates remain very high for all but the oldest workers. For college
graduates with up to 30 years of experience, the average employment rate was essentially flat
during the four-decade period, at roughly 93 percent. Employment rates for black college
graduates with similar experience levels actually rose slightly over the period from 86.4 percent
to 87.7 percent. Among white high school dropouts with less than 30 years of experience, the
average employment rate fell from 83.0 to 65.5 percent, a 17.5 percentage point drop. This is a
large and important decline, although it is much smaller than the 32.7 percentage point drop
observed among black high school dropouts with similar work experience.
The rapid disappearance of a large segment of black high school dropouts from the
workforce was accompanied by a large increase in the number of black high school dropouts in
the institutionalized population. We use information on residence in group quarters available in
the decennial censuses to enumerate the number of persons in institutions. These institutions

8
include jails, prisons, and mental hospitals.7 For young men, the 1980 Census shows that the
majority of persons institutionalized are, in fact, incarcerated. Furthermore, the growth in
institutionalization in Census data closely tracks the growth in incarceration apparent in Justice
Department data from correctional facilities (Western and Pettit, 2000). For expositional
convenience, therefore, we will refer to the fraction of persons institutionalized as the
“incarceration rate.”
Figure 3 presents the trends in the incarceration rate, by race, education, and experience,
over the 1960-2000 period. We again use the same scale in the two graphs so that the very large
racial differences can be easily seen. The average incarceration rate among white male high
school dropouts with 1 to 30 years of experience increased from 1.2 to 6.4 percent between 1960
and 2000. For whites with at least a high school diploma, the incarceration rate remained small,
even by 2000, when it reached 1.3 percent (and was slightly higher for younger men).
In contrast, the incarceration rate for black men increased rapidly beginning after 1980
for all groups except college graduates. Among high school dropouts with 1 to 30 years of
experience, for example, the incarceration rate was 1.4 percent in 1960, 1.3 percent in 1980, 14.3
percent in 1990, and an astounding 25.1 percent in 2000. Even among blacks with a high school
diploma, the incarceration rate for those with 1 to 30 years of experience rose from 0.5 percent in
1980 to 9.8 percent in 2000.
The question at the core of this paper examines whether these trends are related to the
increases in immigration experienced by the specific skill cohort at a particular point in time. To
visually illustrate the nature of this link, Figure 4 presents a scatter diagram relating decadal
changes in the immigrant share and decadal changes in employment rates for blacks and whites,
after removing decade effects. Figure 5 presents the corresponding scatter diagrams relating
decadal changes in the immigrant share and decadal changes in incarceration rates. By removing
decade effects, we control for features of the economic environment that are common to all
education and experience groups in any given decade, but that might vary over time.
The graphical evidence is striking. Each point in the scatter diagram in Figure 4
represents the change in employment rate for an (e, x, t) cell and the corresponding change in the
immigrant share of the workforce for that cell. It is evident that there is a negative correlation
7

Although it is possible to differentiate between correction facilities and mental hospitals before 1990,
there is no such information in the 1990 and 2000 census data. To keep the variable definitions constant over time,
we focus on the number of persons who are in institutions.

9
between changes in employment propensities and the immigrant share, and that the correlation is
stronger for black men. Similarly, Figure 5 shows a corresponding positive correlation between
changes in incarceration rates and the immigrant share, with the correlation again being stronger
for black men. The remainder of this paper examines if these correlations persist after we control
for other factors that affected the trends in male employment and incarceration propensities over
this time period.

III. Theory

To understand how immigration could reduce employment and increase incarceration
among native-born persons, with possibly larger effects among African-Americans, consider a
two-sector model of a national labor market. Native labor consists of black and white workers,
who are perfectly mobile between a formal sector (i.e., the “market” sector) and a sector
dedicated to crime.
It is instructive to consider one particularly simple specification of this model. Suppose
the market sector employs both natives and immigrants, with all workers being perfect
substitutes in terms of their contribution to output.8 The crime sector employs only native
workers. Further, the demand for labor in the crime sector is race-specific, with black and white
workers having separate crime production functions. Finally, native labor supply to the market
and crime sectors is endogenous, with individuals choosing to increase leisure and participation
in crime and to reduce market work as the wage in the market sector falls.
We use this framework to investigate the consequences of an exogenous shift in the
supply of immigrant labor. We are interested in determining whether immigration induces some
native workers to exit market employment and enter the crime sector. The mechanism through
which this might occur is straightforward. A positive immigrant supply shift puts downward
pressure on the wage in the market sector, causing native workers to substitute out of market
work and into either crime or leisure. Intuitively, the more elastic is either the demand for
criminal labor or the demand for leisure, the larger is the reduction in market employment and
the smaller is the reduction in the equilibrium wage. Hence immigration is associated with either
large wage effects and small market-sector employment effects, or the converse, depending on
the relevant elasticities. One can think of the model as a general-equilibrium extension of Gronau
8

The race of immigrant workers is left unspecified.

10
(1977), in which individuals allocate time between work, leisure, and home production. Our
framework reinterprets home production as crime (as in Grogger, 1998) and endogenizes the
wage.9
The specification of the model presented in this section relies on three key assumptions.
First, we assume that all labor types are perfect substitutes in the market sector. Although the
assumption of perfect substitutability is not essential for deriving our theoretical results, it greatly
simplifies the analysis.10 More important, we can easily test for the validity of this assumption
using the data set of 160 cells (defined by education, experience, and time) introduced in the
previous section. In particular, we use a nested CES framework to derive estimable relative labor
demand functions that relate the relative price of a labor group to the relative quantity of that
group.11 It is well known that the coefficient of the relative quantity variable in this type of
regression model estimates the parameter −1/σ, where σ is the elasticity of substitution between
the groups. The top panel of Table 1 reports the estimated coefficient that examines the extent of
substitutability between black and white native labor (i.e., the dependent variable is the log wage
ratio between black and white workers and the independent variable is the log ratio of the
number of black to white workers). The results do not provide any support for the hypothesis that

9 The resulting framework is similar to the specific-factors model of a small open economy (Feenstra,
2004), extended to allow for the endogenous supply of labor to wage employment.
10 In unreported theoretical results, we solved a model in which black, white, and immigrant labor are
imperfect substitutes in the production of formal-sector output. All of the qualitative results of the simpler model
presented here carry through to the more general framework (one minor difference is that imperfect substitutability
produces slightly different estimating equations than those reported below in (6a)-(6d)). The derivation of the more
general model is available on request.
11

Consider a generic two-level nested CES production function (as in Card and Lemieux, 2001), where the
first level defines the size of the native-born workforce as a CES aggregate of the number of black (b) and white (w)
workers, and the second level defines output as a function of the (CES-weighted) native-born workforce and
immigrants. By equating the wage to the marginal product of labor for each native worker type, it is easy to derive
the relative demand function:

(

)

ln wbst / wwst = −

1
1− σ
ln N bst / N wst +
ln τ bst / τ wst
σ
σ

(

)

(

)

where σ is the elasticity of substitution between black and white native workers; wist is the wage of race group i and
skill group s at time t; Nist is employment; and τist is a parameter measuring relative efficiency. In Table 1, we proxy
the relative efficiency terms by a vector of fixed effects indicating education, experience, and time effects, and their
interactions, and a random error term. The null hypothesis of perfect substitution states that the coefficient −1/σ
equals zero. Once we establish that black and white native workers are perfect substitutes, it is trivial to jump to the
next level of the nested CES system and derive an analogous equation giving the relative wage of immigrants as a
function of the relative number of immigrants.

11
black and white workers are imperfect substitutes (within these narrowly defined skill groups).
Similarly, the bottom panel of the table reports the estimated coefficient from regressions of the
relative wage of immigrant workers on their relative quantity (i.e., the dependent variable is the
log wage ratio between immigrant and native workers and the independent variable is the log
quantity ratio). Again, there is no evidence to support the hypothesis that immigrants and natives
are imperfect substitutes.12 For the remainder of the analysis, therefore, we will maintain the
assumption that different labor types (within the narrow education-experience categories) are
perfect substitutes.
We also assume that immigrants do not participate in crime. One could generalize the
model to allow immigrant labor to be employed in either the market or crime sector. Our results
would hold as long as the elasticity of labor demand in crime is larger for natives than
immigrants (or, alternatively, if the elasticity of substitution between native and immigrant labor
is higher in market employment than in crime). Since criminal penalties are larger for
immigrants than natives (for non-citizens, the penalties for criminal activity are incarceration and
possible deportation), it seems reasonable to assume immigrants are less likely than natives to
substitute into crime in response to a negative wage shock. In fact, relative to observationally
equivalent natives, immigrants are much less likely to be incarcerated and more likely to work
(Butcher and Piehl, 1998, 2000).
Finally, we assume that there are race-specific crime production functions, effectively
implying that black and white criminals tend to operate in separate markets.13 This assumption
allows immigration to have different effects by race. Black men, by virtue of being relatively
concentrated in inner cities, may have more opportunities to engage in criminal activity. Grogger
(1998) finds that black men are more likely to participate in crime than white men even after
controlling for alternative labor market options. Further, black-white differences in criminal
propensities may have been exacerbated by the advent of crack cocaine. Fryer et al (2005) argue
that pre-existing gang organizations, which controlled street corners and other outdoor spaces in
many urban areas, gave blacks an advantage in creating and controlling crack distribution

12

The literature provides mixed evidence on the extent of substitution between immigrant and native
workers (Cortes, 2005; Jaeger, 1996; and Ottaviano and Peri, 2006).
13

This assumption, like the other two, simplifies the discussion but is not essential for the results. What is
essential for immigration to have different effects on black and white workers is that the elasticity of labor demand
in crime differs between the two groups.

12
networks.14 Other evidence suggests criminal gangs tend to be organized along racial lines and
operate in spatially segmented markets (Venkatesh, 1997; Grogger and Willis, 2000).
Let Lfs = Nbfs + Nwfs + Ms, where Nbfs denotes employment of native black workers in the
(formal) market sector who have skill s; Nwfs denotes the corresponding employment of native
white workers; and Ms denotes the corresponding number of immigrants. For workers of race i
and skill group s, the wage in the market sector is:
wis = X fs (1 − δi ) ( L fs )

(2)

ηf

,

where Xfs is a labor demand shifter for the market sector; δi is a parameter that captures
preferences for discrimination on the part of employers, with δw = 0 and 1 > δb ≥ 0, so that black
workers may face a lower market wage as a result of discrimination; and ηf < 0 is the inverse of
the labor demand elasticity in the market sector (or the factor price elasticity in this simple
framework). Equation (2) assumes that all workers in skill group s are perfect substitutes in terms
of their contribution to market sector output.
The marginal product of labor in the crime sector for workers in racial group i with skill s
is:

wis = X ics ( N ics )

(3)

ηic

,

where Xics is a demand shifter for criminal activity, Nics gives employment of native workers of
race i and skill group s in crime, and ηic < 0 is the inverse of the labor demand elasticity in the
crime sector.
Black-white wage differences are determined by the extent of discrimination in the
market sector, with wb/ww = (1 - δb) ≤ 1.15 Inter-sectoral labor mobility transmits the
discrimination-driven market racial wage gap to the crime sector. The demand shifters, Xfs and
Xics, embody capital, TFP, and the output price in each sector. Our empirical analysis will allow
14 Responses to a survey of 27 large-city police chiefs administered by Grogger and Willis (2000) indicated
that crack was concentrated among blacks or minorities in all but four jurisdictions.

13
for changes in sectoral demand shifters by controlling for race-specific changes in the returns to
skill over time.
The supply of labor to paid employment (i.e., employment in either the market or crime
sectors) is elastic, with the inverse demand for leisure given by:

(4)

wis = X ihs ( N ihs )

ηih

where Xihs is a leisure demand shift parameter, Nihs gives the number of natives consuming
leisure, and ηih < 0 is the inverse of the demand elasticity for leisure.
Finally, the allocation of native labor to employment in the market sector, employment in
the crime sector, and leisure is subject to the constraint:
(5)

N is = N ifs + N ics + N ihs ,

where N is is the (constant) population of native-born persons of race i and skill s.
Equations (2)-(5) represent a system of seven equations in seven unknowns. For
simplicity, we neglect the impact of immigration on capital accumulation, which would tend to
dampen the wage effects of immigration over time.16 Figure 6 illustrates the equilibrium of the
model for black workers of skill group s. There is an analogous, and interdependent, set of
equilibrium conditions for white workers. The equalization of wages for black workers between
the formal sector and the crime sector is shown by the intersection of the two sectoral labor
demand schedules at point 1. The allocation of labor to leisure is implicit, since the endogenous
leisure allocation defines the value N bs − N bhs = N bcs + N bfs , which is total black labor available
for employment in either the market or crime sector. Solving for Nbhs defines the width of the

15 For simplicity, we assume that the discrimination coefficient is independent of skills. Relaxing this
assumption does not change any of the results of the model.
16 We have worked out an extension of the model where the market sector employs both labor and capital
in production, with the supply of capital adjusting over time in response to deviations in the return to capital from its
long-run rate. As long as complete adjustments in the capital stock are not immediate, the short-run consequences of
immigration are qualitatively the same as those implied by the simpler model summarized in this section. The model
is available on request from the authors.

14
box in Figure 6. The sensitivity of leisure to wages will become apparent once we consider a
labor-supply shock due to immigration.
Figure 7 shows the labor-market consequences of an increase in immigrant labor supply.
The immediate direct effect is a contraction in the demand for native labor.17 The contraction in
market-sector labor demand puts downward pressure on the market wage, inducing native labor
to increase leisure and decrease labor supplied to the market. The increase in leisure implies that

′ , which
labor available for either the market or crime sectors falls from N bs − N bhs to N bs − N bhs
implies the right vertical axis in Figure 7 shifts to the left, inducing a corresponding leftward
shift, from Dc to Dc′ , in the demand for labor in the crime sector (whose horizontal position is
determined by the position of the right axis).
The net effect of the immigrant labor supply shock is a new equilibrium at point 2, in
which the black wage is lower, black employment in the market sector is lower, black
employment in the crime sector is higher, and black leisure is higher. Market employment falls
because immigrant labor substitutes for black labor; black employment in crime rises because
lower market-sector labor demand induces blacks to shift into crime; and black leisure rises
because the black wage falls.
The model has similar qualitative predictions for the wage and sectoral distribution of
white workers. The model, in addition, yields an important and testable quantitative prediction.
Since black and white workers are perfect substitutes in the market sector, the percent impact of
immigration on the black and white wage is the same. As long as the discrimination parameter δb
is invariant to labor-market conditions, immigration changes black and white wages by the same
percentage amount, leaving the racial wage differential unchanged. However, racial differences
in the demand elasticities of crime and leisure imply that the employment effects of immigration
need not have the same magnitude.
Let wis* be the wage for race group i and skill group s in the pre-immigration equilibrium,
and let N *fs give the corresponding number of native workers in the market sector at that time
*
*
( N *fs = N bfs
+ N wfs
) . We measure the immigrant supply shock by ms = M s / N *fs , the immigrant-

induced percent increase in labor supply to the market sector. Part 1 of the Mathematical

17

For black workers, part of the inward shift in formal-sector labor demand is mitigated by the exit of
white workers from the formal sector. In the graphical analysis, this adjustment is implicit.

15
Appendix shows that the race-specific equations relating post-immigration wages, native labor
allocations, and the immigrant supply shock are given by:
(6a)

ln wis = ln wis* + η f ρ ms ,

(6b)

*
ln N ics = ln N ics
+

(6c)

*
ln N ihs = ln N ihs
+

(6d)

ln N ifs = ln N ifs* −

ηf ρ
ηic

ηf ρ
ηih

ms ,

ms ,

η f ρ  θics θihs 
+

 ms .
θifs  ηic ηih 

As shown in the Appendix, the parameter ρ is a positive constant that lies between zero and one
and is defined by:
Nf

ρ=

(7)

Nf +

ηf
ηbc

N bc +

ηf
ηwc

N wc +

ηf
ηbh

N bh +

ηf
ηwh

,
N wh

where N j is the average number of type-j natives across skill groups in the pre-immigration
equilibrium.
The parameter ρ gives an elasticity-adjusted measure of the market sector participation
rate of natives in the pre-immigration equilibrium. Consider, for instance, the special case where
the demand elasticities are equal in all activities, so that ηf = ηic = ηih. Equation (7) shows that ρ
is then exactly equal to the fraction of natives participating in the market sector in the preimmigration period. It is also worth noting that if the demand for labor in both the crime and
leisure sectors is perfectly inelastic (so that the ratios 1/ηic and 1/ηih are equal to zero), the
parameter ρ is then equal to one. In this extreme case, the relative number of native workers in
each of the sectors is effectively fixed.
Equation (6a) implies that more immigration lowers wages (ηf ρ < 0), with the wage
impact being greater the larger the factor price elasticity in the market sector. Two points are
worth emphasizing about the wage impact of immigration. First, as noted above, the wage

16
impact is predicted to be the same for black and white workers.18 Second, the reduced-form
regression of the log wage on the immigrant supply shock m does not identify the factor price
elasticity, ηf . Rather, it identifies the product of the factor price elasticity and ρ, the parameter
that roughly indicates the sectoral allocation of the native population (up to a linear
approximation). As noted above, ρ equals one when the supply of native labor to the market
sector is perfectly inelastic. It is only in this case that the regression coefficient identifies the
factor price elasticity. If native labor supply to the market sector is elastic, however, the reducedform impact of immigration is numerically smaller than the factor price elasticity. The intuition
for this result is obvious: Native opportunities to substitute into crime or leisure dampen the
impact of immigration on the market wage, relative to the case of inelastic labor supply. Figure 7
illustrates the result. If the demand for leisure were perfectly inelastic the post-immigration
equilibrium would be at point 1′, instead of point 2. The fall in the native wage would be larger
and the fall in native formal employment would be smaller. We will refer to the product ηf ρ as
the “reduced-form wage elasticity.”
Equation (6b) shows that a larger immigrant supply shock increases the number of
natives participating in the crime sector (ηf ρ/ηic > 0), with the impact of immigration being
larger the more elastic is the demand for crime labor relative to the demand for formal labor. The
immigration-induced change in crime employment for blacks relative to whites depends on the
ratio of the elasticities ηwc/ηbc. Even though the wage impact of immigration is predicted to be
the same for blacks and whites, black employment in the crime sector is more responsive to
immigration if the elasticity of labor demand in crime is larger for blacks than whites.
Equation (6c) indicates that more immigration is associated with greater native demand
for leisure (ηf ρ/ηih > 0), with the impact of immigration on leisure being larger the more elastic
is the demand for leisure relative to the demand for formal labor. Similar to participation in
crime, the immigration-induced change in leisure for blacks relative to whites depends on the
ratio of elasticities ηwh/ηbh, indicating that black leisure time is more responsive to immigration
if the elasticity of demand for leisure is larger for blacks than whites.

18

As shown by equation (2), the market sector wage for both black and white workers (who are perfect
substitutes in production) is determined by the equilibrium size of the workforce in that sector. As a result, the
manner in which native substitution across sectors mitigates the wage consequences of immigration is common to
all native workers, regardless of race.

17
Finally, equation (6d) implies that a larger immigrant supply shock is associated with
lower native market sector employment, with the impact of immigration being larger the more
elastic is the demand for formal labor relative to the demands for crime labor or leisure. The
impact of immigration depends on the pre-existing employment shares in the various sectors,
*
where θics = N ics
/ N is (the pre-immigration share of race i persons in the crime sector),

*
θihs = N ihs
/ N is (the pre-immigration share of race i persons in the leisure sector), and

θifs = N ifs* / N%is (the pre-immigration share of race i persons in the market sector).19 If, for
expositional convenience, we ignore the skill subscript, equation (6d) implies that the change in
market employment for blacks relative to whites is given by the ratio θwf(θbc/ηbc + θbh/ηbh)/
θbf(θwc/ηwc + θwh/ηwh), which shows that black market employment is more responsive to
immigration if the elasticities of demand for crime labor and for leisure are larger for blacks than
whites (as long as the market participation rate of whites is at least as high as that of blacks).20
This model helps us understand the source of racial differences in the consequences of
immigration and motivates why the empirical analysis presented in the subsequent sections
allows the impact of immigration on wages, employment, and incarceration rates to differ
between black and white men. As we have seen, if the demand for labor in the crime sector is
more elastic for blacks than for whites, immigration will have a larger negative impact on black
market employment and a larger positive impact on black crime employment. A similar
qualitative effect on market employment, but not for crime employment, would result if the
demand for leisure were more elastic among blacks than whites.
Our empirical analysis uses data on wage and employment rates for education-experience
cohorts by year. Although we do not have data on participation rates in crime, we do have
information on incarceration rates for the various groups.21 These data constraints require that we

19

Note that none of the coefficients in equations (6a)-(6d) depend on the extent of discrimination in the
labor market because the discrimination coefficient is assumed to be constant over time.
20 The condition for immigration to affect black market sector employment more than for whites depends
on initial black-white relative employments in crime and leisure. If the initial black shares of employment in crime
and leisure are higher than the white shares (θbc > θwc, θbh > θwh), immigration can then induce relatively larger
reductions in market sector employment for blacks even if the black crime and leisure demand functions are less
elastic than those for whites.
21

The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) has information on participation in criminal
activities, but only for a single cross-section.

18
estimate the reduced-form expressions, as summarized by equations (6a)-(6d), rather than a
structural model of sectoral time allocation.

IV. National Level Evidence

Let yext denote the mean value of a particular labor market outcome for native-born men
who have education e, experience x, and are observed at time t. As noted above, we calculated
yext using the sample of natives who are either black or white. The empirical analysis reported in
this section stacks these national-level data across skill groups and calendar years and estimates
the following regression model separately by race:
yext = θ pext + E + X + T + (E × T) + (X × T) + (E × X) + ϕext,

(8)

where E is a vector of fixed effects indicating the group’s educational attainment; X is a vector of
fixed effects indicating the group’s work experience; and T is a vector of fixed effects indicating
the time period. The linear fixed effects in equation (8) control for differences in labor market
outcomes across schooling groups, experience groups, and over time. The interactions (E × T)
and (X × T) control for the possibility that the impact of education and experience changed over
time, and the interaction (E × X) controls for the fact that the experience profile for a particular
labor market outcome may differ across education groups. The regression specification in (8)
implies that the labor market impact of immigrant-induced labor supply shifts is identified using
time-variation within education-experience cells. Unless otherwise specified, the regressions are
weighted by the number of observations used to calculate the dependent variable yest.22 The
estimated coefficients are generally similar to those obtained from unweighted regressions.
Finally, the standard errors are clustered by education-experience cells to adjust for possible
serial correlation.
We examine the impact of immigration on three distinct outcomes. The alternative
dependent variables include: the log weekly earned income, the employment rate, and the

22

We normalized the sum of weights to equal 1 in each cross-section to prevent the latter censuses from
contributing more to the estimation simply because the U.S. population increased over time.

19
incarceration rate.23 We estimate the employment and incarceration rate regressions using a
grouped logit estimator.24 Let rext be the relevant employment or incarceration rate for cell (e, x,
t). The grouped logit estimator is given by the weighted least squares regression of the log odds
model:
 r 
ln  ext  = θ* pext + E + X + T + ( E × T ) + ( X × T ) + ( E × X ) + ϕ ext .
 1 − rext 

(8′)

To make the results more easily interpretable, we convert the estimated coefficient θ* (and its
standard error) into a marginal impact, which is given by θ* r (1 − r ) , where we use the racespecific sample mean of the employment (or incarceration) rate in the calculation.25
It is important to emphasize that the incarceration rate is an imperfect measure of
participation in crime, as individuals in prison today may have committed crimes several or more
years in the past when different labor market conditions prevailed. To control for lags between
shocks to the labor market and changes in the size of the prison population, we report results on
incarceration that use either the current share of immigrants in the workforce or the five-year lag
of the immigrant share. Together, the contemporaneous immigrant share and the five-year lag
bracket the length of the average prison term, which is about two years (Raphael and Stoll,
2005).
Table 2 reports our estimates of the adjustment coefficient θ (or the corresponding
marginal impact in the grouped logit regressions). The top panel of the table reports the least
squares estimates of the regression model. The first row of the panel reports the results for black
men, while the second row reports the results for white men. Consider initially the results when
the dependent variable is the mean log weekly earnings of the skill group (e, x, t). The
23

Recall that the employment rate is defined by the average fraction of weeks worked during the calendar
year prior to the Census (including non-workers).
24

The use of logit versus a linear probability model leads to relatively similar marginal impacts for the
employment rates, but smaller marginal impacts for the incarceration rate. This is not surprising given the clustering
of incarceration rates at very small numbers near zero.
25

The weighted least squares estimator for grouped logit uses a weight equal to

next rˆext (1 − rˆext ) , where

the predicted probabilities are calculated from a first-stage unweighted regression on the log odds ratio and next is
the sample size in the cell.

20
adjustment coefficient θ is -0.561 (with a standard error of 0.167) for blacks, and -0.669 (0.250)
for whites. These coefficients are easier to interpret if we convert them into an elasticity that
gives the percent change in wages associated with a percent change in labor supply. Let mext =
Mext/Next, or the percentage increase in the labor supply of group (e, x, t) attributable to
immigration. We can calculate the reduced-form wage effect (equivalent to the product of
parameters ηf ρf in our theoretical framework) as:

(9)

∂ log wext
= θ (1 − pext ) 2 .
∂mext

By 2000, immigration had increased the immigrant share in the U.S. workforce to 14.7 percent.
Equation (9) implies that the reduced-form wage elasticity—evaluated at the mean value of the
immigrant supply shift as of 2000—can be obtained by multiplying θ by approximately 0.73. The
reduced-form wage elasticity for weekly earnings is then -0.41 (or -0.561 × 0.73) for blacks, and
-0.49 for whites. Put differently, a 10 percent immigrant-induced increase in the number of
workers in a particular skill group reduces the wage of that group by 4 to 5 percent.26 These
results closely match the estimated wage impacts of immigration across all workers reported in
Borjas (2003). Note that the similarity in the wage effects between the two race groups provides
additional evidence supporting the hypothesis that black and white native workers (within
narrowly defined skill groups) are perfect substitutes in production.
Columns two through four of Table 2 show the relation between immigration and
employment and incarceration rates. There is a strong negative relation between immigration and
employment rates and a strong positive relation between immigration and incarceration rates. A
10 percent increase in supply is predicted to reduce the employment rate of black men by 3.6
percentage points (-0.489 × 0.73) and that of white men by 1.5 percentage points. Similarly, a 10
percent increase in supply increases the incarceration rate of black men by 0.7 percentage points
and that of white men by 0.1 percentage points (although the impact on whites is not significant).

26 The regression model in (7) uses the immigrant share, p, rather than the (more natural) relative number
of immigrants, m, as the regressor. The main reason for using p as the regressor is that the outcomes used in this
paper tend to be nonlinearly related to m, and p is approximately a linear function of log m. Rather than introducing
significant nonlinearity in the regression, we opted for the simpler approach of a generic regression of the outcome
on the immigrant share.

21
Lagged immigration has a similar effect on incarceration rates for blacks and a somewhat larger
(and now statistically significant) effect on whites. It seems, therefore, that the impact of
immigration at the extensive margin of labor supply is far larger for blacks than for whites.
One potential problem with these least squares estimates is that the immigrant share
included in the right-hand-side of equation (7)—that is, the fraction of the workforce that is
foreign-born—may be endogenous. Only those persons (both immigrant and natives) who find it
worthwhile to remain in the workforce are included in the counts, and hence there may be some
correlation between the immigrant share and the disturbance term. Although our theoretical
model maintained the assumption of inelastic immigrant labor supply, it would be desirable to
relax that assumption in the empirical work.
We use instrumental variables to correct for the possible endogeneity bias, where the
instrument is the immigrant share in the population. Panel B of Table 2 reports the estimated IV
coefficients. The wage effects from the IV specification are similar to those from the least
squares regression. The least squares coefficient of the immigrant share on the log weekly wage
of black men, for example, is -0.561 (0.167), while the corresponding IV coefficient is -0.519
(0.172). In addition, the estimated IV coefficients in the black employment and black
incarceration regressions are essentially the same as those obtained in the least squares
specification.
Another important issue is that the measured effects of immigration on labor market
status may be contaminated by factors that are driving employment and incarceration behavior
for blacks and whites within education-experience groups. These factors will not be absorbed by
the fixed effects included in the regression and may be correlated with the immigrant supply
shifts. The potential existence of these additional factors is not altogether surprising. As we
discussed above, the wage structure changed considerably during our sample period and the
crack epidemic raised the return to crime during the 1980s and 1990s. It is important, therefore,
to examine the impact of various sources of bias on the magnitude of the estimated coefficients.
Consider initially how the crack epidemic may influence our estimated correlations. In
terms of the model from the previous section, the invention of crack raises the marginal product
of criminal labor, shifting the curve labeled Dc in Figure 6 to the left. This leftward shift reduces
native labor supplied to the formal sector and raises native labor supplied to crime, just like an
increase in immigration. Unlike an increase in immigration, however, the increasing productivity
of crime should raise equilibrium wages. This casts some doubt on the notion that the effects we

22
attribute to immigration are entirely due to crack, since we showed empirically that immigration
reduced wages. Nevertheless, given the potential importance of crack as an alternative
explanation, it is important to account for it explicitly in the regression model.
To do so we make use of the “crack index” developed by Fryer, Heaton, Levitt, and
Murphy (2005). This index is a linear combination of several variables related to the crack
epidemic, including the share of arrests made for cocaine-related charges, the number of deaths
due to cocaine, the number of cocaine busts carried out by the federal Drug Enforcement
Administration, and the number of cocaine-related hospital emergency room incidents. Most of
these measures can obviously be considered as outcomes of the crack epidemic, whereas the
ideal measures for our purposes would be indicators of the extent to which crack raised criminal
productivity and exogenous measures of the criminal-justice response to the crack problem. Thus
one could argue that the crack index is really an endogenous variable, particularly in the
incarceration regressions. This possibility will affect the interpretation of our results.
The Fryer et al crack index varies only by time and race, meaning that its main effects are
subsumed by the year fixed effects included in our regression model.27 To include the index in
the model, we interact it with the education-experience fixed effects. In particular, consider the
following regression:
yext = θ pext + E + X + T + (E × T) + (X × T) + (E × X) + (E × X) Ct + ϕext,

(10)

where Ct is the value of the crack index at time t. Note that the specification in (10) essentially
introduces a specific type of time variation in the education-experience interaction fixed effects.
Obviously, a totally unrestricted type of variation would be impossible since there would then be
as many education-experience-time interactions as there are observations. Our specification
permits the effects of skill to vary over time in a manner that is related to the spread of crack,
while still enabling us to estimate the effects of immigration from changes over time within the
same skill groups.
The estimated adjustment coefficients θ (and corresponding marginal impacts in the
grouped logit regressions) are reported in panel C of Table 2. It is evident that our estimated
27

The index takes on a value of 0 for all cells drawn from the 1960, 1970, or 1980 Censuses. The index for
the 1990 cells is the average for 1988 and 1989 of the Fryer et al (2005) race-specific city-level crack index. The
index for the 2000 cells is the average of the 1998 and 1999 values.

23
marginal effects on black wages, employment, and incarceration rates are not very sensitive to
the inclusion of the crack index. A ten-percent immigrant-induced supply shift still lowers the
wage of blacks by -4.2 percent, lowers the employment rate by 3.1 percentage points, and
increases the incarceration rate by 0.7 percentage points.
There is an important sense in which the Fryer et al crack index does not capture how the
crack epidemic affected the sectoral choices of the various skill groups. The index, after all, takes
on the same value for black high school dropouts as it does for black college graduates. It is
evident that the crack epidemic had a much greater impact on the behavior of low-skill (and
younger) persons. To incorporate this notion into our study, we re-estimated the regression
models using a “restricted” version of the Fryer et al crack index. In particular, we reset the
index to 0 for all persons who have at least a high school diploma or more than 20 years of work
experience. The restricted crack index, therefore, effectively assumes that the crack epidemic
was mainly a demand shifter for younger, low-skill persons.
Panel D of Table 2 reports the regression coefficients obtained from the use of the
restricted crack index. Note that this change in the way we account for the crack epidemic barely
affects our results.
The use of the crack index helps the regression model partly account for what has been
happening at the low-skill end of the U.S. labor market. A large research literature documents
that there was also a substantial increase in the rate of return to skills and to labor market
experience beginning around 1980 (Katz and Murphy, 1992; Autor, Katz, and Kearny, 2005).
Our basic regression specification in equation (7) attempts to control for these changes by
including interactions of fixed effects between education and time, as well as interactions of
fixed effects between experience and time. As noted above, ideally we would control for changes
in the wage structure by including a complete set of three-way interactions between the
education, experience, and time fixed effects. Such a strategy is not feasible, however, because
the full set of interactions would be exactly collinear with the immigrant share variable. As a
result, we must balance the collinearity problem against the need to control for changes in the
wage structure by allowing year effects to vary by education and experience in a limited way.
We attempt to capture the changes that occurred at both ends of the skill distribution by
introducing a set of dummy variables that allow for some interactions between education,
experience, and time. In particular, we introduce dummy variables indicating if the (e, x, t) cell
refers to a post-1980 observation of high school dropouts, a post-1980 observation of high school

24
graduates or those with some college, or a post-1980 observation of college graduates. Moreover,
for each education group we categorize individuals into very young, young, and older experience
groups (1-10, 11-20, or 20 plus years of experience). This set of dummy variables is specifically
designed to capture changes that occurred at the extremes of the wage distribution (in terms of
both education and experience) before and after 1980.
It is worth emphasizing that the inclusion of this restricted set of education-experiencetime interactions does not impose any structure on why these changes may have occurred. As a
result, the interactions capture not only the impact of the widening of the wage structure, but also
the impact of the crack epidemic, as well as any kinds of changes in the composition of particular
skill groups over time (e.g., the possibility that younger low-skill workers may be selected
differently before and after 1980). In particular, one consequence of rising returns to skill may
have been to raise the incentive for workers at all ability levels to obtain more education. If,
within each skill group, more able workers are those more likely to complete additional
schooling, then over time we would observe a decline in the average ability of workers in all
education groups. Such an outcome would be more likely among the young, since their net
benefit to completing more schooling is relatively high. Declining average ability within skill
groups could result in all groups, and especially the young, exhibiting declining wages, declining
employment rates, and rising incarceration rates, which are the same patterns that our theoretical
model suggests would result from an immigration-induced labor supply shock. The included set
of additional education-experience-time fixed effects allow for differential effects before and
after 1980 among very young, young, and older workers, with low, average, or high levels of
education. Hence we can partly control for changes in the average ability of individuals within
experience-education group, focusing on those cases where the ability changes are likely to have
been most pronounced.
The bottom panel of Table 2 reports the estimated coefficients from the specification with
the restricted set of education-experience-time fixed effects. A number of results are worth
noting. The wage effect of immigration is negative and significant—even after controlling for
these changes in the wage structure at the extremes of the skill distribution. In fact, the
adjustment coefficients are very similar for the two race groups: -0.543 (0.209) in the black
regression and -0.566 (0.243) in the white regression. A 10-percent immigrant-induced increase
in supply, therefore, reduces wages by around 4.0 percent. Second, immigration reduces the
employment rate of both black and white workers. These effects are statistically significant, and

25
the marginal impact on blacks is over twice as large as the marginal impact on whites. Finally,
the use of the restricted set of education-experience-time interactions suggests that immigration
had a significant impact on incarceration rates for both blacks and whites, with the marginal
impact on blacks being seven times as large as the marginal impact on whites. A 10-percent
immigrant induced increase in supply raises black incarceration rates by 0.8 percentage points
and that of whites by 0.1 percentage points.28
The robustness of our results to major specification changes (such as the inclusion of the
crack index or the restricted set of education-experience-time interactions) suggests that the
national-level regressions may indeed be capturing the “true” effect of immigration on wages
and the sectoral allocation of labor. However, because the impact of the crack epidemic (as well
as concurrent changes in the judicial system) varied greatly across regions, we believe that it is
important to determine if our estimated effects remain even when we analyze the evolution of
wages and labor allocation within states.

V. State Level Evidence

We now examine the link between immigration and the evolution of wages, employment,
and incarceration at the state level. This level of analysis has the advantage of letting us account
more completely for the consequences of the crack epidemic. Crack first appeared in the early
1980s. It spread rapidly, reaching most of the country by the early 1990s (Grogger and Willis,
2000; Fryer et al. 2005). The criminal justice response followed shortly thereafter. Arrests for
drug-related offenses rose substantially and many states stiffened penalties for drug-related
offenses (Boggess and Bound, 1997; Charles and Luoh, 2005). Given the regional nature and
timing of the consequences of the crack epidemic, much of the effect of the epidemic on the
variables of interest may be absorbed by year-specific state fixed effects.29

28 We experimented with other specifications for the restricted set of education-experience-time
interactions (e.g., allowing a dummy variable for each experience cohort for high school dropouts after 1980). This
experimentation revealed that the evidence summarized in Table 2 adequately represent the results that can be
obtained from a large family of alternative specifications—as long as the specifications include interactions that
differentiate younger versus older workers separately for the two extreme education groups in the study.
29

In particular, the state-level analysis helps us address the potential bias that may arise in the nationallevel study presented in the previous section if a relatively large immigrant influx happened to enter those states that
have a relatively large black population and that also reacted to the crack epidemic with a crackdown of the drug
trade and a substantial increase in incarceration rates.

26
It is well known that the estimated wage impact of immigration at the state level will
differ from that estimated at the national level. In response to an influx of immigrants in a state,
native workers may choose to migrate to another state, possibly dampening the impact of
immigration on local wages. To incorporate native migration between states into our theoretical
framework, we extend the model presented in section III, extending theoretical results on the link
between native wages, immigration and native migration reported in Borjas (2006).
The wage in the market sector for a particular skill group of race i in state r at time t is
given by:
η

wirt = X fr (1 − δi ) ( L frt ) f ,

(11)

where Lrft gives the total number of persons working in the market sector in state r at time t. Note
that the market sector labor demand shifter (Xfr) is allowed to vary across states, but the market
sector wage elasticity (ηf) is assumed to be constant across states. Equation (11) gives the
marginal productivity condition for a particular skill group in a particular regional labor market.
For simplicity, we omit the subscript indicating the skill group (s) throughout some of the
discussion.
Suppose labor market r is initially in a pre-immigration long-run equilibrium. The
immigrant influx begins at time t = 0. In particular, Mr immigrants arrive in state r in each
period. As long as immigration is not properly “balanced” across states, immigration creates
regional wage differences for a particular skill group. These differences motivate natives to
migrate to higher-wage regions. Because such migration is costly, the native labor supply
response to supply shocks (or to local labor demand shocks) is not instantaneous. As in Borjas
(2006), suppose that the migration rate of natives of racial group i residing in state r between
periods t − 1 and t is:
(12)

vrt = σ (ln wr ,t −1 − ln wt −1 ) ,

*
*
where vrt = ∆N rt /( N bfr
+ N wfr
) is the inflow of natives (of all races) as a share of native

employment in the market sector in the pre-immigration equilibrium; σ > 0 is the supply
elasticity; and ln wt −1 is the average log wage in the national economy at time t – 1. Part 2 of the

27
Mathematical Appendix shows that the solution to this model implies that the market wage (for a
particular skill group s) of the native workforce in state j is given by:

(13a)

*
+ η f ρ(1+ ση f ρ) mrst − σ η2f ρ2 mst ,
ln wirst = ln wirs

*
is the wage of workers of race i in state j with skills s in the pre-immigration
where wirs

equilibrium; mrst is the immigrant share in state j’s workforce as of time t; and mst is the
immigrant share in the national workforce at that time. These shares are defined as a fraction of
the initial native workforce in the pre-immigration equilibrium.
Equation (13a) gives the state-level counterpart to the national-level wage in equation
(6a). It is important to emphasize that the state-level wage depends both on immigration into
state r (mrst) as well as on the national level of immigration (mst). The model predicts that both of
these variables will have a negative impact on the market wage.
The economic intuition for the inclusion of both state-level and national-level immigrant
shares in the state-level wage regression is obvious: The influx of immigrants into a particular
state does not capture the entire impact of immigration on that particular regional labor market.
Immigrants also enter other states, and the native migration response internalizes the impact of
this out-of-state immigration into state r. In short, any native response (whether in terms of labor
flows or capital flows) inevitably implies that local supply shocks do not adequately measure the
size of the immigrant influx and hence do not capture the entire wage impact of immigration.
Put differently, a regression of local-level wages on the local-level measure of the
immigrant supply shock is not correctly specified. Including only the local immigrant share in
the regression, which is the convention in most of the existing literature, produces estimates of
the wage effect of immigration that are too small. Indeed, equation (13a) shows that the sum of
the coefficients on mrst and mst equals ηf ρ, the reduced-form wage elasticity that we introduced
in the national wage equation (6a). The coefficient on the state-level immigration share by itself
could easily (and, as we show, does) provide a substantially downward-biased estimate of the
reduced-form effect of immigration on wages.
Natives in each state have the option of working in the market sector, participating in
crime, or taking leisure, where crime and leisure demand shifters may vary across states but the

28
wage elasticities in these activities (ηic , ηih) do not. We assume that wages in the various
activities are equalized across sectors for each region-race group combination.
Based on equation (13a), we can then obtain the equations determining the sectoral
employment levels for each race group in state j:

(13b)

*
+
ln N icrst = ln N icrs

(13c)

ln N ihrst = ln N

(13d)

*
ln N ifrst = ln N ifrs
−

*
ihrs

+

η f ρ(1+ ση f ρ)
ηic

η f ρ(1+ ση f ρ)
ηih

mrst −

mrst −

ση2f ρ2
ηic

ση2f ρ2
ηih

mst ,

mst ,

1  θicrs θihrs 
 η f ρ(1+ ση f ρ)mrst − ση2f ρ2 mst  .
+



ηih  
θ ifr  ηic

As in our national labor market model, higher levels of immigration are associated with
higher native employment in crime, greater native leisure, and lower native formal employment.
The marginal impact of immigration on black market employment and crime would be larger
than that on whites as long as the crime and leisure demand elasticities are larger for blacks. It is
again worth emphasizing that both the state-level and national-level immigration shares affect
the sectoral distribution of employment in state r, with the sum of the respective coefficients
equaling the national level coefficients in (6b)-(6d).
The state-level results presented below are based on a regression model where yrext
denotes the mean value of a particular labor market outcome for men who live in state r, have e
years of education, x years of labor market experience, and are observed at time t. There are now
a potential 8,160 cells in the analysis.30 We calculated yrext using the sample of native-born men
who are either black or white. Consider the following regression model:
(14) yrext = θR prext + θN pext + R + E + X + T + (R × T) + (E × T) + (X × T) + (R × E × X) + εrext,
30

The actual number of observations differs from the potential maximum for two main reasons. First, there
are many cells where there are no blacks in the sample. Second, the measured incarceration rate in many cells is
zero. The use of the log odds ratio to estimate the employment and incarceration rate regressions implies that zeromean cells are excluded from the analysis. To evaluate the sensitivity of our results, we estimated the relevant
models using a linear probability estimator and tried both including and excluding the zero-mean cells. The results
suggest that the inclusion of the zero-mean cells lead to marginal impacts that are at least as large as those reported
in the paper.

29

where R is a vector of fixed effects indicating the state of residence; E is a vector of fixed effects
indicating the education group; X is a vector of fixed effects indicating experience group; and T
is a vector of fixed effects indicating the year in which the data are observed.31 As with the
national-level regression specified earlier, the various vectors of fixed effects absorb any regionspecific, skill-specific, and time-specific factors that affect the evolution of the dependent
variable in a particular labor market. The standard errors reported in this section are clustered at
the state-education-experience level.32 As in our national level analysis, the employment and
incarceration rate regressions use the grouped-logit version of equation (14).
Table 3 reports the relevant regression coefficients from the state-level wage equations.
Panel A presents least squares estimates. The first row shows the immigration coefficient from a
model that excludes the national-level immigration share. This is the type of model that is
typically estimated in the literature. The coefficient for blacks is -0.266, which is less than half
the size of the national-level coefficient of -0.561 reported in Table 2.
Our theoretical model, however, showed that the true reduced-form wage elasticity from
a state-level regression is given by the sum of the coefficients of the state- and national-level
immigration shares. Estimates from this generalized state-level model are reported in row 2 of
panel A. Adding the national-level immigration share changes the state-level coefficient only
slightly. Moreover, the national-level coefficient is itself numerically sizable and statistically
significant. Our theoretical model implies that this constitutes a rejection of the hypothesis that
regional labor markets are isolated and are only affected by local supply shocks.
More importantly, the “true” reduced-form wage effect, as estimated by the sum of the
coefficients of the state- and national-level immigration shares, is large. The sum of the
coefficients for blacks is -0.697 (0.155). This estimate is larger than the coefficient of -0.561
from the national-level regression reported in Table 2, although the standard errors are
sufficiently large that one cannot reject the hypothesis that the two reduced-form wage effects
are equal. For whites, the corresponding sum is -0.790 (and, again, the hypothesis that the

31

In contrast to the national level regressions presented in the previous section, we do not allow the full set
of interactions that would be theoretically possible. In particular, we are omitting separate three-way vectors of
interactions between education-region-time, experience-region-time, and education-experience-time.
32

Our choice of clustering variable is very conservative. Clustering at the state level would often generate
lower standard errors for the coefficients reported in Tables 2 and 3 below.

30
national wage effect equals the state-level wage effect cannot be rejected). Further, these
coefficients are consistent with the theoretical implication that immigration should affect the
wages of blacks and whites equally as long as the two groups (within narrowly defined skill
categories) are perfect substitutes in the market sector.
Panel B of the table replicates the analysis using the immigrant share in the population at
the state level and national level as instruments. The IV coefficients are very similar to the
corresponding least squares estimates.
The IV estimates reported in Panel C of the table are based on models that include
interactions between the region-skill fixed effects and the state-level crack index. In particular,
we estimate the regression model:
yrext = θR prext + θN pext + R + E + X + T + (R × T) + (E × T) + (X × T)

(15)

+ (R × E × X) + (R × E × X) Crt + εrst ,
where Crt is the Fryer et al (2005) crack index for state r at time t.33 In these models, the crackskill group interactions allow the effects of skill to vary over time as a function of the extent of
crack activity within the state.
Adding the state-skill-crack interactions to the models has little effect on the state-level
coefficient, but reduces the national-level coefficients (compare the estimates in Panels B and C
of the table). However, a reduction is not found when we use the restricted crack index, reported
in panel D (where we set the state-level crack index at zero for all cells that contain workers who
are either high school graduates or have more than 20 years of experience).
Finally, Panel E of the table illustrates the wage effects of immigration when we include
the restricted set of education-experience-year interactions to capture specifically what happened
to the wage structure at the bottom and top ends of the skill distribution in the 1980s and 1990s.34
The estimated coefficients clearly indicate that both the state-level and national-level immigrant

33

These regressions make use of Fryer, et al’s state-specific crack index, which varies by state and year.
We use the average value of the index for the two calendar years preceding the Census.
34

As in the previous section, these interactions include dummy variables indicating whether a cell refers to
a post-1980 observation of high school dropouts, a post-1980 observation of high school graduates or those with
some college, or a post-1980 observation of college graduates, where for each education group we categorize
individuals into very young, young, and older experience groups (1-10, 11-20, or 20 plus years of experience).

31
shares have significant and numerically sizable impacts on the wage of both black and white
workers.
Table 4 reports the regression coefficients for the state-level analysis using the other
dependent variables in our study. For convenience, all of the models include both the state- and
national-level immigration shares. We also report the sum of the two coefficients.
The top panel presents the basic OLS estimates. Immigration reduces employment rates
and raises incarceration rates for both blacks and whites, although the marginal effects are
numerically bigger for blacks. In nearly all of these models, the national-level immigration share
is significant, which is consistent with the notion that local labor markets are linked and that the
impact of immigration into one region spills over into other regions. It is worth noting that, for
each outcome, the sum of the state- and national-level immigration coefficients is roughly similar
to the national-level coefficient reported in Table 2.
The remaining panels of the table report IV estimates from models that include either the
state-level crack index or a limited set of interactions between education, experience, and year
fixed effects. For the most part, these estimates are similar to the least squares estimates in the
top panel. The coefficient of the state-level immigration variable tends to be numerically smaller
than that of the national-level immigration variable. In fact, the state-level immigration
coefficient is often insignificant in the incarceration regressions that use the concurrent
immigration measure, but are slightly more significant in the regressions that use the lagged
immigration variable. Note, however, that the sum of coefficients (which measures the true
impact of immigration) is statistically significant in almost every specification of the
employment and incarceration regressions reported in Table 4. Equally important, the marginal
impact implied by the sum of the coefficients is roughly similar to that estimated in the nationallevel models in the previous section. For example, using the marginal effects reported in Panel E
of Table 4, a 10-percent immigrant-induced increase in supply reduces the employment rate of
blacks by 2.3 percentage points and that of whites by 1.7 percentage points. The comparable
statistics implied by Panel E of the national-level results reported in Panel E of Table 2 are 3.5
and 1.6 percentage points, respectively. Similarly, the state-level regressions imply that a 10percent immigrant-induced increase in supply raises the incarceration rate of blacks by 0.8
percentage points and that of whites by 0.1 percentage points, and these are exactly the same
marginal impacts implied by the national level analysis.

32
Measurement Error

There exists an alternative, non-economic explanation for the significance of the national
immigration share in the state-level regression model. Aydemir and Borjas (2006) argue that
sampling error in estimates of state-level immigrant shares may result in biased estimates of the
relation between state-level wages and immigration. One might then speculate that the inclusion
of the national-level share in equation (15) might compensate for some of the state-level
measurement error in regressions that include both measures.
To address this issue, we examine the properties of our estimates under the assumption
that the true model involves only the state-level shares (i.e., there is no native migration response
to immigration), but the estimated model includes both the state and national immigration shares
as regressors. Abstracting from the other regressors in the model, we adopt a simplified notation
and assume the true model to be:
(16)

yR = θ πR + εR,

where yR denotes the state-level dependent variable, πR denotes the true state-level immigrant
share, and εR denotes the disturbance term. In this notation, yR, πR, and εR are vectors. The unit of
analysis is an observation on wage-immigration outcomes in a particular labor market (defined
by skills and time). The estimated model is given by:
(17)

yR = θR pR + θN pN + ε,

where pR is the measured state-level immigrant share and pN is the measured national-level share.
Measurement error takes the form:

(18)

pR = π R + v1
p N = π R + v2

We assume that εR, v1, and v2 are uncorrelated with each other, and that εR and v1 are
uncorrelated with pR. However, since pN represents the mean of pR across states, v2 represents a

33
deviation from the mean of pR, which implies that v2 is uncorrelated with pN but correlated with
pR. Part 3 of the Mathematical Appendix demonstrates that under these assumptions:

(19a)

plim θˆ R = θ

var(v2 )
,
var(v1 ) + var(v2 )

(19b)

plim θˆ N = θ

var(v1 )
.
var(v1 ) + var(v2 )

Note that even when the true regression model is given by equation (16), the national-level
immigrant share will influence state-level labor market outcomes if there is measurement error in
the state-level shares—and that the impact of the national-level share will be larger the greater
the measurement error in the state-level share. Moreover, equations (19a) and (19b) imply that:
θ = plim θˆ R + plim θˆ N .

(20)

In other words, in the presence of measurement error the true impact of immigration at the statelevel is given by the sum of the state-level and national-level coefficients.
The bottom panel of Table 3 indicates that the state-level black wage regression yields a
state-level coefficient equal to -0.238 and a national-level coefficient of -0.407. The respective
coefficients for whites are -0.129 and -0.524. Note that the national-level coefficient is
numerically larger than the state-level coefficient for both race groups, suggesting that, if
equation (16) is the true model, there must be a great deal of measurement error in the state-level
immigrant share. Suppose the only source of measurement error in the state-level immigrant
share is sampling error. Because the immigrant share is a proportion, one can work out the exact
nature of the sampling error. Aydemir and Borjas (2006) show that the sampling error in pR is
given by:

(21)

 π (1− π R ) 
p (1− p)
.
var(v1 ) = (1− f )E  R
≈(1− f )

nR
n



34
where f is the sampling fraction (i.e., the fraction of the population included in the sample), p is
the average immigrant share, and n is the average cell size used in the calculation. In our
analysis, the sampling fraction is 0.05 (as most of the data comes from a 5 percent random
sample), the average immigrant share is 0.1, and the average cell size in a particular state-skillyear observation is approximately 1,200. This implies that var(v1) is a small number, less than
0.0001. On the other hand, var(v2), which measures the “between variance” in the immigrant
share across states, is quite large, about 0.0049. The evidence reported in Table 3, therefore, is
inconsistent with the conjecture that equation (16) is the true model determining immigrant
wages at the state level, and that measurement error is the only reason for the national-level
immigrant share to matter in determining state-level wages. Instead, it seems that a behavioral
response by native labor (or capital) is responsible for diffusing the impact of immigration across
states.

VI. Accounting for the Trends in Employment and Incarceration Rates

We now use the regression coefficients estimated in the last two sections—both from the
national-level and state-level models—to determine the extent to which the immigration-induced
shift in supply accounts for the decline in black wages and employment and the increase in black
incarceration. In particular, we use the coefficients estimated in the previous sections to simulate
the impact of the immigrant influx that entered the United States between 1980 and 2000.
Suppose the estimated regression coefficient for a particular outcome y (and for a particular race
group) is θ̂ , where θ̂ represents either the immigration coefficient from the national-level model
or the sum of the state- and national-level immigration coefficients from the state-level model
(i.e., θˆ = θˆ R + θˆ N ). Equation (9) then implies that the reduced-form impact of an immigrant
influx that increases the supply of education group e by me percent can be approximated by:
(22)

∆ye = θˆ (1 − p ) 2 me ,

where we evaluate the derivative in (9) at the mean value of the immigrant share observed in
2000. Because we are interested in simulating the impact of the cohort of immigrants that entered
the United States between 1980 and 2000, we define the supply shock as:

35

(23)

me =

M e,2000 − M e ,1980
,
0.5( N e,1980 + N e,2000 ) + M e,1980

so that the baseline population used to calculate the percent increase in labor supply averages out
the (changing) size of the native workforce during the 1980-2000 period and treats the preexisting immigrant population as part of the “native” stock.
Table 5 summarizes the results of the simulation. Column 1 of the table reports the actual
change in the log weekly wage, employment, and incarceration rates experienced by black and
white men during the 1980-2000 period.35 The changes in wages, employment and incarceration
rates are quite large for black men, and particularly for low-skill black men. Between 1980 and
2000, for example, the real wage of black high school dropouts (a group that made up 25 percent
of the black male population in 1990), wages fell by 14 percent, the employment rate fell by 17.9
percentage points, and the incarceration rate rose by 19.9 percentage points.
Columns 2 and 3 of the table summarize the results of the simulation when we use the
adjustment coefficients estimated at the national level and reported in Panel E of Table 2.
Equation (22) predicts that, other things equal, the 1980-2000 immigrant influx reduced the
wage of black high school dropouts by 8.3 percent, reduced the employment rate by 7.4
percentage points, and increased the incarceration rate by 1.7 percentage points. These predicted
impacts are sizable and account for 60 percent of the observed reduction in wages, 41 percent of
the observed decline in employment, and 8 percent of the rise in incarceration rates. In other
words, immigration contributed a numerically significant amount to the trends among low-skill
blacks, but much of the decline in wages and employment and the rise in incarceration would
have been observed even in the absence of the 1980-2000 immigrant influx.
The simulation provides roughly similar results for black high school graduates (a group
that formed 43 percent of the black male population in 1990). Immigration reduced black wages
by 3.2 percent (as compared to an actual reduction of 8.5 percent) and reduced the employment
rate by 2.8 percentage points (as compared to an actual decline of 9.8 percentage points).
Similarly, immigration increased the black incarceration rate by 0.6 percentage points (as
compared to an actual rise of 8.4 percentage points). The 1980-2000 immigrant influx, therefore,
35 The reported statistics for “all persons” in Table 5 are calculated using a fixed-weight weighted average
of the changes observed for the various education groups. The fixed weights equal the average of the 1980 and 2000
race-specific education distributions.

36
generally “explains” about 40 to 60 percent of the decline in wages, 30 to 40 percent of the
decline in employment, and about 10 percent of the rise in incarceration rates among blacks with
a high school education or less.
Table 5 also shows that our approach cannot explain the observed changes in wages or
employment for high-skill blacks. In the sample of black college graduates, for example,
immigration is predicted to reduce wages by 4.4 percent and employment rates by 3.9 percent,
whereas they rose by 12.7 percent and 0.6 percent, respectively. The key underlying assumption
of the simulation—that “other things are equal” in the 1980-2000 period—clearly misses an
important part of what was driving employment opportunities for high-skilled workers at that
time. The wage structure was changing dramatically during this period, particularly affecting the
opportunities of workers at the top of the wage distribution. The simulation reported in Table 5
does not account for these shifts.
A second caveat on the interpretation of the predicted changes in employment and
incarceration rates for college graduates is that the regressions reported above impose the
restriction that the labor demand elasticities described in equations (2)-(4) are invariant to skill.
We might imagine that the elasticity of labor demand in crime, in particular, varies by education
level, with elasticities being larger for the less-educated. If the demand for highly educated labor
in crime is in fact relatively inelastic, we would overstate the impact of immigration on their
employment and incarceration rates.
Finally, it is important to stress that the “all other things equal” assumption ignores the
capital adjustments induced by the immigrant supply shock. Over time, these capital adjustments
attenuate the wage effects of immigration. If the aggregate production function had constant
returns to scale, for example, the capital adjustments would eventually raise the average wage in
the labor market back to its pre-immigration equilibrium level. Even in the long run, however,
immigration may still have significant distributional effects. In a CES framework, the long-run
relative wage effects of immigration are obtained by simply differencing the effects across the
different education groups reported in Table 5 (Borjas and Katz, 2007). For example, even after
all capital adjustments take place, the 1980-2000 immigrant influx lowered the wage of black
high school dropouts relative to that of college graduates by 3.9 percent (or –0.083 – (–0.044)).
These relative wage effects suggest that there would also be sizable relative employment effects
and relative incarceration effects.

37
The bottom two panels of Table 5 replicate the analysis for white employment and
incarceration rates. The 1980-2000 immigrant influx reduced the wages of white high school
dropouts by about 8.6 percent, or about 40 percent of the observed change. The influx also
lowered the employment rate by 3.2 percentage points, or about 30 percent of the decline
actually observed in the white sample. Immigration also explains a smaller portion (about 5
percent) of the increase in incarceration rates observed among low-skill white men.
The comparison of the simulation results for black and white men suggests that the 19802000 immigrant influx had roughly similar impacts on wages by race, but had a bigger impact on
both employment rates and incarceration rates for blacks. The predicted decline in employment
rates is more than twice as large for blacks as for whites (3.2 percentage points for blacks as
compared to 1.4 percentage points for whites). Similarly, the predicted increase in incarceration
rates is seven times as large for blacks (0.7 percentage points for blacks as compared to 0.1
percentage points for whites). In short, immigration contributed to the widening of the racial gap
in employment and incarceration rates over the period.
Columns 4 and 5 of Table 5 replicate the entire exercise using the sum of the state- and
national-level immigration coefficients estimated in the state-level regressions and reported in
Panel E of Tables 3 and 4. These estimates are very similar to those in columns (2) and (3). The
reason is that the estimated effect of immigration is similar in the two sets of models, provided
we use the sum of the state- and national-level coefficients from the state-level models to
estimate the effect of immigration.
Before concluding, it is useful to compare our findings to related results in the labor
supply and crime literatures. Juhn, Murphy, and Topel (1991), for instance, estimate the
elasticity of labor supply with respect to wages for low-skill workers along both the extensive
and intensive margins. They report an estimate of 0.4. We can compare their estimate with
implicit estimates from our analysis of the responsiveness of employment and wages to
immigration.36
Table 5 indicates that the wage of high school dropouts fell by about 8 percent in
response to the 1980-2000 immigrant influx, while the wage of high school graduates fell by
36

Note that the reduced-form estimate of the impact of immigration on employment (or incarceration) rates
can be combined with the reduced-form estimate of the wage impact of immigration to calculate the IV estimate of
the relation between employment rates and wages, where the immigrant share is the instrument. The IV estimate of
the employment elasticity is given by the ratio of the coefficients of the immigrant share variable from the
employment and wage regressions.

38
about 3 percent. These estimates, combined with the employment impacts reported in the table
and baseline employment rates from 1980, imply that the elasticity of employment with respect
to wages is roughly 0.9 for blacks, and about 0.4 for whites.37 A weighted average that accounts
for each group’s representation within education cells yields overall employment elasticity
estimates of 0.47 for high school dropouts and 0.48 for high school graduates.38 Thus our
estimates are roughly similar to those reported by Juhn, Murphy and Topel.
We are not aware of any previous estimates of the effect of the market wage on
incarceration, although a small literature estimates the relation between crime rates and the wage.
Using data from the NLSY, Grogger (1998) finds that the derivative of crime participation with
respect to the market log wage is −0.25. Table 5 shows that the 1980-2000 immigrant influx
increased incarceration rates by 1.7 percentage points for black high school dropouts and by 0.6
percentage points for black high school graduates. Combining these results with the wage effects
implies that the derivative of the incarceration rate with respect to log wages is about −0.20 for
both black low-skill groups. For whites, the corresponding derivative is −0.02 for high school
dropouts and −0.03 for high school graduates. Weighted averages yield derivatives of −0.06 for
all high school dropouts and for all high school graduates.
How do these numbers compare with Grogger’s (1998) estimate? Suppose incarceration
is proportional to crime participation, with the factor of proportionality being the conditional
probability that criminals end up in jail. The derivative of incarceration with respect to the wage
is then proportional to the derivative of crime participation with respect to the wage. Therefore,
our evidence is consistent with the earlier estimate if roughly one-fifth to one-third of criminals
are incarcerated. By at least one metric, these conditional incarceration probabilities seem
reasonable: Since over 20 percent of black high school dropouts were incarcerated in 2000, we
know that far more than 20 percent of black dropout criminals were incarcerated.39

37

Among blacks, employment rates in 1980 were 0.59 for high school dropouts and 0.74 for high school
graduates. Among whites, the respective figures were 0.74 and 0.87.
38

In 1980, blacks made up 18 percent of male high school dropouts and 10 percent of male high school

graduates.
39

Gould, Weinberg, and Mustard (2002) and Machin and Meghir (2004) use aggregate data to estimate the
elasticity of crime with respect to wages, and both studies report estimates centered roughly around -1.0. However it
is very difficult to compare our estimates to theirs because of the minuscule base incarceration rate in our sample.

39
VII. Summary

It is well known that black employment rates declined substantially over the past few
decades, and that this decline was accompanied by a rapid rise in the black incarceration rate.
This paper examines a simple yet potentially controversial question: has the resurgence of largescale immigration in the United States contributed to these trends?
We use data drawn from the microdata files of the 1960-2000 U.S. Censuses to examine
the trends in black wages, employment, and incarceration. Our empirical analysis examines the
link between immigration and the evolution of these variables over the four-decade period—after
adjusting for other factors that could account for shifts in the wage structure as well as shifts in
opportunities in the “formal” labor market and in the crime sector. We find a numerically sizable
and statistically significant negative correlation between immigration and the wages of black
men; a sizable and significant negative correlation between immigration and the employment
rate of black men; and a sizable and significant positive correlation between immigration and the
incarceration rate of black men. It is important to emphasize that we find similar correlations for
white men, but the magnitude of these correlations differ in important ways between the two
groups. Although the wage effect of immigration is similar for black and white men, the negative
employment effect and the positive incarceration effect are larger for blacks.
Our empirical analysis uses both national- and state-level data to document the impact of
immigration on black wages and employment. Although the literature uniformly finds that
estimates of the wage effects of immigration are much smaller when one uses geographically
smaller units (such as a state), our theoretical approach provides a simple and intuitive method
for synthesizing the national- and state-level studies in the literature. The state-level regression of
the state wage on the immigration supply shift in that state is misspecified as long as natives,
either through labor or capital flows, diffuse the impact of immigration into one particular state
to other states. By including measures of both state-level and national-level supply shocks, one
can estimate the “true” reduced-form effects of immigration, and these reduced-form effects are
similar to those revealed by national labor market studies.
The economic adjustments unleashed by the large 1980-2000 immigrant influx, a labor
supply shock that increased the number of workers in the United States by nearly 10 percent and
the number of high school dropouts by over 20 percent, reduced the employment rate of low-skill
black men by about 8 percentage points. Immigration, therefore, accounts for about 40 percent of
the 17.9 percentage point decline in black employment rates. Similarly, the changes in economic

40
opportunities caused by the 1980-2000 immigrant influx raised the incarceration rate of black
high school dropouts by 1.7 percentage points, accounting for almost 10 percent of the 19.9
percentage point increase observed during that period. Put differently, although immigration
played a numerically important role, much of the decline in employment and increase in
incarceration observed in the low-skill black population would have taken place even if the
immigrant influx had been far smaller.

41
DATA APPENDIX

The data are drawn from the 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Integrated Public Use
Microdata Samples (IPUMS) of the U.S. Census. In the 1960 and 1970 Censuses, the data
extract forms a 1 percent sample of the population. In the 1980, 1990, and 2000, the data extracts
form a 5 percent sample. The analysis is restricted to men aged 18-64. A person is classified as
an immigrant if he was born abroad and is either a non-citizen or a naturalized citizen; all other
persons are classified as natives. We use the information contained in the census race variable to
classify persons as “black” (IPUMS variable raced = 200) or “white” (raced = 100 or 110).
Sampling weights are used in all calculations.
Definition of education and experience: We use the IPUMS variables educrec to classify
workers into four education groups: high school dropouts (educrec <= 6), high school graduates
(educrec = 7), persons with some college (educrec = 8), college graduates (educrec = 9). We
assume that high school dropouts enter the labor market at age 17, high school graduates at age
19, persons with some college at age 21, and college graduates at age 23, and define work
experience as the worker’s age at the time of the survey minus the assumed age of entry into the
labor market. We restrict the analysis to persons who have between 1 and 40 years of experience.
Workers are classified into one of 8 experience groups, defined in five-year intervals.
Counts of persons in education-experience groups: The workforce counts are calculated
in the sample of men who worked at some point in the calendar year prior to the census, are not
enrolled in school, and are not in the military during the survey week. The population counts are
calculated in the sample of men who are not enrolled in school and are not in the military during
the survey week.
Weekly earnings: We use the sample of men who do not reside in group quarters, report
positive weeks worked, are not in the military in the reference week, and report positive
earnings. Our measure of earnings is the sum of the IPUMS variables incwage and incbusfm in
1960, the sum of incearn, incbus, and incfarm in 1970 and 1980, and is defined by incearn in
1990-2000. In the 1960, 1970, and 1980 Censuses, the top coded annual salary is multiplied by
1.5. All earnings are deflated to 1990 dollars. In the 1960 and 1970 Censuses, weeks worked in
the calendar year prior to the survey are reported as a categorical variable. We imputed weeks
worked for each worker as follows: 6.5 weeks for 13 weeks or less, 20 for 14-26 weeks, 33 for
27-39 weeks, 43.5 for 40-47 weeks, 48.5 for 48-49 weeks, and 51 for 50-52 weeks. The average
log weekly earnings for a particular education-experience cell is defined as the mean of log
weekly earnings over all workers in the relevant population.
Employment and incarceration rates: These variables are calculated in the sample of men
who are not enrolled in school. The employment rate is the sample average of the ratio of weeks
worked during the calendar year prior to the Census, including zeros, to 52. In the 1960, 1970,
and 1980 Censuses, a person is institutionalized if the group quarter variable gqtype takes on a
value that is between 2 and 4 (indicating that the person is in a correctional institution, mental
institution, or other institution at the time of the Census). In 1990 and 2000, the person is
institutionalized if gqtype takes on a value of 1 (indicating the person is in an institution). The
1990 and 2000 Censuses do not provide detailed information on the type of institution where an
institutionalized person resides.

42
MATHEMATICAL APPENDIX
1. Derivation of equations (6a)-(6d)
Equate equations (2) and (3) in the text. This yields:

(A1)

N ics = g (

X fs
X ics

1/ ηic

X 
, L fs ) =  fs 
 X ics 

( L fs )

η f / ηic

.

We linearize equation (A1) using a multivariate first-order Taylor series approximation. The
linearization is conducted at the arbitrary point:
(A2)

Nf =

1 S *
∑ N fs ,
S s =1

X f / X ic =

1 S
*
( X *fs / X ics
),
∑
S s =1

where the asterisks indicate the values of the variables in the pre-immigration equilibrium and S
gives the number of skill groups. Recall that Lf gives the sum of natives (Nf) and immigrants (M)
in the market sector. In the pre-immigration equilibrium, it must be the case that Lf = Nf. The
first-order approximation of (A1) can then be written as:
(A3)

N ics = g ( X f / X ic , N f ) + g1 ( X f / X ic , N f )( X fs / X ics − X f / X ic )
+ g 2 ( X f / X ic , N f )( L fs − N fs )

where g1 = ∂g/∂(Xfs/Xics) and g2 = ∂g/∂Lfs. Given (A1) these derivatives are:
−1

(A4)

N X 
g1 = ics  fs  ,
ηic  X ics 
η N
g 2 = f ics .
ηic L fs

If we evaluate these derivatives at the points defined in (A2), the first-order approximation is:
(A5)

Nics = αics + βic Lfs ,

where:
(A6)

α ics = g ( X f / X ic , N f ) − g1 ( X f / X ic , N f , ) X f / X ic + g1 ( X f / X ic , N f )( X fs / X ics )
− g 2 ( X f / X ic , N f ) N f

βic = g 2 ( X f / X ic , N f ).
Note that the intercept in (A5) is a function of the skill level s, but the slope βic is not. By using a
similar method, we can derive the analogous linear approximation for Nihs:

43

(A7)

Nihs = αihs + βih Lfs ,

In the post-immigration equilibrium, the total number of persons participating in the
market sector can be written as:
(A8)

L fs = ( N bs + N ws + M s ) − N bcs − N wcs − N bhs − N whs ,

where N is gives the number of native persons of race i and skill s in the population. By
substituting equations (A5) and (A7) into (A8), and solving for Lfs we obtain:
(A9)

L fs = α s + ρ ( N bs + N ws + M s ),

where ρ is a constant that is not race-specific and that does not depend on skills. In fact, it
follows from the definition of g2 that:

(A10)





Nf

 <1.
0<ρ=
ηf
ηf
ηf
ηf


 N f + η N bc + η N wc + η N bh + η N wh 
wc
bc
bh
wh



where N ic = g ( X f / X ic , N f ) and N ih is defined analogously. The intercept αs in equation (A8)
does depend on skills and is defined by:
(A11)

α s = − (α bcs + α wcs + α bhs + α whs ) ρ .
It follows from equation (A9) that N *fs = α s + ρ( N bs + N ws ) in the pre-immigration

equilibrium. Substituting this into equation (2) in the text implies that the pre-immigration
equilibrium wage is:
(A12)

ln wis* = ln[ X fs (1 − δi )] + η f ln[α s + ρ ( N bs + N ws )] .

Suppose immigrant supply increases from 0 to Ms. The post-immigration wage is:
ln wis = ln[ X fs (1 − δi )] + η f ln[α s + ρ ( N bs + N ws + M s )],
(A13)

= ln[ X fs (1 − δi )] + η f ln[ N *fs + ρM s ],
= ln wis* + η f ρ ms ,

where ms = M s / N fs* , which produces the result in equation (6a). Equations (6b) and (6c) in the
text follow from combining (A5) with equations (2) and (3). To derive equation (6d), write
equation (5) in terms of rates of change as

44

ln N ifs − ln N ifs* = −

(A14)

θics
θ
*
*
(ln N ics − ln N ics
) − ihs (ln N ihs − ln N ihs
),
θifs
θifs

*
*
where θics = N ics
/ N is , θihs = N ihs
/ N is , and θifs = N ifs* / N is . Equation (6d) follows after

substituting equations (6b) and (6c) into (A14).
2. Solving the state-level model
Let N be the total supply of native labor across states (assumed to be constant over time)
and Mt be the total supply of immigrants across states as of time t. It follows that
ln wit = ln wi* + η f ρ mt ,

(A15)

*
where mt = M t /( N bf* + N wf
) is the immigrant labor supply as a share of national market

employment in the pre-immigration equilibrium.40 The native migration supply response is a
lagged function of the difference between the wage in a particular state and the mean national
wage given by (A15). As long as the racial discrimination parameter δi is constant across states
and the supply elasticity (σ) is the same for blacks and whites, we can write the supply function
as:
vrt = σ(ln wr ,t −1 − ln wt −1 ) ,

(A16)

*
*
where vrt = ∆N rt /( N bfr
+ N wfr
) is the net migration rate of natives (as a share of native

employment in the market sector in the pre-immigration equilibrium). For expositional
convenience, we ignore the subscript indicating the particular race group in (A16)—since the
wage differential between the average wage in a state and the average national wage must be the
same for both race groups.
To evaluate the impact of immigration and the ensuing native migration response on state
wages and sectoral employments, consider first the case in which state r is hit by a one-time
supply shock in period 0 of size M r (with the total supply shock across states being of size M ).
Following Borjas (2006), it is straightforward to show that the cumulative adjustment in the
native labor supply over periods 0 to t in response to this period 0 supply shock is
t
Vrt = ∑ τ=0 vrτ = 1 − (1 + η f ρ σ)t  ( m − mr ) , where we assume that 0 < (1 + η f ρ σ) < 1, to ensure that
the internal migration response of natives eventually re-equilibrates the national labor market.
The variable mr gives the supply of immigrants in state r relative to the state native-born
workforce in the pre-immigration equilibrium, and m gives the corresponding share for the
national labor market. Suppose now that the state-specific and national immigration shocks of

40

Additional assumptions sufficient for equation (A7) to hold are that log sectoral demand shifters are iid
with mean zero and that any state-specific shocks to demand shifters are transitory in nature.

45
size M r and M occur in each period from 0 to t. The total resulting adjustment in the native
labor force is:41
t −1
t −1
 1+ ηf ρ σ

1 − (1 + η f ρ σ)t   ( m − mr ) ,
(A17) Ψ rt = ∑Vrτ = ∑ 1 − (1 + η f ρ σ) τ  ( m − mr ) =  t +


ηf ρ σ
τ= 0
τ= 0



Equation (A17) collapses to η f ρ σ (mr − m) if we use the approximations that (1 + x)t ≈ 1 + xt
and t/(t + 1) ≈ 1, where mr = (t + 1)mr and m = (t + 1)m are the immigration shares observed as of
time t. A slight generalization of equation (A13) implies that the wage in state r at time t will be
given by:
ln wirt = ln wi* + η f ρ ( Ψ rt + mr ),

(A18)

This is equivalent to equation (13a) in the text.
3. Measurement error
We use the simplified notation introduced in equations (16)-(18) of the text. We assume
the covariance structure:

E(πR εR) = E(πR v1) = E(εR v1) = E(εR v2) =E(v1 v2) = 0.

(A19)

Since pN converges to the expected value of πR, v2 represents a deviation between πR and its
mean, so we have E(pN v2) =0, which implies that E(πR v2) = −var(v2).42 We adopt the following
notation:
(A20)

σ12 = var( pR ) = var( π R ) + var( v1 )

(A21)

σ22 = var( pN ) = var( π R ) − var( v2 )

(A22)

σ12 = E ( pN pR ) = var( π R ) − var( v2 ) = σ22

(A23)

M N = I − pN ( p′N pN ) −1 p′N

The least squares estimates of the coefficients in the regression model that includes both
state-level and national-level immigrant shares can be written as:

41 We assume that the period t immigration shock is unanticipated in period t-1 such that there is no
anticipatory native labor migration in response to expected future immigration. To introduce anticipatory native
migration into the model, one would have to specify in each period the expected sequence of expected future
immigration shocks.
42

We are assuming that there are sufficiently large numbers of observations within each skill group so that
the measurement error in the national-level immigrant share is effectively zero. With an average of over 60,000
observations per national-level skill cell, this seems reasonable.

46

(A24)

θˆ R = [ p′R M N pR ]−1 p′R M N y R
= [ p′R pR − p′R pN ( p′N pN ) −1 p′N pR ]−1[ p′R y R − p′R pN ( p′N pN ) −1 p′N y R ]

This implies that:
plim θˆ R =

(A25)

σ22 cov( pR , y R ) − σ12 cov( pN , y R )
σ12σ22 − σ212

σ22 cov( pR , y R ) + σ22 cov( pN , y R )
=
σ22 ( σ12 − σ22 )

Similarly,
(A26)

plim θˆ N =

σ12 cov( pN , y R ) + σ22 cov( pR , y R )
.
σ22 ( σ12 − σ22 )

Evaluating the covariances yields:
cov( pR , y R ) = E ( pR , y R )
(A27)

= E ( π R + v1 )(θπ R + ε R )
= θ var( π R )
cov( pN , y R ) = E ( pN , y R )

(A28)

= E ( π R + v2 )(θπ R + ε R )
= θ [var( π R ) − var( v2 )]
= θσ22

Equations (19a) and (19b) in the text are easily obtained by substituting these covariance terms
into equations (A25) and (A26) and by using the fact that σ12 − σ22 = var( v1 ) + var( v2 ).

47
References

Altonji, Joseph G. and Card, David. “The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market
Outcomes of Less-Skilled Natives,” in John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman, eds.,
Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991, pp.
201-234.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. “Trends in U.S. Wage
Inequality: Re-Assessing the Revisionists,” Working Paper, Harvard University, 2004.
Aydemir, Abdurrahman and George J. Borjas. “Attenuation Bias in Estimating the Wage
Impact of Immigration,” Working Paper, Harvard University, October 2005.
Borjas, George J. “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the
Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (November
2003): 1335-1374.
Borjas, George J. “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of
Immigration,” Journal of Human Resources 41 (Spring 2006): 221-258.
Borjas, George J. “The Evolution of the Mexican-Born Workforce in the U.S. Labor
Market,” in George J. Borjas, editor, Mexican Immigration to the United States. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2007.
Bound, John and Scott Boggess. “Did Criminal Activity Increase During the 1980s?
Comparisons across Data Sources,” Social Science Quarterly 78 (September 1997): 725-739.
Bound, John and Richard B. Freeman. “What Went Wrong? The Erosion of Relative
Earnings and Employment Among Young Black Men in the 1980s,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107 (February 1992): 201-232.
Bound, John, Michael Schoenbaum, and Timothy Waidmann. “Race and Education
Differences in Disability Status and Labor Force Attachment in the Health and Retirement
Survey,” Journal of Human Resources 30 (Supplement 1995): S227-S267.
Butcher, Kristin F. and Anne Morrison Piehl. “Recent Immigrants: Unexpected
Implications for Crime and Incarceration.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 51 (July
1998): 654-679.
Butcher, Kristin F. and Anne Morrison Piehl. “Cross-City Evidence on the Relationship
between Immigration and Crime,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 17 (Summer
1998): 457-493.
Butcher, Kristin F. and Anne Morrison Piehl. “The Role of Deportation in the
Incarceration of Immigrants,” in George J. Borjas, editor, Issues in the Economics of
Immigration. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000, pp. 351-385.

48
Card, David. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts
of Higher Immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics (January 2001): 22-64.
Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising
Return to College for Young Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
May: 705-746.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Ming Ching Luoh. “Male Incarceration, the Marriage Market,
and Female Outcomes.” Working Paper, University of Chicago, 2005.
Cortes, Patricia. 2005. “The Effects of Low-Skilled Immigration on US Prices:
Evidence from CPI Data.” Mimeo, MIT.
Feenstra, Robert C. Advanced International Trade. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2004.
Fryer, Roland G., Paul S. Heaton, Steven D. Levitt, and Kevin M. Murphy. “Measuring
the Impact of Crack Cocaine,” NBER Working Paper No. 11318, May 2005.
Gould, Eric D., Bruce A. Weinberg, and David B. Mustard, “Crime Rates and Local
Labor Market Opportunities in the United States: 1979-1997,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 84 (February 2002): 45-61.
Grogger, Jeffrey. “Market Wages and Youth Crime.” Journal of Labor Economics 16
(October 1998): 756-791.
Grogger, Jeffrey and Michael Willis. “The Emergence of Crack Cocaine and the Rise in
Urban Crime Rates,” Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (November 2000): 519-529.
Gronau, Reuben. “Leisure, Home Production, and Work: The Theory of the Allocation of
Time Revisited.” Journal of Political Economy 85 (December 1977): 1099-1123.
Jaeger, David. “Skill Differences and the Effect of Immigrants on the Wages of Natives,”
Working Paper, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1996.
Juhn, Chinhui. “The Decline in Male Labor Market Participation: The Role of Declining
Market Opportunities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (February, 1992): 79-121.
Juhn, Chinhui. “Labor Market Dropouts and Trends in the Wages of Black and White
Men,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56 (July 2003): 643-662.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert H. Topel. “Why Has the Natural Rate of
Unemployment Increased Over Time?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1991): 75-126.
Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy. “Changes in the Wage Structure, 1963-87:
Supply and Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (February 1992): 35-78.

49
Machin, Stephen and Costas Meghir. “Crime and Economic Incentives,” Journal of
Human Resources 39 (Fall 2004): 958-979.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P., and Giovanni Peri. 2006. “Rethinking the Effects of
Immigration on Wages.” NBER Working Paper No. 12497.
Parsons, Donald O. “Racial Trends in Male Labor Force Participation,” American
Economic Review 70 (December 1980): 911-920.
Raphael, Steven and Michael A. Stoll (2005), “The Effect of Prison Releases on Regional
Crime Rates,” in William G. Gale and Janet Rothenberg Pack (eds.), The Brookings-Wharton
Papers on Urban Economics Affairs, Volume 5, The Brookings Institution: Washington, D.C.
Raphael, Stephen and Lucas Ronconi. “Reconciling National and Regional Estimates of
the Effects of Immigration on U.S. Labor Markets: The Confounding Effects of Native Male
Incarceration Trends,” Working Paper, University of California, Berkeley, 2005.
Stern, Steven. “Measuring the Effect of Disability on Labor Force Participation,” Journal
of Human Resources 24 (Summer 1989): 361-395.
Venkatesh, Sudhir Alladi, “The Social Organization of Street Crime Activity in an Urban
Ghetto.” American Journal of Sociology 103 (July 1997): 82-111.
Welch, Finis. “The Employment of Black Men,” Journal of Labor Economics 8 (January
1990): S26-S74.
Western, Bruce and Becky Pettit. “Incarceration and Racial Inequality in Men's
Employment,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 54 (October 2000): 3-16.

50
Figure 1. The share of immigrants in the workforce

High school graduates

Some college

College graduates

0
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
0

Fraction

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

High school dropouts

0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

Labor market experience
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

51
Figure 2. Trends in employment rates, by race, education and experience
A. Blacks
High school graduates

Some college

College graduates

.2
1
.2

.4

.6

.8

Fraction

.4

.6

.8

1

High school dropouts

0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

Labor market experience
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

B. Whites
High school graduates

Some college

College graduates

.2
1
.8
.6
.4
.2

Fraction

.4

.6

.8

1

High school dropouts

0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

Labor market experience
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

52
Figure 3. Trends in incarceration rates, by race, education and experience
A. Blacks
High school graduates

Some college

College graduates

0
0

.1

.2

.3

Fraction

.1

.2

.3

High school dropouts

0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

Labor market experience
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

B. Whites
High school graduates

Some college

College graduates

0
.3
.2
.1
0

Fraction

.1

.2

.3

High school dropouts

0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

Labor market experience
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

53

-.1

Change in employment rate
-.05
0
.05

.1

Figure 4. Relation between decadal changes in employment and immigration
(removing decade effects)
A. Blacks

-.05

0
.05
Change in immigrant share
Raw data

.1

.15

Fitted values

-.1

Change in employment rate
-.05
0
.05

.1

B. Whites

-.05

0

.05
.1
Change in immigrant share

Raw data

Fitted values

.15

54

-.05

Change in incarceration rate
0
.05
.1

.15

Figure 5. Relation between decadal changes in incarceration and immigration
(removing decade effects)
A. Blacks

-.05

0
.05
Change in immigrant share
Raw data

.1

.15

Fitted values

-.05

Change in incarceration rate
0
.05
.1

.15

B. Whites

-.05

0

.05
.1
Change in immigrant share

Raw data

Fitted values

.15

55
Figure 6. Initial equilibrium: allocation of labor across sectors

w
Dc

Df

1

Native
Crime
Employment

Native
Market
Employment

Nbfs

Nbcs
N bs − N bhs = N bcs + N bfs

56
Figure 7. Impact of immigration on sectoral allocation of labor

w
Dc′

Df

Dc

D 'f

1
2

1′

Native
Crime
Employment

Native
Market
Employment

Pre-immigration Nbfs

Post-immigration Nbfs

Pre-immigration Nbcs

Post-immigration Nbcs

57
Table 1. Tests for perfect substitution

Specification
1
A. Testing perfect substitution between black
and white native workers.
Estimate of −1/σ
Includes time fixed effects
Includes education-experience fixed effects
Interacts education and time fixed effects
Interacts experience and time fixed effects
A. Testing perfect substitution between
immigrant and native workers
Estimate of −1/σ
Includes time fixed effects
Includes education-experience fixed effects
Interacts education and time fixed effects
Interacts experience and time fixed effects

2

3

4

0.007
(0.010)

-0.006
(0.007)

0.018
(0.037)

-0.053
(0.041)

No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.010
(0.008)

0.024
(0.008)

0.019
(0.015)

0.050
(0.045)

No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within education-experience cells.
All regressions have 160 observations and are weighted by the total number of observations used to calculate the
dependent variable. The dependent variable in panel A is the difference between the mean log weekly wage of black
and white workers, and the independent variable is the difference between the log of the number of black workers
and the log of the number of white workers. The dependent variable in panel B is the difference between the mean
log weekly wage of immigrant and native workers, and the independent variable is the difference between the log of
the number of immigrant workers and the log of the number of native workers.

58
Table 2. National level estimates of the impact of immigration

Dependent variable

A. Least squares
Blacks
Whites
B. Instrumental variables
Blacks
Whites
C. IV, with crack index
Blacks
Whites
D. IV, with restricted crack index
Blacks
Whites

Log weekly
earnings

Employment
rate

Incarceration
rate

-0.561
(0.167)
-0.669
(0.250)

-0.489
(0.092)
-0.206
(0.079)

0.100
(0.040)
0.010
(0.015)

0.087
(0.016)
0.017
(0.008)

-0.519
(0.172)
-0.640
(0.255)

-0.488
(0.098)
-0.180
(0.088)

0.105
(0.038)
0.003
(0.016)

0.091
(0.014)
0.014
(0.009)

-0.571
(0.289)
-0.398
(0.351)

-0.426
(0.212)
-0.169
(0.124)

0.099
(0.049)
0.012
(0.021)

0.095
(0.032)
0.017
(0.009)

-0.673
(0.224)
-0.613
(0.291)

-0.508
(0.150)
-0.205
(0.096)

0.088
(0.040)
0.009
(0.016)

0.088
(0.028)
0.015
(0.008)

0.109
(0.033)
0.015
(0.008)

0.091
(0.017)
0.012
(0.005)

E. IV, with restricted education-experience-time interactions
Blacks
-0.543
-0.483
(0.209)
(0.123)
Whites
-0.566
-0.213
(0.243)
(0.072)

Incarceration rate,
using lagged
immigration

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within education-experience cells.
All regressions have 160 observations and include education, experience, and period fixed effects, and interactions
between education and experience fixed effects, education and period fixed effects, and experience and period fixed
effects. Regressions on employment and incarceration rates use a grouped logit specification; reported coefficients
are marginal effects evaluated at the mean employment and incarceration rates in the particular sample. Instrumental
variable regressions instrument the immigrant share in the workforce with the immigrant share in the population.
The restricted crack index sets the value of the Fryer et al (2005) crack index to zero if the skill cell has at least a
high school education or more than 20 years of experience. The restricted education-experience-time interactions
include a vector of fixed effects indicating if the cell refers to a post-1980 observation of high school dropouts with
1-10, 11-20, or more than 20 years of experience; a post-1980 observation of workers with a high school diploma or
some college with 1-10, 11-20, or more than 20 years of experience; or a post-1980 observation of college graduates
with 1-10, 11-20, or more than 20 years of experience. The lagged immigration variable gives the immigrant share
for the particular skill group measured five years prior to the Census.

59
Table 3. State-level estimates of the wage impact of immigration

State
share
A. Least squares
Model 1
Model 2
B. Instrumental variables
Model 1
Model 2
C. IV, with crack index
Model 1
Model 2

Blacks
National
share

Sum

-0.266
(0.063)
-0.246
(0.138)

---

---

-0.451
(0.138)

-0.697
(0.155)

-0.258
(0.064)
-0.239
(0.064)

---

---

-0.415
(0.185)

-0.654
(0.188)

-0.266
(0.063)
-0.259
(0.063)

---

---

-0.332
(0.199)

-0.591
(0.204)

D. IV, with restricted crack index
Model 1
-0.257
(0.064)
Model 2
-0.245
(0.064)

---

Sum

-0.192
(0.031)
-0.152
(0.035)

---

---

-0.639
(0.229)

-0.790
(0.222)

-0.168
(0.036)
-0.126
(0.035)

---

---

-0.644
(0.102)

-0.771
(0.104)

-0.136
(0.035)
-0.119
(0.036)

---

---

-0.394
(0.111)

-0.513
(0.109)

-0.732
(0.195)

-0.149
(0.035)
-0.124
(0.035)

E. IV, with restricted education-experience-time interactions
Model 1
-0.253
----(0.064)
Model 2
-0.238
-0.407
-0.645
(0.064)
(0.196)
(0.201)

-0.158
(0.035)
-0.129
(0.035)

-0.488
(0.190)

---

State
share

Whites
National
share

---0.595
(0.103)

---0.718
(0.105)

---0.524
(0.105)

---0.654
(0.106)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within state-skill cells. The
regressions for blacks have 6,581 observations; the regressions for whites have 8,153 observations. All regressions
include education, experience, state, and period fixed effects, two-way interactions between education and period,
experience and period, and state and period fixed effects, and three-way interactions between education, experience,
and state fixed effects. Model 1 instruments the state-level immigrant share in the workforce with the state-level
population share. Model 2 instruments the state- and national-level immigrant shares in the workforce with the stateand national-level population shares. The restricted crack index sets the value of the Fryer et al (2005) crack index to
zero if the skill cell has at least a high school education or more than 20 years of experience. The restricted
education-experience-time interactions include a vector of fixed effects indicating if the cell refers to a post-1980
observation of high school dropouts with 1-10, 11-20, or more than 20 years of experience; a post-1980 observation
of workers with a high school diploma or some college with 1-10, 11-20, or more than 20 years of experience; or a
post-1980 observation of college graduates with 1-10, 11-20, or more than 20 years of experience.

60
Table 4. State-level estimates of the impact of immigration on sectoral allocation
Employment rate
State
share
A. Least squares
Blacks
-0.068
(0.021)
Whites
-0.058
(0.009)

Incarceration rate

Incarceration rate (with
lagged immigration)
State
National
share
share
Sum

National
share

Sum

State
share

National
share

Sum

-0.254
(0.062)
-0.181
(0.027)

-0.322
(0.059)
-0.239
(0.028)

0.008
(0.016)
0.000
(0.002)

0.099
(0.053)
0.014
(0.008)

0.108
(0.052)
0.014
(0.008)

0.029
(0.021)
0.004
(0.003)

0.080
(0.042)
0.015
(0.007)

0.109
(0.038)
0.019
(0.007)

B. Instrumental variables
Blacks
-0.058
-0.257
(0.021)
(0.065)
Whites
-0.050
-0.160
(0.009)
(0.028)

-0.315
(0.061)
-0.210
(0.029)

0.003
(0.016)
-0.001
(0.002)

0.100
(0.054)
0.008
(0.008)

0.103
(0.054)
0.007
(0.008)

0.022
(0.021)
0.003
(0.003)

0.085
(0.042)
0.014
(0.007)

0.107
(0.040)
0.016
(0.007)

C. IV, with crack index
Blacks
-0.061
-0.275
(0.022)
(0.078)
Whites
-0.050
-0.135
(0.009)
(0.028)

-0.336
(0.075)
-0.185
(0.029)

0.009
(0.018)
-0.002
(0.002)

0.118
(0.066)
0.017
(0.010)

0.127
(0.064)
0.014
(0.010)

0.028
(0.022)
0.001
(0.003)

0.079
(0.054)
0.015
(0.008)

0.107
(0.050)
0.016
(0.008)

D. IV, with restricted crack
Blacks
-0.058
-0.271
(0.021)
(0.068)
Whites
-0.052
-0.201
(0.009)
(0.030)

-0.329
(0.065)
-0.253
(0.031)

0.007
(0.016)
-0.000
(0.002)

0.119
(0.057)
0.012
(0.008)

0.126
(0.057)
0.011
(0.008)

0.025
(0.021)
0.002
(0.003)

0.095
(0.044)
0.017
(0.007)

0.121
(0.041)
0.019
(0.007)

E. IV, with restricted education-experience-time interactions
Blacks
-0.056
-0.262
-0.319
0.003
0.107
(0.021)
(0.066)
(0.064) (0.017) (0.058)
Whites
-0.049
-0.188
-0.237
-0.002
0.019
(0.009)
(0.029)
(0.029) (0.002) (0.008)

0.111
(0.057)
0.017
(0.008)

0.022
(0.021)
0.002
(0.003)

0.078
(0.047)
0.013
(0.008)

0.100
(0.044)
0.014
(0.007)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within state-skill cells. The
numbers of observations in the regressions vary due to empty cells. For blacks (whites), the employment and
incarceration regressions have 6,357 and 3,052 (8,152 and 5,457) observations, respectively. All regressions include
education, experience, state, and period fixed effects, two-way interactions between education and period,
experience and period, and state and period fixed effects, and three-way interactions between education, experience,
and state fixed effects. Regressions on employment and incarceration rates use a grouped logit specification;
reported coefficients are marginal effects evaluated at the mean employment and incarceration rates in the particular
sample. IV regressions instrument state- and national-level immigrant shares in the workforce with the state- and
national-level population shares. The restricted crack index sets the value of the Fryer et al (2005) crack index to
zero if the skill cell has at least a high school education or more than 20 years of experience. The restricted
education-experience-time interactions include a vector of fixed effects indicating if the cell refers to a post-1980
observation of high school dropouts with 1-10, 11-20, or more than 20 years of experience; a post-1980 observation
of workers with a high school diploma or some college with 1-10, 11-20, or more than 20 years of experience; or a
post-1980 observation of college graduates with 1-10, 11-20, or more than 20 years of experience. The lagged
immigration variables gives the immigrant share for the particular skill group measured five years prior to the
Census both at the state and national levels.

61
Table 5. The impact of the 1980-2000 immigrant influx
1. Actual change
(1980-2000)
Blacks:
Log weekly wage
High school dropouts
High school graduates
Some college
College graduates
All persons
Employment rate
High school dropouts
High school graduates
Some college
College graduates
All persons
Incarceration rate
High school dropouts
High school graduates
Some college
College graduates
All persons
Whites:
Log weekly wage
High school dropouts
High school graduates
Some college
College graduates
All persons
Employment rate
High school dropouts
High school graduates
Some college
College graduates
All persons
Incarceration rate
High school dropouts
High school graduates
Some college
College graduates
All persons

National-level analysis
2. Predicted
3. % due to
impact
immigration

State-level analysis
4. Predicted
5. % due to
impact
immigration

-0.140
-0.085
0.008
0.127
-0.060

-0.083
-0.032
-0.033
-0.044
-0.036

59.5
37.4
-417.2
-34.7
60.0

-0.099
-0.038
-0.040
-0.052
-0.043

70.7
44.4
-495.6
-41.2
72.0

-0.179
-0.098
-0.022
0.006
-0.097

-0.074
-0.028
-0.030
-0.039
-0.032

41.3
28.9
137.9
-617.3
33.0

-0.049
-0.019
-0.020
-0.026
-0.021

27.3
19.1
91.1
-407.7
21.6

0.199
0.084
0.054
0.011
0.106

0.017
0.006
0.007
0.009
0.007

8.4
7.6
12.5
77.6
6.6

0.017
0.007
0.007
0.009
0.007

8.5
7.8
12.8
79.0
6.6

-0.206
-0.146
-0.050
0.102
-0.060

-0.086
-0.033
-0.035
-0.046
-0.037

41.7
22.8
70.3
-45.2
61.7

-0.099
-0.038
-0.041
-0.053
-0.042

48.1
26.4
81.2
-52.2
70.0

-0.102
-0.047
-0.015
-0.008
-0.038

-0.032
-0.013
-0.013
-0.017
-0.014

31.6
26.9
90.2
215.8
36.8

-0.036
-0.014
-0.015
-0.019
-0.015

35.2
29.9
100.4
240.1
39.5

0.043
0.017
0.007
0.001
0.015

0.002
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001

5.3
5.2
12.5
99.2
6.7

0.003
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001

6.0
5.9
14.2
112.5
6.7

Notes: The education-specific immigrant supply shock is defined as the number of immigrants arriving between
1980 and 2000 divided by a baseline population equal to the average size of the native workforce (over 1980-2000)
plus the number of immigrants in 1980. The education-specific supply shocks are: 0.210 for high school dropouts;
0.080 for high school graduates; 0.084 for persons with some college; 0.111 for college graduates; and 0.092 for all
persons. The predicted impacts use national-level coefficient reported in Panel E of Table 2, and the sum of the
state-level and national-level coefficients reported in Panel E of Tables 3 and 4. The changes for “all persons” are
calculated using fixed weights equal to the average of the 1980 and 2000 race-specific education distributions.

