NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONTINGENT VALUATION ANALYSIS OF WILLINGNESS TO PAY TO REDUCE
CHILDHOOD OBESITY
John Cawley
Working Paper 12510
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12510

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2006

I gratefully acknowledge financial support from Cornell Cooperative Extension and a Smith-Lever
grant from the U.S. Department of Agriculture. I thank Rachel Dunifon, Eric Finkelstein, John Komlos,
Dean Lillard, Melayne Morgan McInnes, Sean Nicholson, Greg Poe, Judy Shinogle, Josephine Swanson,
the Cornell Obesity Working Group for helpful comments, and three anonymous referees. I also thank
Yasamin Miller and the Survey Research Center at Cornell University for survey pre-testing and data
collection. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by John Cawley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Contingent Valuation Analysis of Willingness to Pay To Reduce Childhood Obesity
John Cawley
NBER Working Paper No. 12510
September 2006, Revised June 2008
JEL No. I1,I18
ABSTRACT
Several recent surveys have asked Americans whether they support policies to reduce childhood obesity.
There is reason for skepticism of such surveys because people are not confronted with the tax costs
of such policies when they are asked whether they support them. This paper uses contingent valuation
(CV), a method frequently used to estimate people’s willingness to pay (WTP) for goods or services
not transacted in markets, applied to unique survey data from New York State to estimate the willingness
to pay to reduce childhood obesity.
The willingness to pay data correlate in predictable ways with respondent characteristics. The mean
WTP for a 50% reduction in childhood obesity is $46.41 (95% CI: $33.45, $59.15), which implies
a total WTP by New York State residents of $690.6 million (95% CI: $497.7, $880.15), which is less
than that implied by previous surveys that did not use CV methods but greater than current spending
on policies to reduce childhood obesity and greater than the estimated savings in external costs. The
findings provide policymakers with useful information about taxpayers' support for, and preferred
budget for, anti-obesity policies.

John Cawley
124 MVR Hall
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
jhc38@cornell.edu

Introduction
Over the past three decades the prevalence of overweight among American youth
has risen dramatically. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention define childhood
overweight2 as a body mass index3 (BMI) above the 95th percentile for children of the
same age and gender (benchmarked against the historic BMI distribution4). Since 1970,
the fraction overweight has almost quadrupled among children aged 6-11 years and more
than doubled among adolescents aged 12-19 years (Ogden et al., 2002). As of
2003-2004, 17.1 percent of children aged 2-19 are clinically overweight, a figure more
than three times greater than the Healthy People 20105 goal of 5 percent (Ogden et al.,
2006; U.S. DHHS, 2000). Public health and medical organizations have responded by
encouraging the passage of a wide variety of policies aimed at preventing or reducing
obesity among youths (e.g. IOM, 2005). The goal of this paper is to use the method of
contingent valuation to provide evidence on the public’s willingness to pay higher taxes
to fund policies to reduce childhood obesity.
In part to determine how much support there is for such policies to reduce
childhood obesity, several surveys have been conducted recently to determine how
Americans perceive childhood obesity. A summary of these surveys is provided in Table
1. From the time of the earliest listed survey (March 2003) until the survey conducted for
this paper (Feb-March 2006, the methodology of which is described in a subsequent

2

The highest weight classification for adults is “obese” but in order to avoid stigmatizing youth with that
label, the highest weight classification for children is “overweight.” In this paper I use the two terms
interchangeably.
3
Body mass index (BMI) is calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared.
4
The historic data for child and adolescent BMI-for-height come from the National Health Examination
Surveys II (1963-65) and III (1966-70), and the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys I
(1971-74) and II (1976-80); U.S. DHHS (2002), Table B.
5
Healthy People 2010 states U.S. national health objectives, identifies the most significant preventable
threats to health, and establishes national goals to reduce these threats by the year 2010 (U.S. DHHS,
2000).

2

section), almost all of the surveys find that at least two-thirds of respondents indicate that
childhood obesity is a “major” or “serious” problem.6
A limitation of such survey questions is that it is easy for respondents to describe
any issue as a serious problem. One might be more convinced if respondents expressed a
willingness to pay higher taxes in exchange for reductions in childhood obesity. A few
surveys have attempted to measure this, although in ad hoc ways. In the American Public
Health Association (APHA) poll of 2003, 56% of Americans said they would support “a
small increase in their local tax” to provide free fruit and vegetable snacks in school
lunchrooms (Widmeyer Polling & Research, 2003). In the Harvard Forums on Health
poll of 2003, 76% of respondents said they would support school-based policies to reduce
childhood obesity if it meant an increase in their taxes, and 42% said they would pay
more than $100 a year in taxes to support such efforts (Lane, Snell, Perry & Associates,
2003). Lee and Oliver (2005) found that 64% were willing to pay $50 more a year in
taxes to support more nutritious school lunches.
These questions, while an improvement, have limitations. First, none of the
questions specified both the policy’s benefits (in terms of reductions in childhood
obesity), which makes it difficult for survey respondents to evaluate such proposals.
Second, the Contingent Valuation (CV) literature has established that asking a series of
questions that progressively narrow the bounds on willingness-to-pay (known as the
double-bounded model) provides more efficient estimates of WTP than asking a yes/no

6

The exceptions are the two surveys conducted by RTI (rows 4 and 5), in which fewer than 50% of
respondents responded that they thought childhood obesity was a “very serious” problem; fewer people
may have agreed with that statement because it was a yes/no question about a strong opinion (“very
serious” instead of “serious”) instead of a question that allowed the respondent to indicate a degree of
agreement.

3

question about a willingness to pay a single amount (Hanemann, Loomis, and Kanninen,
1991).
This paper estimates willingness to pay for reductions in childhood obesity using
the double-bounded Contingent Valuation model. It follows the recommendations of the
NOAA committee on CV (Arrow et al., 1993) and recent guidelines for conducting CV
analyses (Whitehead, 2006).
This paper explores two major research questions. First, how much are people
willing to pay to reduce youth obesity? Within this over-arching question, it is explored
whether willingness to pay varies with characteristics such as household income,
perceptions of youth obesity, opinion of current tax levels, and political affiliation.
The benefits of such an anti-obesity policy to any given voter may vary; there
may be benefits to their relatives or voters may be motivated by altruism for unrelated
children. It is beyond the scope of this paper to disentangle those benefits. The goal of
this paper is to measure voters’ willingness to pay for such a policy, because that can help
guide policymakers’ decisions about whether to enact such policies and what scope of
such policies voters would support.
The second research question is: how do these willingness-to-pay estimates
compare to results of surveys that ask public support for anti-obesity initiatives? Are the
responses to previous surveys that did not ask people to consider the costs of such
policies biased in favor of finding greater support for such policies?
The results of this paper are useful for policymakers because they indicate more
accurately than ever before the extent of voters’ support for anti-obesity policies, and also

4

can provide guidance to policymakers on how much of a tax increase voters would
support in exchange for reductions in childhood obesity.

The Contingent Valuation Method
Policymakers are often interested in how the public values goods and services that
are not traded in the marketplace. These values can be estimated using contingent
valuation (CV) methods, in which survey questions elicit respondents’ willingness to pay
(Michell and Carson, 1989; Carson and Hanemann, 2005; Alberini and Kahn, 2006).
The litigation surrounding the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster led both the state of
Alaska and Exxon to conduct CV studies of the damaged environmental assets and to
assess the accuracy and usefulness of CV studies in general. Around that time, the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) appointed an expert panel
that included the Nobel-Prize winning economists Kenneth Arrow and Robert Solow and
charged it with studying whether CV methods can provide reliable information about
passive-use values.
The NOAA panel concluded that CV methods can generate useful information
(Arrow et al., 1993) and issued the following recommendations to maximize the
reliability of CV estimates: 1) Use of a probability sample; 2) using face-to-face or
telephone interviews but not mail surveys; 3) measuring willingness to pay rather than
willingness to accept7; 4) pretesting of the CV questionnaire; 5) phrasing CV questions in
the form of hypothetical referenda in which respondents are told how much they would

7

Willingness to pay refers to how much a person would pay to reduce something that causes disutility.
Willingness to accept refers to how much the person would have to receive to compensate them for an
increase in something that causes disutility. The two tend not to be equal because of the “endowment
effect”; see Hanemann (1991).

5

have to pay in increased taxes if the measure passed and are then asked to cast a simple
yes or no vote; 6) providing a “would not vote” option in addition to the “yes” and “no”
vote options on the referendum; 7) breaking down willingness-to-pay by a variety of
respondent characteristics such as income, interest, and attitudes; 8) reminding
respondents of their actual budget constraint when considering their willingness to pay.
The survey questions designed for this paper adhered to each of these recommendations.
In recent years, CV has been increasingly applied to topics in health economics
(Donaldson, Mason, and Shackley, 2006; Smith 2003; Olsen and Smith, 2001). In
particular, several recent papers apply the CV method to obesity, estimating willingness
to pay for obesity treatment (Narbro and Sjostrom 2000), community-based weight loss
programs (Roux et al. 2004), bariatric surgery (Finkelstein et al. 2005), and smoking
cessation treatment that does not result in weight gain (Busch et al. 2004). This paper
complements this previous literature in that while others estimated willingness to pay for
treatment of own obesity, this paper estimates adults’ willingness to pay to reduce
childhood obesity. Moreover, rather than valuing a medical procedure, this paper
estimates the willingness to pay for a public policy, which can be interpreted as a
measure of support for the policy.
This paper uses the double-bounded CV model, in which survey respondents are
asked a sequence of questions that progressively narrows down the willingness to pay,
because this method has been shown to generate more efficient estimates than those
based on a single question (Hanemann, Loomis, and Kanninen, 1991). This method is
generally preferred to asking an open-ended question about willingness to pay (Watson
and Ryan 2007). For example, researchers found that people commonly gave “protest

6

answers” to open-ended questions, responding with zeros or extremely high values (Haab
and McConnell, 2002). Asking simple yes/no questions eases the burden on the
respondent, decreasing the number of protest answers, and the “would not vote” option
allows protest answers to be submitted without introducing bias in estimates of WTP.
However, there are also limitations of the double-bounded CV model; for example,
respondents may become indignant because they believe that they struck a deal with their
response to the first question but now are being asked a follow-up question with a
different amount, or may feel guilty at having said no to the first question and therefore
may be more likely to say yes to the second (smaller) amount (Watson and Ryan, 2007).
We assume that each person i has a willingness to pay for reductions in childhood
obesity that is equal to Yi* and is related to the person’s characteristics Xi in the following
way: Yi * = X i β + ε i where εi is assumed to be mean zero and normally distributed. We do
not observe Yi * but we know that the willingness to pay of person i lies in the interval [Yi1,

Yi2] because of the responses they gave to a series of CV questions. Therefore, the
likelihood contribution of the individual is Pr(Yi1 ≤ Yi* ≤ Yi 2 ) or Pr(Yi1 ≤ X i β + ε i ≤ Yi 2 ) .

For left-censored data (for which a lower bound is not known), the likelihood
contribution is Pr( X i β + ε i ≤ Yi 2 ) and for right-censored data (for which an upper bound is
not known) it is Pr(Yi1 ≤ X i β + ε i ) . The maximum likelihood function is estimated using

the interval regression command intreg in STATA 10. Whereas a probit regression
estimates the probability that a latent variable exceeds a certain threshold, the interval
regression estimates the probability that a latent variable exceeds one threshold but is less
than another threshold; i.e., it estimates the probability of the latent variable lying in a

7

certain interval (StataCorp 2007). The regression results are used to estimate individual
WTP; both the mean and median are reported. Bootstrap standard errors (200
replications) are used to calculate the 95% confidence interval on the mean and median
WTP.

Data: Empire State Poll (ESP)

The questions regarding willingness to pay for policies to reduce childhood
obesity were included in the 2006 Empire State Poll (ESP). The Empire State Poll is a
survey of adults (aged 18 and over) who live in New York State that is conducted
annually by the Survey Research Institute at Cornell University.
The ESP sample consists of randomly selected households generated by random
digit dial (RDD) sampling of all telephone exchanges within New York State and
includes all listed and unlisted households. Households from black or Hispanic
neighborhoods were somewhat over-sampled to ensure their proper representation in the
final sample. After a household was selected, a household member who was at least 18
years old was randomly selected from within the household based on who has the most
recent birthday. All respondents had to be residents of New York State. This selection
procedure ensures that every household with a telephone has an equal chance of being
included in the survey; and once a household is selected, each adult in the household has
an equal chance of being chosen for the interview. Full details of the polling
methodology can be found in Nisbet (2006).
Telephone surveys took place between February 2, 2006 and March 19, 2006. All
interviews were conducted using a Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing (CATI)

8

software system. The 2006 Empire State poll had 800 respondents, which implies that
there is only a 5% chance that random variations in the sample cause the results to vary
by more than 3.5 percentage points (Nisbet 2006).
The cooperation rate (total number of survey completions divided by the number
of potential interviews which implies contact was made with a properly selected
respondent) for the ESP 2006 was 62.2%, and the American Association of Public
Opinion Research definition of response rate (total number of survey completions divided
by the total eligible sample) was 25.2%.8 These cooperation and response rates are
consistent with those of other recent surveys of New York State residents including those
by CBS News and the Pew Research Organization (Nisbet 2006).9
Survey response rates, particularly those for random-digit dialing surveys like the
ESP, fell during the 1990s (Biener et al., 2004). This is of potential concern, because if
the non-respondents differ in important ways from respondents then survey results may
be biased. To investigate the impact of increased non-response on survey results, two
recent papers altered response rates by changing the number of repeat attempts at contact
(one experimentally ex ante and another ex post using call-record histories), and both
found little effect of increased non-response on estimates of consumer sentiment (Curtin
et al., 2000) or a wide range of other topics commonly covered in surveys (Keeter et al.,
2000). A comparison of surveys of smoking prevalence over time also found no
8

For each survey, the American Association for Public Opinion Research recommends reporting a host of
response rates, cooperation rates, refusal rates, and contact rates, the definitions of which can be found in
that organization’s Standard Definitions (AAPOR, 2000). For the ESP 2006, response rates 1 and 2 were
both 23.5%, and response rates 3 and 4 were both 25.2%. Cooperation rates 1 and 2 were both 58.7%, and
cooperation rates 3 and 4 were both 62.2%. Refusal rate 1 was 14.3%, refusal rate 2 was 15.3%, and
refusal rate 3 was 17.2%. Contact rate 1 was 40.0%, contact rate 2 was 42.9%, and contact rate 3 was
48.2%.
9
If the ESP did not randomly choose respondents within households and did not utilize unlisted phone
numbers it would likely have a higher contact rate and therefore response rate, although also a less
representative sample (Langer 2003).

9

evidence that increased non-response affected the representation of population subgroups (Biener et al., 2004). Langer (2003) reviews recent research and concludes there
is “no substantial effect of lower response rates on measurements of opinion.” (Langer
2003, p. 17).
The random digit dial of the ESP includes cell phones, but cell phone users tend
to not to participate in phone surveys because it costs them air time. A Pew Research
Center study found that the rise in the percentage of Americans with only a cell phone
(which the Center estimates to be 14% of the public) has a “minimal” impact on survey
results (Pew Research Center, 2008, 2006; 1).
ESP 2006 sample weights are used in each regression so that results are
generalizable to all New York State residents. The willingness to pay of a state’s
population is of interest because virtually all state legislatures are considering enacting
policies to reduce childhood obesity (Cawley and Liu 2008). It is a strength that this
study utilizes a sample that is representative of a state population. Many CV studies use
samples of convenience, producing results that cannot be easily generalized.
The ESP collects a host of demographic, labor market, and other variables. In
addition, each respondent to the ESP 2006 was asked a series of three CV questions to
ascertain their willingness to pay to reduce childhood obesity. Prior to the 2006 ESP, the
Survey Research Institute conducted a pretest of the CV questions; based on the
responses the CV questions were revised (see Appendix for details). In its final form on
the ESP 2006, the opening CV question read:
Suppose there is a new voter referendum in your town. The referendum will enact
policies that will reduce youth obesity in your town by 50% (set aside for now how it will
reduce youth obesity, but assume it will do so with certainty). If the referendum passes,

10

you and everyone else will have to pay $Y more in taxes every year. Given your current
budget, would you vote for or against this referendum?
__ FOR __ AGAINST __ WOULD NOT VOTE

This question adheres to each of the NOAA expert panel recommendations: 1) It
is asked of a probability sample; 2) it is asked through a telephone interview, not a mail
survey; 3) it measures willingness to pay rather than willingness to accept; 4) the CV
questions were pre-tested and revised in light of feedback; 5) the CV questions were
phrased in the form of hypothetical referenda in which respondents are told how much
they would have to pay in increased taxes if the measure passed and are then asked to
cast a simple yes or no vote; 6) a “would not vote” option is provided; 7) later in this
paper we break down estimated willingness-to-pay by a variety of respondent
characteristics such as income, interest, and attitudes; 8) respondents are reminded to
consider their actual budget when deciding their willingness to pay.
The magnitude of the reduction (50%) was selected based on the magnitude of the
increase in childhood obesity in recent years; since 1970, the fraction overweight has
almost quadrupled among children aged 6-11 years (Ogden et al., 2002). In effect, a 50%
reduction from current levels of obesity would eliminate half of that recent rise (i.e.
childhood obesity would have doubled instead of quadrupled since 1970). One might be
concerned that the 50% rise would seem implausible to the respondent, but the magnitude
of change we ask people to value is half of that the respondent has observed since 1970.
In the context of a 300% increase in (i.e., a quadrupling of) childhood obesity, a 50%
change is not unimaginable. Responses to an open-ended question that asked
respondents to explain their answers to the CV questions yielded no evidence that
respondents were concerned about, or distracted by, the magnitude of the reduction in

11

childhood obesity that they were asked to consider (the responses to the open-ended
question, which span 22 pages, are available upon request). These open-ended answers
reveal that overwhelming majority of people did not dismiss the question as implausible
or hard to imagine but based on their answers on a weighing of the costs and benefits of
the referendum.
No specific method of achieving the reduction was specified is because to specify
an arbitrary policy risked leading respondents to focus on the expected effectiveness of
the specific policy than on weighing the specified costs and benefits. The goal of this
paper is to determine how respondents value reductions in childhood obesity, not how
they value a specific anti-obesity policy. Responses to the open-ended question that
asked respondents to explain their answers to the CV questions yielded no evidence that
respondents were concerned or distracted by the lack of a specific policy to achieve the
50 percent reduction in childhood obesity (available upon request).
In the first of the series of CV questions, the value of $Y was $50.10 If
respondents answered that they would vote against the referendum, they were asked a
follow-up question in which they were asked how they would vote if their taxes would
instead rise by a lesser amount. Respondents who answered that they would vote for the
referendum were asked in a follow-up question how they would vote if their taxes would
instead rise by a higher amount. A second follow-up question (the third question in the
series) further narrowed down the respondents’ willingness to pay. Based on their
responses to these three questions, respondents ended up in one of the following

10

Dollar values in the DBDC questions were based on the two surveys that asked about respondents’
support for tax hikes to reduce obesity (Lane, Snell, Perry & Associates 2003; Lee and Oliver 2005). They
were then modified in response to the pre-test by the Survey Research Center.

12

categories of willingness-to-pay in dollars: < 10, (10, 25), (25, 40), (40, 50), (50, 75), (75,
100), (100, 200), > 200; see Figure 1.11
The regressors in the interval regressions include: number of children in the
household and indicator variables for white (omitted category is nonwhite), female
(omitted category male) household income over $50,000 (omitted category is household
income less than $50,000), and whether respondent is obese.12 Respondents are asked to
value a proportional (50%) reduction in childhood obesity; those who perceive that
obesity is a bigger problem are likely to assign a greater value to that reduction. For this
reason the set of regressors includes proxies for the respondent’s perception of obesity: 1)
an indicator for whether the respondent said they believe youth obesity in the U.S. is a
major problem (the omitted category is stating that youth obesity is either a minor
problem or not a problem at all); 2) indicators for whether the respondent thinks youth
obesity is among the most important or least important problems facing American youth
(the omitted category is “somewhere in the middle”); 3) indicators for whether the
respondent said that, of a fixed budget to spend on combating public health problems
facing American youth, youth obesity should receive a greater than even share or less
than even share (the omitted category is an even share relative to other public health
problems); and 4) indicators for whether the respondent thinks obesity is primarily due to
individual choices or genetics (the omitted category is thinking obesity is primarily due to
environment).

11

One could instead define the absolute lower bound as zero, but this would rule out the possibility that
some respondents could be so opposed to the policy that they would have to be paid (in the form of a tax
cut) in order to support the policy.
12
Weight and height are self-reported in the Empire State Poll, so we correct for reporting error in these
variables using validation data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III; see Cawley
and Burkhauser (2006).

13

Political beliefs are also relevant because they relate to preferences for taxes,
public goods, and government intervention. The regressors that proxy for the
respondent’s general political beliefs include: 1) an indicator variable for whether the
respondent rated the tax situation in New York State as poor (the omitted category is
rating it fair, good, or excellent); 2) an indicator variable for whether the respondent selfidentified as liberal, and another for whether respondent self-identified as a conservative
(the omitted category is “middle of the road”); 3) indicator variables for whether the
respondent self-identified as a Democrat or a Republican (the omitted category is
independent of the two major parties). In the base model, all of these variables are
included as regressors. However, there may be collinearity between these different
measures, so alternate models are estimated including just one of these proxies at a time
among the regressors. Table 2 provides summary statistics for the regression sample
used in this paper.

Empirical Results

Figure 1 shows the percentage of respondents whose willingness to pay lies
within each bounds. The mode (36% of respondents) is the lowest category (willing to
pay less than $10 per year) and the next largest group of respondents (15.9%) is in the
highest category (willing to pay at least $200 a year).
Interval regression results are presented in Table 3 (which is split in half for ease
of reading); each model varies in terms of which proxies for support for anti-obesity
policies or political affiliation or philosophy are included. These tables list coefficients,
elasticities (for coefficients that are statistically significant in any model presented in the

14

table), and standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance is indicated using
asterisks. Table 3 column 1 lists results for the baseline model that includes the full set of
regressors. Based on the results of the baseline model, the mean estimated willingness to
pay for a 50% reduction in youth obesity is $46.41; bootstrap standard errors yield a 95%
confidence interval of ($33.45, $59.15). The median willingness to pay is $32. 66 (95%
confidence interval: $17.66, $47.65).
Because the CV questions are hypothetical it is reasonable to ask whether
respondents are giving random answers to get through the survey faster. The NOAA
committee offered two suggestions to address this issue. First, include as an optional
answer “Would not vote”, so people can speed through the survey if they wish without
generating nonsensical WTP (in this study, 0.3 to 2.8 percent of the sample stated they
would not vote). Second, the NOAA committee recommended that researchers
investigate the face validity of the responses. In the present context, that involves testing
whether willingness to pay for reductions in youth obesity varies in logical ways with
observed characteristics, such as household income, opinion of current tax levels, and
perception of whether youth obesity is a major problem.
The results in Table 3 indicate that WTP varies in logical ways with observables13
and therefore has considerable face validity. One might expect that, if such policies are
normal goods, higher-income people would demand more of them. This is confirmed in
column 1: a household income over $50,000 per year is associated with a 39% higher
willingness to pay. Those who perceive obesity is a major problem are estimated to have

13

These same variables are statistically significant if the natural log of the bound rather than the bound in
dollar terms is used to estimate the interval regression. I am not able to compare the mean and median
WTP in each case because of the retransformation issues involved in using the log bound in the interval
regression.

15

an 86% higher willingness to pay. Those who think obesity is among the most important
problems facing American youth are willing to pay 18% more while those who think it is
among the least of the problems facing American youth are willing to pay 32% less.
Those who report that a greater-than-even share of the public health budget should be
devoted to youth obesity as opposed to other youth health concerns have 35% higher
WTP. Those who think the tax situation in New York State is poor are willing to pay
35% less. Self-described liberals are willing to pay 20% more, and Democrats have 32%
higher WTP. In summary, WTP is generally correlated in expected ways with observable
characteristics such as income, perception of obesity, and perception of tax burden, and
political persuasion.
Subsequent columns of Table 3 provide results for more parsimonious models
that include only one of the proxies for support for anti-obesity policies. Because the
proxies tend to be correlated, the magnitude of the elasticities tends to rise in the more
parsimonious models. For example, perceiving obesity to be a major problem is
associated with 86% higher WTP in the base model (column 1) but 200% higher WTP in
a more parsimonious model (column 3). In particular, the magnitude of the results for
political persuasion change considerably because party affiliation (e.g. Democrat,
Republican) is highly correlated with political philosophy (e.g. liberal, conservative). In
a parsimonious model (column 9), Democrats have a 26% higher, and Republicans have
an 18% lower, WTP. Another change in the more parsimonious model is that both
people who think obesity is due to individual choices and people who think obesity is due
to genetics have significantly lower WTP relative to people who think obesity is
primarily due to the environment (column 6).

16

Discussion

The rise in childhood obesity has led governments to consider a variety of policy
responses (Cawley and Liu 2008). The critical information needed to guide these
decisions include: 1) what policies are effective and cost-effective; and 2) how much are
taxpayers willing to pay for these programs? Information on the cost-effectiveness of
anti-obesity programs is collected elsewhere (CDC 2008; Cawley 2007). This study
provides the other critical information: how much taxpayers are willing to pay for
policies to reduce childhood obesity.
The WTP data collected have considerable face validity; a higher willingness to
pay for reductions in childhood obesity is reported, on average, by those who have higher
household income, perceive childhood obesity as a major problem, and self-identify as
liberal or a Democrat. Lower willingness to pay is reported, on average, by those who
think childhood obesity is one of the least important problems facing American youth,
who disapprove of their current tax burden, and who self-identify as Republican. The
association of party affiliation with WTP for reductions in childhood obesity is consistent
with the finding that enactment of a law to reduce childhood obesity is 20% more likely
in states headed by a Democratic governor and that enactment of a school nutrition law is
19.4% less likely in states with a Republican-controlled legislature (Cawley and Liu
2008). The results also suggest that public health advocates might achieve greater
success by targeting their legislative initiatives to localities or states in which the median
voter is liberal or Democrat.

17

The median voter model theorem implies that, under certain conditions, the
outcome of majority voting is that expenditures will equal those preferred by the median
voter (Arrow 1951). The estimates of this paper imply that, in New York State, the
median willingness to pay for a 50% reduction in childhood obesity is $32.66 (95%
confidence interval: $17.66, $47.65) per year.
Two published surveys found that substantial percentages of American reported
that they were willing to pay higher taxes for policies to reduce childhood obesity. Their
questions are not directly comparable to the CV questions in this paper, in part because
neither previous survey explicitly stated the benefit of the policy in terms of a specific
reduction in childhood obesity. However, even if respondents interpreted both proposed
policies as generating a 50% reduction in childhood obesity, the results of this paper still
imply a lower WTP than that found by either previous study. While the Harvard Forums
on Health poll found that 42% said they would pay more than $100 a year in taxes to
reduce childhood obesity (Lane, Snell, Perry & Associates, 2003), in the ESP 2006 only
29% reported a WTP in that range. Lee and Oliver (2005) find that 64% were willing to
pay $50 or more a year (for more nutritious school lunches), whereas in the ESP 2006
only 45.7% had a WTP in that range. To the extent that respondents to the previous
surveys were expecting less than a 50% reduction in youth obesity as a result of these
proposed policies (which seems likely), the gap between the WTP found by this paper
and those implied by earlier papers widens further. While caution must be used when
making comparisons across samples and survey questions, these discrepancies suggest
that using simple survey questions may seriously overstate taxpayer support for antiobesity policies.

18

Despite the fact that the WTP found in this paper are somewhat less than that
implied by earlier surveys, the aggregate WTP is substantial. The mean WTP in this
study was $46.41 (95% CI: $33.45, $59.15). Many CV surveys are administered to
convenience samples, so it is a strength of this paper that the data, from the Empire State
Poll of New York, generalize to the entire state of New York. The results of this paper
imply a total WTP by New York State adult residents of $690.6 million per year (95%
CI: $497.7, $880.2) for a 50% reduction in youth obesity.
A limitation of this study is that it could not be conducted with nationally
representative data. It is not clear whether the mean and median WTP estimates for New
York State residents are higher or lower than those for Americans as a whole. On the one
hand, New York State residents are heavily taxed and therefore at the margin may be less
willing to pay for any public policies than residents of other states. On the other hand,
New York State is also relatively liberal and may have, unconditionally, stronger
preferences for these types of policies. Keeping all of these caveats in mind, if for the
sake of argument the WTP estimate was applied to the entire U.S. it implies a national
WTP of $10.6 billion (95% CI: $7.6, $13.5).14
Natural comparisons for these total WTP are the current spending by the New
York State and U.S. Federal governments on anti-obesity policies, but such estimates do
not exist.15 However, these aggregate WTP estimates are clearly far in excess of what is

14

If the mean WTP is interpreted as the WTP of the entire household rather than just the respondent, then
the total WTP by all New York State households is estimated to be $327.7 million per year, and the total
WTP by all U.S. households is estimated to be $4.8 billion.
15
While the total amount spent on all anti-obesity programs is not known, it is straightforward to find the
budgets for specific programs. For example, the U.S. government spent $340 million over five years – the
most that Congress ever appropriated to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for a single
initiative - on the marketing campaign VERB: It’s What You Do (Collins and Wechsler 2008; Wong et al.
2008). (Berkowitz et al. (2008) and Bauman et al. (2008) provide evidence that the VERB campaign
increased youth physical activity.) A more typical budget is the $1 million spent by the National Cancer

19

currently being spent; for example, federal spending on all public health (all age groups,
all public health challenges) through the CDC in 2005 was $20.99 per capita (IOM 2007),
which equals $6.2 billion.
A related question is whether there are effective programs on which to spend tax
dollars. Two school-based interventions have been shown to be cost-effective at
preventing childhood obesity by focusing on improving nutrition and increasing physical
activity: Planet Health (Wang et al. 2003) and the Coordinated Approach to Child Health
or CATCH (Brown et al. 2007). However, many other candidate interventions lack
evidence of efficacy or cost-effectiveness (Cawley 2007) so policymakers should be wary
of misallocating resources.
One might wonder why respondents are willing to pay anything at all to reduce
childhood obesity. Suggestive evidence on this question comes from an open-ended
question asked of all respondents after the final CV question: “Please explain why you
would vote for (against) the referendum in this case.” Answers indicate that to some
extent, people perceive benefits to their own children. The answers of others indicate
altruism, e.g.: “I think it is for the public good.” Others state that it may be cheaper to
address it today than pay higher insurance or medical costs tomorrow.
Given the motivation of some respondents of avoiding external costs, we next
compare the total WTP of New Yorkers for reductions in childhood obesity to the
expected savings that would result from the reduction in childhood obesity due to lower
external costs imposed through public health insurance (Medicaid and the State
Children’s Health Insurance Program or SCHIP) or private group health insurance. If
Institute for its 5-A-Day Educational Campaign to increase fruit and vegetable consumption (IOM 2007).
The Fresh Program, which supplies fresh fruit and vegetables to schools to improve the quality of school
meals, received $50 million in Federal funding in 2005 (IOM 2007).

20

New Yorkers are well-informed about the external costs of childhood obesity, then we
should find that the total WTP for obesity reductions is at least as high as the external
cost savings that would result. The external costs of childhood obesity can be
decomposed into two categories: the external costs imposed during childhood, and those
imposed during adulthood. We consider each of these in turn.
We first calculate the external costs associated with obese children today.
Johnson, McInnes, and Shinogle (2006) calculate that each overweight child each year
causes $12.09 (in 1998 dollars) in additional health care expenditures; adjusted to May
2006 dollars it equals $15.11. I assume that all of these additional costs represent
externalities imposed on the public through public health insurance programs like
Medicaid and the State Children’s Health Insurance Program or through private group
health insurance (no group health insurance adjusts premiums to reflect the clinical
weight classification of covered minors).
We next multiply the $15.11 per-overweight-child external cost by the number of
overweight children in New York State. The U.S. Census estimates that New York was
home to 4.5 million youths under the age of 18 in the year 2005, and the CDC reports that
11% of New York State high school students were clinically overweight in 2005 (CDC,
2006). Assuming that the prevalence of overweight among high school students was the
same among younger youths, the total number of overweight New York State youths is
roughly 495,000. Multiplying the number of overweight New York youths by the $15.11
in additional health care costs for each overweight youth generates an external cost of
childhood obesity in New York State of $7.5 million. The CV question asked about

21

reducing childhood obesity by half, so the associated savings would presumably be half
the total external costs, or $3.8 million.
We next consider the savings associated with decreased adult obesity in the
future. An important statistic for this calculation is the percentage of adult obesity that
can be attributed to childhood obesity (the Population Attributable Risk); in the literature
review by Serdula et al. (1993) the average published estimate is 13.0%. We assume that
if childhood obesity fell by half, adult obesity would fall by 6.5% (half of 13.0%) in the
long run. Finkelstein et al. (2004) estimate that the total external costs of adult obesity in
New York State in 2003 were $4.93 billion in 2003 dollars (which includes costs to both
Medicaid and Medicare). In 2006 dollars this equals $5.426 billion. (Clearly, the
consequences of obesity for health expenditures are much greater for adults than
children.) A 6.5% reduction in adult obesity is expected to save 6.5% of that amount, or
$352.7 million. However, a 6.5% reduction in adult obesity will not occur immediately;
that is the long-run reduction after today’s youth have matured through the age
distribution. As a result, the value today of these future savings is far less than $352.7
million. Moreover, we acknowledge that projections of savings in future decades are
likely to be highly inaccurate because of future changes in costs and technology.
These estimates of savings from external costs help put in context the willingness
of New York State residents to pay for reductions in childhood obesity. Although the
savings today from reducing childhood obesity by half is estimated to be $3.8 million per
year, New Yorkers are willing to pay $690.6 million per year for such a reduction. Even
when one adds in the undiscounted savings from decreased external costs associated with

22

less adult obesity in the future, the annual savings total $356.5 million, still far less than
New Yorkers’ WTP.
Limitations of this paper include that variation in responses may be driven in part
by different estimates of the baseline prevalence of childhood obesity. To some extent
these differences are controlled for using the regressors that reflect the respondent’s
opinion of whether childhood obesity is a major problem, among the most important
health problems facing youth today, and the extent to which reducing childhood obesity
should be a budget priority.
Another limitation of CV in general is the possibility of protest bids introducing
bias. To minimize such bias the ex ante approach of this paper is to ask DBDC questions
instead of open-ended questions that could result in excess zeros or implausibly large
responses (Haddad and Howarth 2006).16 In addition, this paper used another
recommended strategy to decrease such bias (Arrow 1993): allowing respondents to state
“would not vote”. The percentage of respondents taking that option ranged from 0.3 to
2.8 percent. These respondents were dropped from the sample.17 What is unknowable is
the percentage of respondents who voted but in a way inconsistent with their true
valuation. Research on CV methodology has not resolved how extensive this problem is
and whether it has a systematic directional bias (Boyle 2004).
We also acknowledge limitations of the double-bounded CV model. While it is
generally perceived to be preferable to a single-question CV model (Hanemann, Loomis,
and Kanninen, 1991; Haab and McConnell, 2002), asking follow-up questions could
16

Another strategy for minimizing such bias that was not used in this survey is to use a “cheap talk design”
– explicitly raise the issue of such bias with the respondent (Cummings and Taylor 1999).
17
There is no well-established theoretical basis for dropping nonresponses and others impute the value of
non-answers but this is considered dangerous because it yields a dataset that does not include the same
variability that would be found in a complete dataset (Haddad and Howarth 2006).

23

introduce bias by provoking indignation or guilt (Watson and Ryan, 2007). Despite these
limitations, this paper provides insights into voter preferences for anti-obesity policies
and associated tax increases and, therefore, useful information for advocates and
policymakers.

24

Works Cited

Alberini, Anna, and James R. Kahn (eds.). 2006. Handbook on Contingent Valuation.
(Northampton MA: Edward Elgar).
American Association for Public Opinion Research. 2000. Standard Definitions: Final
Dispositions of Case Codes and Outcome Rates for Surveys. (Lenexa, Kansas:
The American Association for Public Opinion Research).
Arrow, Kenneth, Robert Solow, Paul R. Portney, Edward E. Leamer, Roy Radner, and
Howard Schuman. 1993. “Report of the NOAA Panel on Contingent Valuation.”
Arrow, Kenneth. 1951. Social Choice and Individual Values. (New Haven: Yale
University Press).
Bauman, Adrian, Heather R. Bowles, Marian Huhman, Carrie D. Heitzler, Neville Owen,
Ben J. Smith, Bill Reger-Nash. 2008. “Testing a Hierarchy-of-Effects Model:
Pathways from Awareness to Outcomes in the VERB™ Campaign 2002–2003.”
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 34(6 Supplement 1): S249-S256.
Berkowitz, Judy M., Marian Huhman, Mary Jo Nolin. 2008. “Did Augmenting the
VERB™ Campaign Advertising in Select Communities Have an Effect on
Awareness, Attitudes, and Physical Activity?” American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, 34(6 Supplement 1): S257-S266.
Biener, Lois, Catherine A. Garrett, Elizabeth A. Gilpin, Anthony M. Roman, and Douglas
B. Currivan. 2004. “Consequences of Declining Survey Response Rates for
Smoking Prevalence Estimates.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine,
27(3): 254-257.
Boyle, Kevin J. 2004. “Contingent Valuation in Practice.” Chapter 5 in: A Primer on
Nonmarket Valuation, edited by Patricia A. Champ, Kevin J. Boyle, and Thomas
C. Brown. (Boston MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers).
Brown, Henry Shelton III, Adriana Perez, Yen-Peng Li, Deanna M. Hoelscher, Steven H.
Kelder, and Roberto Rivera. 2007. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition
and Physical Activity, 4:47.
Busch, Susan H., Tracy A. Falba, Noelia Duchovny, Mireia Jofre-Bonet, Stephanie S.
O’Malley, and Jody L. Sindelar. 2004. “Value to Smokers of Improved
Cessation Products: Evidence From a Willingness-to-Pay Survey.” Nicotine &
Tobacco Research, 6(4): 631-639.
Carson, Richard T. and W. Michael Hanemann. 2005. “Contingent Valuation” Chapter
17 in Handbook of Environmental Economics, Volume 2, edited by Karl-Goran
Maler and Jeffrey R. Vincent. (New York: Elsever North-Holland).
Cawley, John. 2007. “The Cost Effectiveness of Programs to Prevent or Reduce
Obesity: The State of the Literature and a Future Research Agenda.” Archives of
Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 161(6): 611-614.
Cawley, John, and Richard V. Burkhauser. 2006. “Beyond BMI: The Value of More
Accurate Measures of Fatness and Obesity in Social Science Research.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper # 12291.
Cawley, John, and Feng Liu. 2008. “Correlates of State Legislative Action to Prevent
Childhood Obesity.” Obesity, 16(1): 162-167.

25

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2006. “The Obesity Epidemic and New
York Students.” World wide web content:
http://www.cdc.gov/HealthyYouth/overweight/pdf/NewYork.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2008. Guide to Community Preventive
Services. World wide web content: http://www.thecommunityguide.org/
Accessed February 8, 2008.
Collins, Janet L. and Howell Wechsler. 2008. “The VERB Campaign.” American
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 34(6 Supplement 1): S171-S172.
Cummings, Ronald G. and Laura O. Taylor. 1999. “Unbiased Value Estimates for
Environmental Goods: A Cheap Talk Design for the Contingent Valuation
Method.” American Economic Review, 89(3): 649-665.
Curtin, Richard, Stanley Presser, and Eleanor Singer. “The Effects of Response Rate
Changes on the Index of Consumer Sentiment.” Public Opinion Quarterly, 64:
413-428.
Donaldson, Cam, Helen Mason, and Phil Shackley. 2006. “Contingent Valuation in
Health Care.” In The Elgar Companion to Health Economics, Andrew M. Jones
(editor). (Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar).
Evans, W. Douglas, Jeanette M. Renaud, Eric Finkelstein, Douglas B. Kamerow, and
Derek S. Brown. 2006. “Changing Perceptions of the Childhood Obesity
Epidemic.” American Journal of Health Behavior, 30(2): 167-176.
Evans, W. Douglas, Eric A. Finkelstein, Douglas B. Kamerow, and Jeanette M. Renaud.
2005. “Public Perceptions of Childhood Obesity.” American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, 28(1): 26-32.
Finkelstein, Eric A., Derek S. Brown, Yoav Avidor, and Annie H. Takeuchi. 2005. “The
Role of Price, Sociodemographic Factors, and Health in the Demand for Bariatric
Surgery.” American Journal of Managed Care, 11(10): 630-637.
Finkelstein, Eric A., Ian C. Fiebelkorn, and Guijing Wang. 2004. “State-Level Estimates
of Annual Medical Expenditures Attributable to Obesity.” Obesity Research,
12(1): 18-24.
Gullo, Kelly. 2005. “Most of the American Public, Including a Majority of Parents,
Believe that Childhood Obesity in the U.S. Is a Major Problem.” Wall Street
Journal Online, 4(3) February 15.
Haab, Timothy C. and Kenneth E. McConnell. 2002. Valuing Environmental and
Natural Resources: The Econometrics of Non-Market Valuation. (Northampton
MA: Edward Elgar).
Haddad, Brent and Richard Howarth. 2006. “Protest Bids, Commensurability, and
Substitution: Contingent Valuation and Ecological Economics.” Chapter 6 in
Alberini, Anna, and James R. Kahn (eds.). Handbook on Contingent Valuation.
(Northampton MA: Edward Elgar).
Hanemann, Michael, John Loomis, and Barbara Kanninen. 1991. “Statistical Efficiency
of Double-Bounded Dichotomous Choice Contingent Valuation.” American
Journal of Agricultural Economics, 73: 1255-1263.
Hanemann, W. Michael. 1991. “Willingness to Pay and Willingness to Accept: How
Much Can They Differ?” American Economic Review, 81(3): 635-647.
Institute of Medicine. 2005. Preventing Childhood Obesity: Health in the Balance.
(National Academies Press: Washington, D.C.).

26

Institute of Medicine. 2007. Progress in Preventing Childhood Obesity: How Do We
Measure Up? (National Academies Press: Washington, D.C.).
Johnson, Eric, Melayne Morgan McInnes, and Judith A. Shinogle. 2006. “What is the
Economic Cost of Overweight Children?” Eastern Economic Journal, 32(1):
171-187.
Keeter, Scott, Carolyn Miller, Andrew Kohut, Robert M. Groves, and Stanley Presser.
2000. “Consequences of Reducing Nonresponse in a National Telephone
Survey.” Public Opinion Quarterly, 64: 125-148.
Lane Snell Perry & Associates. 2003. “Obesity as a Public Health Issue: A Look at
Solutions.” Press Release.
Langer, Gary. 2003. “About Response Rates: Some Unresolved Questions.” Public
Perspective, May/June, pp. 16-18.
Mitchell, Robert Cameron, and Richard T. Carson. 1989. Using Surveys to Value Public
Goods: The Contingent Valuation Method. (Washington DC: Resources for the
Future).
Narbro, Kristina, and Lars Sjostrom. 2000. “Willingness to Pay for Obesity Treatment.”
International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care, 16(1): 50-59.
Nisbet, Erik. 2006. “New York Opinion Index. Empire State Poll 2006. Report 1:
Introduction and Methodology.” Cornell University Survey Research Institute.
World wide web content:
http://sri.cornell.edu/sri/files/esp/Report_1_2006_Intro_Method.pdf
Ogden, Cynthia L., Katherine M. Flegal, Margaret D. Carroll, and Clifford L. Johnson.
2002. "Prevalence and Trends in Overweight Among US Children and
Adolescents, 1999-2000." Journal of the American Medical Association,
288(14): 1728-1732.
Ogden, Cynthia L., Margaret D. Carroll, Lester R. Curtin, Margaret A. McDowell,
Carolyn J. Tabak, and Katherine M. Flegal. 2006. "Prevalence of Overweight
and Obesity in the United States, 1999-2004." Journal of the American Medical
Association, 295(13): 1594-1555.
Olsen, Jan Abel, and Richard D. Smith. 2001. “Theory Versus Practice: A Review of
‘Willingness-to-Pay’ in Health and Health Care.” Health Economics, 10:39-52.
Pew Research Center for the People & The Press. 2008. Ways of Coping with a
Growing Population Segment: the Impact of “Cell-Onlys” on Public Opinion
Polling.” World wide wbe content. http://peoplepress.org/reports/display.php3?ReportID=391
Pew Research Center for the People & The Press. 2006. “The Cell Phone Challenge to
Survey Research: National Polls Not Undermined by Growing Cell-Only
Population.” World wide web content. http://peoplepress.org/reports/display.php3?ReportID=276
Roux, Larissa, Christina Ubach, Cam Donaldson, and Mandy Ryan. 2004. “Valuing the
Benefits of Weight Loss Programs: An Application of the Discrete Choice
Experiment.” Obesity Research, 12(8): 1342-1351.
San Jose Mercury News / Kaiser Family Foundation. 2004. “Survey on Childhood
Obesity: Summary Document and Chartpack.” March.

27

Serdula MK, Ivery D, Coates RJ, Freedman DS, Williamson DF, and Byers T. 1993.
“Do Obese Children Become Obese Adults? A Review of the Literature.”
Preventive Medicine, 22(2):167-77.
Smith, Richard D. 2003. “Construction of the Contingent Valuation Market in Health
Care: A Critical Assessment.” Health Economics, 12: 609-628.
StataCorp. 2007. Stata Base Reference Manual, Volume 2 I-P Release 10. (Stata Press:
College Station TX).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2000. Healthy People 2010:
Understanding and Improving Health, 2nd Edition. Washington D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2002. “2000 CDC Growth Charts for
the United States: Methods and Development.” Vital and National Health
Statistics, Series 11, Number 246, May.
Wang, Guijing, and William H. Dietz. 2002. “Economic Burden of Obesity in Youths
Aged 6 to 17 Years: 1979-1999.” Pediatrics, 109(5): 81-86.
Wang LY, Yang Q, Lowry R, and Wechsler H. Economic analysis of a school-based
obesity prevention program. Obesity Research, 2003; 11(11): 1313-1324.
Wong, Faye L., Michael Greenwell, Suzanne Gates, Judy M. Berkowitz. 2008. “It's
What You Do!: Reflections on the VERB™ Campaign.” American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, 34(6 Supplement 1): S175-S182.
Watson, Verity and Mandy Ryan. 2007. “Exploring Preference Anomalies in Double
Bounded Contingent Valuation.” Journal of Health Economics, 26: 463-482.
Whitehead, John C. 2006. “A Practitioner’s Primer on the Contingent Valuation
Method,” Chapter 3 in Alberini, Anna, and James R. Kahn (eds.). Handbook on
Contingent Valuation. (Northampton MA: Edward Elgar).
Widmeyer Polling & Research. 2003. Summary of Study Findings: Americans Attitudes
on Fighting Obesity.” Press Release.

28

Appendix
Modifications of Survey Based on Pre-test

The Empire State Poll conducted a pretest of the CV questions in January 2006;
23 individuals were interviewed. They were administered draft versions of the CV
questions and were asked to explain why they responded as they did. The pretest
respondents’ answers regarding why they would vote for or against the hypothetical
referendum in the willingness-to-pay question indicated that they were weighing the costs
and benefits of the proposal. Examples:
* I think the $50 is too excessive and the $10 range I could cope with.
* I am an endocrinologist and I see it all of the time. I think it is a big problem
and in the long run it will cost a lot more if we simply let it go.
* We are taxed virtually to death where we live. A little more here and a little
more there add up.
* I feel it's each person's own responsibility, so other people shouldn't have to
pay.
* It gets out of hand for too much money. We have to put a cap on spending.
Based on these responses, respondents appeared to understand the tradeoff they were
being asked to consider. A similar open-ended question was included on the main ESP
2006 survey, and the responses again confirmed that respondents appeared to understand
the tradeoff they were being asked to consider. A copy of the responses to this openended question is available upon request.
The pretest respondents’ answers were used to modify the questionnaire in two
ways. First, interviewers reported that respondents were asking how the policies on the
referendum would reduce youth obesity. To address this, the question was revised to
read in part “(set aside for now how it will reduce youth obesity, but assume it will do so
with certainty)”. Second, the follow-up CV questions were reworded to clarify that the
extra amount will have to be paid every year in higher taxes, which made them consistent
with the original question.
An open-ended question that asked respondents to explain their answers to the CV
questions was also asked on the actual 2006 Empire State Poll. These answers are also
consistent with respondents weighing the costs and benefits of the proposed referendum,
and answers frequently refer to either the level of existing taxes, the benefits of
preventing childhood obesity, or whether it is appropriate for government to address the
problem of childhood obesity. The answers to this open-ended question, which span 22
pages, are available upon request.

29

Figure 1: Sequence of Contingent Valuation Questions In Empire State Poll 2006
Regression Sample of N=477
Yes

> 200

N=76
15.9%

(100,200)

63
13.2%

(75,100)

28
5.9%

(50,75)

51
10.7%

(40,50)

19
4.0%

(25,40)

37
7.8%

(10,25)

30
6.3%

< 10

173
36.3%

No

$200
Yes

$100
Yes

No

$75

No

s
Ye

$50
Yes

No

$40

No

Yes

$25
No

Yes

$10

No

Notes: At each node, respondents were asked whether they would vote for a referendum to enact anti-obesity policies that would reduce childhood obesity by
half if as a consequence of passage they would have to pay an additional amount in annual taxes equal to the amount listed at that node. The sequence of three
questions gives us bounds on the respondent’s willingness to pay for such policies.

30

Table 1: Recent Surveys on Significance of Childhood Obesity
Study
Number
1

Researching
Institution
American Public
Health
Association

2

Harvard Forums
on Health

3

San Jose Mercury
News/Kaiser
Family
Foundation
Research Triangle
Institute

4

5

Research Triangle
Institute

6

Wall Street
Journal

7

Cornell University

Pollster

Sample
Size
600

Sample
Representative?
Yes – of U.S.

Dates of
Survey
March 2003

Lane Snell Perry &
Associates

1,002

No

May-June
2003

International
Communications
Research

1,175

Yes – of San
Francisco Bay
Area

Nov – Dec
2003

Odom Survey Research
Institute at the
University of North
Carolina
Odom Survey Research
Institute at the
University of North
Carolina
Harris Interactive

1,010

Yes – of U.S.

Jan 17 –
March 6,
2004

1,139

Yes – of U.S.

Sept – Oct
2004

47.4% perceive childhood
overweight and obesity to
be a very serious problem.

Evans et al.
(2006)

2,387

No

Feb 4-8,
2005

Gullo (2005)

800

Yes – of New
York State

Feb 2 –
March 19,
2006

77% believe childhood
obesity is a major problem
and an additional 21%
believe it is a minor
problem.
83% believe youth obesity
is a major problem and an
additional 13.3% believe it
is a minor problem.

Widmeyer Polling &
Research

ILR Survey Research
Institute at Cornell
University

31

Results

Citation

82% concerned about
childhood obesity, and 89%
believe it is a serious
problem
74% believe childhood
obesity is a major problem.

Widmeyer
Polling &
Research (2003)

69% describe youth obesity
as a major problem and an
additional 26% believe it is
a minor problem
41.5% perceive childhood
overweight and obesity to
be a very serious problem.

Lane Snell
Perry &
Associates
(2003)
San Jose
Mercury News
(2004)
Evans et al.,
(2005)

This paper

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Empire State Poll Regression Sample
Variable

N

Mean

Standard
Deviation
68.16

Minimum

Maximum

Lower Bound of Willingness to
304
92.55
10
200
Pay
Upper Bound of Willingness to
401
60.19
66.65
10
200
Pay
Age
477
45.95
15.79
18
88
White
477
.77
.42
0
1
Female
477
.50
.50
0
1
Obese
477
.28
.45
0
1
Number of Kids in Household
477
.81
1.15
0
8
Household Income Over $50,000
477
.51
.50
0
1
Say Childhood Obesity is a Major
477
.81
.39
0
1
Problem
Think Youth Obesity Among Most
477
.21
.41
0
1
Important Problems Facing
American Youth
Think Youth Obesity Among Least
477
.24
.43
0
1
Important Problems Facing
American Youth
US Should Devote Relatively
477
.39
.49
0
1
Large Share of Public Health
Budget to Obesity
US Should Devote Relatively
477
.40
.49
0
1
Small Share of Public Health
Budget to Obesity
Say Obesity Primarily Due to
477
.61
.49
0
1
Individual Choices
Say Obesity Primarily Due to
477
.14
.34
0
1
Genetics
Rate Tax Situation in NY State as
477
.58
.49
0
1
Poor
Liberal
477
.37
.48
0
1
Conservative
477
.34
.48
0
1
Democrat
477
.43
.50
0
1
Republican
477
.27
.44
0
1
Note: if lower bound of willingness to pay is less than $10, it is set to missing. Likewise,
if upper bound of willingness to pay is over $200, it is set to missing. All 477
observations are used in the regressions reported in Tables 3 and 4.

32

Table 3: Interval Regression Results of
Willingness to Pay for 50% Reduction in Childhood Obesity

Age
Age Squared
White

Female
Obese

Number of Kids in Household
Household Income > $50,000

Believe Obesity is a Major Problem

Think Obesity Among Most Important Problems

Think Obesity Among Least Important Problems

Prefer Large Public Health Budget for Obesity

(1)
1.44
(2.05)
-0.02
(0.02)
22.63*
e = .35
(12.85)
-3.24
(11.73)
27.60**
e = .17
(12.91)
7.32
(5.70)
35.39***
e = .39
(12.46)
48.99***
e = .86
(18.44)
39.20**
e = .18
(17.08)
-62.73***
e = -.32
(15.91)
40.68**
e = .35

33

(2)
1.26
(2.22)
-0.01
(0.02)
-3.39
e = -.05
(13.81)
8.93
(13.22)
12.14
e = .07
(14.01)
9.68
(6.16)
37.51***
e = .39
(13.54)

(3)
0.40
(2.08)
-0.00
(0.02)
-3.29
e = -.05
(13.51)
9.52
(12.69)
20.60
e = .12
(13.33)
9.50
(5.90)
33.64***
e = .36
(12.94)
115.81***
e = 2.00
(17.99)

(4)
1.91
(2.10)
-0.02
(0.02)
3.64
e = .05
(13.01)
10.83
(12.33)
26.18*
e = .15
(13.47)
7.58
(6.03)
33.11**
e = .35
(12.82)

(5)
0.12
(2.17)
-0.00
(0.02)
6.69
e = .10
(13.78)
3.88
(12.40)
14.89
e = .09
(13.11)
5.21
(5.95)
46.26***
e = .49
(13.05)

66.61***
e = .29
(17.04)
-94.02***
e = -.45
(16.09)
49.97***
e = .42

Prefer Small Public Health Budget for Obesity

Think Obesity Due to Individual Choice
Think Obesity Due to Genetics
Rate Tax Situation in NYS as Poor

Liberal

Conservative
Democrat

Republican
Constant
Observations

(16.79)
-22.86
e = -.19
(17.10)
-3.92
(14.27)
0.27
(19.39)
-29.45**
e = -.35
(12.12)
25.40*
e=.20
(15.03)
-6.61
(16.43)
32.81**
e = .32
(14.31)
9.63
(17.82)
-75.92
(56.82)
477

(17.43)
-62.16***
e = -.51
(17.54)

-20.90
(49.33)
477

-90.61*
(48.21)
477

-26.48
(46.55)
477

8.60
(51.52)
477

Notes:
1) Elasticities appear below coefficient point estimates for coefficients that are ever statistically significant.
2) Reference person is non-white non-obese male with household income under $50,000 per year who thinks youth obesity is either a minor problem or not
a problem at all, thinks youth obesity is “somewhere in the middle” of all problems facing American youth, thinks youth obesity should receive an even
share of the public health budget devoted to youth health problems, thinks obesity is primarily due to the environment, rates the tax situation in NYS as
better than poor, and is a middle-of-the-road independent.
3) Standard errors appear in parentheses
4) Asterisks indicate statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.01
5) For more detail on independent variables, see Table 2 and the text.

34

35

Table 3 (continued): Interval Regression Results of
Willingness to Pay for 50% Reduction in Childhood Obesity

Age
Age Squared
White

Female
Obese

Number of Kids in Household

Household Income > $50,000

Believe Obesity is a Major Problem

Think Obesity Among Most Important Problems

Think Obesity Among Least Important Problems

Prefer Large Public Health Budget for Obesity

(1)
reprinted
1.44
(2.05)
-0.02
(0.02)
22.63*
e = .35
(12.85)
-3.24
(11.73)
27.60**
e = .17
(12.91)
7.32
e = .13
(5.70)
35.39***
e = .39
(12.46)
48.99***
e = .86
(18.44)
39.20**
e = .18
(17.08)
-62.73***
e = -.32
(15.91)
40.68**

36

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

1.05
(2.21)
-0.01
(0.02)
-5.67
e = -.08
(13.62)
5.41
(13.08)
16.06
e = .09
(14.19)
11.13*
e = .18
(6.11)
33.23**
e = .35
(13.59)

1.85
(2.17)
-0.02
(0.02)
4.20
e = .06
(13.88)
2.25
(13.28)
14.20
e = .08
(14.08)
10.22*
e = .17
(6.19)
37.03***
e = .39
(13.42)

1.06
(2.21)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.85
e = .01
(13.80)
3.23
(13.22)
10.61
e = .06
(14.05)
10.90*
e = .33
(5.97)
31.59**
e = .33
(13.58)

1.32
(2.22)
-0.01
(0.02)
11.59
e = .17
(13.92)
4.39
(13.03)
10.76
e = .06
(13.92)
10.87*
e = .42
(6.38)
39.65***
e = .42
(13.42)

Prefer Small Public Health Budget for Obesity

Think Obesity Due to Individual Choice

Think Obesity Due to Genetics

Rate Tax Situation in NYS as Poor

Liberal

Conservative
Democrat

Republican

Constant
Observations

e = .35
(16.79)
-22.86
e = -.19
(17.10)
-3.92
e = -.05
(14.27)
0.27
e = .00
(19.39)
-29.45**
e = -.35
(12.12)
25.40*
e = .20
(15.03)
-6.61
(16.43)
32.81**
e = .32
(14.31)
9.63
e = .05
(17.82)
-75.92
(56.82)
477

-41.62***
e = -.52
(15.76)
-38.67*
e = -.11
(21.11)
-46.60***
e = -.53
(13.45)
40.05**
e = .30
(16.19)
-18.83
(16.72)

15.53
(50.84)
477

-8.68
(48.43)
477

-22.50
(48.56)
477

27.41*
e = .26
(15.06)
-34.51*
e = -.18
(18.55)
-38.92
(51.03)
477

Notes:
1) Elasticities appear below coefficient point estimates for coefficients that are ever statistically significant.
2) Reference person is non-white non-obese male with household income under $50,000 per year who thinks youth obesity is either a minor problem or not
a problem at all, thinks youth obesity is “somewhere in the middle” of all problems facing American youth, thinks youth obesity should receive an even
share of the public health budget devoted to youth health problems, thinks obesity is primarily due to the environment, rates the tax situation in NYS as
better than poor, and is a middle-of-the-road independent.

37

3) Standard errors appear in parentheses
4) Standard errors appear in parentheses
5) Asterisks indicate statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.01

38

