                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE CORPORATE GOVERNANCE ROLE OF
                          THE MEDIA: EVIDENCE FROM RUSSIA

                                          Alexander Dyck
                                         Natalya Volchkova
                                           Luigi Zingales

                                        Working Paper 12525
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12525


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2006




Alexander Dyck thanks the Gamma Foundation, the Division of Research, Harvard Business School, and the
Rotman School of Management for financial support. Luigi Zingales thanks the Gamma Foundation, the
CRSP center, and the George Stigler Center at the University of Chicago for financial support. We thank
Beatriz Armendariz, Stefano della Vigna. Andrei Shleifer, Andrei Simonov and participants and seminars
at Dartmouth, Harvard, Stockholm School of Economics and the NBER for very useful comments. We thank
Mehmet Beceren and Victor Xin for their research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Alexander Dyck, Natalya Volchkova and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Corporate Governance Role of the Media: Evidence from Russia
Alexander Dyck, Natalya Volchkova and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 12525
September 2006
JEL No. G3, O16

                                          ABSTRACT


We study the effect of media coverage on corporate governance by focusing on Russia in the period
1999-2002. This setting offers us three ideal conditions for such a study: plenty of corporate
governance violations, no alternative mechanisms to address them, and the presence of an investment
fund (the Hermitage) that actively lobbies the international press to shame companies perpetrating
those violations. We find that Hermitage’s lobbying is effective in increasing the coverage of
corporate governance violations in the Anglo-American press. We also find that coverage in the
Anglo-American press increases the probability that a corporate governance violation is reversed.
This effect is present even when we instrument coverage with an exogenous determinant, i.e. the
Hermitage’s portfolio composition at the beginning of the period. The Hermitage’s strategy seems
to work in part by impacting Russian companies’ reputation abroad and in part by forcing regulators
into action.

Alexander Dyck                                       Luigi Zingales
University of Toronto                                Harvard University
Joseph L. Rotman School of Management                Littauer Center
University of Toronto                                Cambridge, MA 02138
105 St. George Street                                and NBER
Toronto, Ontario                                     luigi.zingales@gsb.uchicago.edu
CANADA M5S 3E6
adyck@rotman.utoronto.ca

Natalya Volchkova
Nakhimovsky pr., 47, Office 720
117418 Moscow
RUSSIA
nvolchkova@cefir.ru
        In recent years, hedge funds have emerged as some of the most powerful players
in corporate governance worldwide. From the dismissal of Deutsche Boerse’s CEO
Seifert to McDonalds spin-off of major assets in an IPO, hedge funds have played a
crucial role. The Wall Street Journal labeled them the “new leader” on the “list of
bogeymen haunting the corporate boardroom.”1 Among the many tactics hedge funds
managers use, the most prominent one is to focus public attention on an underperforming
company and shame the CEO to either resign or change policy (Kahan and Rock, 2006).
        It is hard to tell, however, whether this public relations campaign is just a
smokescreen for more important maneuvers that take place behind the scene or is a
crucial ingredient of their battle. Can hedge funds (or shareholders in general) increase
the level of coverage received by certain news/companies? And if so, does this coverage
have any effect on corporate governance outcomes? These questions are hard to address
using U.S. data. On the one hand, most hedge funds trade in and out of companies very
quickly. So it is hard to disentangle whether they are simply good at recognizing that the
situation is ripe for change or whether they are indeed an actor of change. On the other
hand, hedge funds in the United States (and in most of Europe) have access to an array of
options to address bad corporate governance (from shareholder’s suits to calling an
extraordinary general meeting). So it is hard to tell whether they succeed because of their
public relations campaign or because of the power of their legal rights.
       To overcome these problems we study shareholders’ ability to influence coverage
and the impact of this coverage on corporate governance by looking at Russia. Russia
presents a useful laboratory setting for this analysis for several reasons. First, during the
late 1990s, corporate governance violations in Russia were very extreme, very common,
and very visible, providing a wide field of inquiry. Second, in Russia, the standard
mechanisms to readdress these violations were either non-existent or completely
ineffective (for example, courts were easily corruptible), allowing us to identify whether
media have an independent effect on outcomes. Third, and most important, in Russia,
there exists an investment fund (the Hermitage Fund), with extremely low turnover, that


1
 Alan Murray “Hedge Funds Are New Sheriffs of Boardroom,” Wall Street Journal, 14 December 2005,
pg A2.


                                                                                                   2
consciously played a media strategy after the 1998 Russian crisis. In the words of its
chairman: “Our basic approach is to thoroughly research and understand where the
corporate malfeasance is taking place and then go to great pains to simplify the story so
the average person can understand what is going on.…. We then share the stories with the
press. By doing so, we want to inflict real consequences – business, reputational and
financial” (Dyck, 2002). Since the Hermitage fund spends resources only when it has
money at stake, we can use the Hermitage’s portfolio composition as an instrument for
news coverage. To avoid any possible reverse causality, we use Hermitage portfolio’s
composition at the beginning of the period, before the corporate governance violations
take place.
        To identify a sample of potential corporate governance violations we exploit the
fact that a prominent Russian investment bank, Troika Dialog, produced a weekly
publication, between 1998 and 2002, that highlighted all the corporate actions that, in
their view, have the potential to severely impact outside investors’ rights. This definition
of potential violation does not necessarily imply that any Russian law was infringed.2
How to judge, for instance, Tomskneft’s dilutive equity issue in 1999? The issue was
approved by shareholders present at the meeting. But very few were able to be present
because the day of the meeting the company announced that the venue had been
transferred to a new distant location that shareholders couldn’t possibly reach in time to
vote on the proposal.
        We refine this list by eliminating repeated events and minor violations (like a delay
in financial reporting). We then study how much coverage each of these violations
received and whether they were stopped or somehow readdressed.
        Not surprisingly, we find that the magnitude of the violation (which we proxy by
the potential loss caused by the announced decision) increases the extent it is covered in
the Anglo-American media. We also find that, controlling for the severity of the
violation, companies receiving more coverage in normal periods (and thus more
newsworthy) command more attention. Even controlling for these factors, however, we

2
 When discussing governance violations we focus on the distributional impact. It is harder to make any
overall welfare assessment. Even actions that have an extremely negative distributional impact (such as
pure theft) can have a positive efficiency effect, because the consolidation of cash flow rights in one hand




                                                                                                               3
find that the presence of the Hermitage fund among its shareholders increases the amount
of coverage a corporate governance violation receives. This correlation does not appear to
be due to the Hermitage fund’s ability to pick newsworthy companies, since the effect is
present even when we use the Hermitage Fund’s stake in companies at the beginning of
the period (end of 1998).
       We then test whether news coverage in the Russian and prominent English
language press surrounding and following the revelation of this potential violation is
correlated with the eventual outcome. We find that the probability the decision
negatively impacting outside investors is reverted is significantly affected by the
coverage of the event in Anglo-American newspapers, even after controlling for other
potential determinants of the outcome, such as the degree of foreign ownership and the
involvement of international organizations such as the European Bank of Reconstruction
and Development (EBRD). By contrast, exposure in the local press has no impact.
       Between the two main foreign newspapers, the Wall Street Journal seems to have
more impact than the Financial Times. This could be the result of a higher credibility of
the former or of the different importance of the two types of audiences these newspapers
have. To separate the effect of audience from that of credibility, we use a Russian-
language publication called Vedemosti. Since this publication is a joint venture between
the Wall Street Journal and the Financial Times, it has credibility similar to that of its
owners. But being in Russian, it only reaches Russian businessmen and politicians. Our
finding that coverage by Vedemosti has no significant effect suggests that the leverage is
provided by the reputation vis-à-vis the Anglo-American community.
       So exposure of corporate governance violations in the international press seems to
promote some readdress. This evidence hardly proves that the press was an instrument of
change, let alone that hedge funds were the force behind this change. An egregious
corporate governance violation is more likely to be covered by newspapers regardless of
any effort by hedge fund managers. And such an egregious violation is also more likely
to generate a reaction. To attempt to disentangle these effects, we instrument foreign
press coverage with the Hermitage Fund’s stake in companies at the end of 1998. Since


can have positive incentive effects as argued in the Russian case by Shleifer (2005), and Guriev and
Rachinsky (2005).


                                                                                                       4
the Hermitage fund will only spend resources in lobbying the press if it has some skin in
the game, Hermitage’s stake can be considered a good measure of the exogenous
component in news coverage. When we instrument coverage with this exogenous
determinant, its estimated impact on outcome does not change, suggesting this link might
be causal.


      Finally, we investigate the main mechanism through which the press had an effect.
We find that, in roughly half of the cases, media pressure leads a regulator or a politician
to intervene, while in the remaining half, it is the company itself that relents, realizing the
reputational costs of continuing the battle. In sum, this evidence suggests that the primary
mechanism through which media coverage has an effect is by increasing the reputational
cost of misbehavior vis-à-vis a relevant audience (in this case Anglo-American
investors).
       This paper contributes to the literature on the real effects of media coverage.
Previous work has looked at the impact of coverage on the voting behavior of citizens
(George and Waldfogel (2004) and Della Vigna and Kaplan (2006)) as well as of
representatives (Dyck, Moss, and Zingales, 2005). As Dyck and Zingales (2002, 2004),
this paper looks at the impact of coverage on corporate governance. But rather than
focusing on a cross-country correlation between newspaper circulation and various
corporate governance outcomes, this paper focuses on a within-country setting where we
are better able to identify the impact of the press. In this respect, our paper is similar to
Miller’s (2006), which explores the role played by the media in bringing to light
corporate frauds in the United States.
       Our paper is also related to the growing literature on the determinants of possible
media biases. Previous work has emphasized the biases generated by advertising pressure
(Reuter and Zitzewitz, 2003), media ownership (Besley and Pratt (2001)), competition for
audience (Baron (2003), Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005) and Gentzkow and Shapiro
(2006)), and the quid-pro-quo between journalists and sources (Dyck and Zingales,
2004)). By contrast, this paper looks at the ability of financial institutions, with sufficient
‘skin in the game’, to influence whether a story makes its way to the international press.




                                                                                                5
       Finally, our paper is also related to a large literature on shareholder activism. As
nicely summarized by Gillan and Starks (2003) and Karpoff (2001), the bulk of this
evidence has focused on pension and mutual funds and their attempt to discipline
managers with traditional control mechanisms, such as incentive contracts (Almazan,
Hartzell and Starks, 2005). By contrast, we follow Kahan and Rock (2006) in studying a
new important player (hedge funds) and we focus on an alternative mechanism: shaming
in the press. In addition, our use of the Hermitage holdings as an instrument allows us to
make further progress towards establishing a causal link between activism and outcomes.
A limitation of our study, due to the illiquidity of the Russian market, is that we can only
look at specific governance disputes rather than overall share performance.
       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section I we introduce a
parsimonious theoretical framework for considering the impact of the media. We start by
arguing that the media can matter, as they impact the reputation of the agents involved. In
Section II we explain why we focus on the Russian market. Section III describes our
research design and data. Section IV studies the determinants of media coverage of
major corporate governance violations and the impact that the Hermitage fund has on this
coverage. Section V presents our main results on the effect of media coverage on the
probability corporate governance violations are addressed. Section VI presents results
when we instrument for coverage with the presence of the Hermitage fund. Section VII
discusses the mechanisms through which media affect outcomes. Section VIII concludes.


I. What role can the media play in corporate governance?


I.1 The role of the media in information diffusion
       The role of the media is to collect, select, certify, and repackage information. In
doing so they dramatically reduce the cost economic agents face to become informed.
When the Wall Street Journal reports a table with the quarterly performance of mutual
funds, for instance, an investor does not have to spend time collecting all the pieces of
information herself, but she can glance at them in a second, for the price of a dollar (plus
the opportunity cost of the time spent reading). Furthermore, if there is a strong
complementarity between news and entertainment, as it is often the case for hot or



                                                                                              6
titillating topics, the media can make the cost of absorbing information negative by
packaging news appropriately (Becker and Murphy (1993) and Dyck, Moss, and Zingales
(2005)).
           This dramatic reduction (if not elimination) of the cost of collecting information is
very important since, in many situations, individual agents face a rational ignorance
(Downs, 1957) paradox: the cost of becoming informed exceeds the benefit they can
personally gain from that information. Hence, the media have the power to overcome the
“rational ignorance” result (Dyck, Moss, and Zingales, 2005). By doing so, the media
increase the number of people who learn about the behavior of other people, thereby
increasing the effect of reputation. In the words of Justice Brandeis: “Publicity is justly
commended as a remedy for social and industrial diseases. Sunlight is said to be the best
of disinfectants; electric light the most efficient policemen.”3


Which reputation?
           Starting with Fama (1980), the finance literature has recognized the importance
reputation plays in disciplining corporate managers. The early literature, Fama (1980) and
Fama and Jensen (1986), emphasized managers’ reputation vis-à-vis potential employers,
who will determine future jobs and wages. Even with recent declines in CEO tenure,
CEOs do not hop from job to job frequently. Especially for CEOs of large companies, the
probability of re-entering the labor market (and thus the importance of their reputation
vis-à-vis future employers) is minimal. By contrast, career concerns might lead directors
to act against the interest of shareholders. Since they are appointed by managers, they
should care about their reputation vis-à-vis them.
           More important, instead, is the role played by a manager’s (or a company’s)
reputation vis-à-vis financial markets, as modeled by Diamond (1989) and (1991) and
Gomes (2000). To the extent a company needs to access financial market repeatedly, its
reputation will affect the terms of future financing. Since these terms affect the
profitability of a company and its ability to exploit future investment opportunities, they
will be important even for self-interested managers.
           Managers, however, seem to care not only about their reputation vis-à-vis the

3
    Louis D. Brandeis, 1933, Other People’s Money, National Home Library Foundation: 62.


                                                                                              7
financial market, but also vis-à-vis society at large. As Dyck and Zingales (2002) argue,
managers often bow to environmental pressures not because these are in the interest of
shareholders, but because they do not want to face the private cost of being portrayed as
“the bad guys”.


I.2 The role of the media in corporate governance
        Consider a manager who has to decide whether to make a decision that might
benefit her personally, but might hurt her reputation and trigger some legal punishment.
A simple application of Becker’s (1968) model has that a manager will be dissuaded from
such an action if and only if


  (1)          E (Private benefit) < E (Reputational cost) + E (Punishment) =
                                = ∑ pi *RCi | i learns about it + π P
                                   i


where RCi is the reputational cost of this action vis-à-vis group i, pi is the probability

group i will receive the news about the manager’s action and will believe it , π is the
probability of enforcement, and P is the punishment in case of enforcement.
        The media influence the right hand side of this equation in four ways. By
publishing the news they can change pi , i.e., the probability that a given action is known
to a certain audience and so it carries a reputational cost. Of course, different media have
different audiences, so each medium has a special impact on its own audience’s pi . If, for

instance, a company is planning to raise new finance and it cares about the capital
markets’ perception of its own action, it will be very sensitive to coverage in outlets that
are read by the financial market community.
        The second way in which the media can affect the decision is by increasing the
reputational cost RCi . When the lavish compensation of the former chairman of the New
York Stock Exchange Richard Grasso was revealed by the press, for instance, many of
the same directors who approved it changed their position. What triggered this about face
was not only the diffusion of this information to a large audience, but also the negative
characterization of Grasso’s pay package by even the most pro-business newspapers. This




                                                                                               8
negative slant increased the reputational cost the directors faced and likely factored into
their change in position.
        Third, the media can have an impact by changing the probability of
enforcement π .4 This impact arises through three channels. The first one is a simple
extension of Fama’s model to politicians: they care about their future employers, i.e. the
voters.5 The second channel passes through the role of media in the battle between public
interest and vested interests. A major reason why vested interests have so much power in
political decisions is because of the “rational apathy” of voters (Downs, 1957). As Dyck,
Moss, and Zingales (2005) argue, however, this rational apathy can be overturned by the
media. By making political news entertaining, the media can overcome voters’ cost to
become informed and, in so doing, reduce the power of vested interests. Once again,
Richard Grasso’s very large compensation became an entertaining news, and made a
much larger group of people aware of the potential conflict of interest intrinsic to the
position of the NYSE chairman, who is in part a defender of the interests of the NYSE
seat owners, and in part regulator. This new awareness substantially weakened the
position of the NYSE lobbying effort to maintain its monopoly position. The third
channel arises because politicians do not care only about reputation vis-à-vis voters, but
also their reputation (and their country’s reputation) vis-à-vis foreign countries. Russian
President Putin, for example, also cares about his own reputation vis-à-vis the Western
world and, in particular, the United States. Any news (especially if reported in the
international press) that makes him appear weak or not in control of the situation
undermines his credibility in the international circle. Therefore, he will be more likely to
take an action to address a problem if this problem is visible to the international
community.
        In sum, in the face of a corporate governance violation, a regulator who has to
decide whether to intervene faces a trade-off very similar to equation (1). On the one
hand, the private benefits of not enforcing are represented by the effort saved and the

4
  The large literature on law and finance has emphasized the importance of legal enforcement as different
from the law on the books (La Porta et al. , 1998; Bhattacharya and Daouk, 2002), but has not explored
what drives enforcement. As the discussion below suggests, media pressure can be an important
determinant of legal enforcement.




                                                                                                            9
gratitude acquired from the company committing the violation. On the other hand, the
regulator faces some reputational cost for being perceived as ineffective in her own job.
In addition she faces the risk of a punishment, if her inaction violates a law and if this law
is enforced. By diffusing the news of a corporate governance violation, the media expose
the regulator’s lack of activity, increasing the personal cost of her inaction. The SEC, for
example, started to ask the NYSE board about its compensation practices after the first
news of Richard Grasso’s compensation was published in the Wall Street Journal. The
publication of that news informed many people about the issue and created some
awareness that the SEC was passive on this front. This awareness was sufficient to spurt
the Commission into action.
         Finally, the media can affect the right hand side of equation (1) by impacting the
size of the penalty P. This is definitely true if a case goes to trial, because media can
impact the mood of a jury. But it is also true whenever the enforcer has any discretion in
the size of the punishment and she is influenced by her reputation vis-à-vis the public at
large.
         Note that all the terms on the right hand side of equation (1) are ex ante estimates.
Hence, what will affect the decision to commit a corporate governance violation is a
manager’s expectation of the likelihood the relevant players will learn about his decision
and how harshly his decision will be judged. After the decision has been made, however,
what determines the probability of reversal of this decision is the actual realization of
those costs, which is greatly affected by the coverage in the media. Hence, the impact of
the media is most visible (albeit not necessarily most important) in environments where
managers underestimate ex ante the degree of intervention and influence of the media. As
we will explain momentarily, this is exactly the case in Russia.


I.3 When are the media most effective?
         If we look at equation (1), the impact of media is greater when the media reach a
larger number of relevant groups (i.e, groups with whom managers care to maintain a
good reputation) and when the news reporting generates a greater increase in p i . In the

5
 This is not strictly true with a regulatory agency such as the SEC where those in charge have no voters to
be accountable to. But it is a reasonable approximation, for the SEC relies for its budget and authority on



                                                                                                         10
language of the media, these two characteristics are diffusion and credibility. Ceteris
paribus, the more people a medium reaches, the broader will be the reputational impact
of its reports. To produce an increase in p i , the news must come from a credible source,

otherwise it is not believed. If we receive an e-mail coming from an unknown
organization that accuses a famous professor of plagiarism, we are unlikely to believe it.
If the same news were reported in the New York Times, we would be much more likely to
believe it because the New York Times has developed a good reputation (some recent
incidents notwithstanding).
         Finally, the effectiveness of the media depends upon several characteristics of the
surrounding environment. If the relevant reputational punishment occurs in the
labor/product market, its magnitude depends upon the frequency of repeated buyers in
that market and the ratio between future and current benefits. Reputational penalties are
strongest in a market with many repeated buyers. Similarly, reputational costs are bigger
when a company needs a good reputation now (i.e, to raise a large amount of funds in the
capital market) rather than in the future.
         If, by contrast, punishment occurs through social pressure, then its magnitude
depends upon the strength of shared social norms. Media can only be as effective as the
moral norms shared by a certain community and its media.Exposing a CEO for not
maximizing shareholders’ value does not have much of an impact in a country where this
goal is not shared as legitimate by at least a relevant fraction of society. By contrast, in
the United States there is a well-developed set of business publications (representative of
a relevant part of society) that share this goal. These publications are the most effective in
reaching business people who will interact with executives in the future. Hence, any
executive fears being exposed as villain in these publications.

II. The Russian Case

II.1 Why Russia?
         If enforcement is very effective and/or legal punishments are extremely severe,
the manager’s expected cost of violating minority shareholders’ rights is such that


Congress, and these political overseers care about political concerns about inactivity.


                                                                                               11
managers will never do so. For this reason, it would be very difficult to try to identify any
effect of the media in a country with very effective corporate governance rules.
          The same is true, however, if the media have a long track record of imposing
reputational penalties to managers who violates investors’ rights. The fear of these
penalties will dissuade any manager from committing a violation. Ideally, thus, we would
need a country that has very little or no legal enforcement and where, at the time a
decision is made, the reputational costs of a decision are perceived to be very low.
          Russia during the period late 1990s-early 2000s scores “well” on both
dimensions. During this period the standard instruments to readdress corporate violations
were either non- existent (derivative suits) or completely ineffective (for example, courts
were easily corruptible, see Slink, Yakolev, and Zhuravskaya, (2004)). As a result,
corporate governance violations were very extreme, very common, and very visible.
Hence, we can relatively easily assemble a sample of objectively bad governance
decisions and follow them over time.
          At the same time, Russian managers were just starting to learn how to deal with
the press, in particular with the foreign press. Having been raised in an environment
(Soviet Russia) where the media were reporting only what the party establishment
wanted, they were unlikely to factor into their decisions the reputational cost the media
could inflict.

          No one illustrates this learning process better than Khodorkovsky, the former
CEO of Yukos. At the beginning of his career, Khodorkovsky hated the press and kept it
at distance. After one of his rare meetings with journalists, he declared: "It would be
more pleasurable to meet a bunch of our unpaid workers in Siberia."6 In August 1999,
however, when the Bank of New York was accused of laundering money for several
Russian companies, Yukos changed strategy, because it was concerned that "despite the
absence of specific data, U.S. officials have taken the publications quite seriously -- a
U.S. Congress hearing is scheduled for mid-September. A possible result of this hearing
could be a decision to refuse Russia the financial aid of international financial
institutions.”7 Such attention spurred Yukos to hire a Western public relations agency and

6
    “Oily Charm”, The Economist, 5 December 1998.
7
    Yukos Press release as reported by PR Newswire, 30 August 1999, 03:37 PM.


                                                                                            12
to start to fight back all the allegations in the media. Explaining Yukos decision to keep
his company public and to pay more attention to investors and public relations,
Khodorkovsky said: "First, there are not many very big private companies - and we want
to be very big. Second, we need access to cheap capital and that means openness. Third, a
big oil company has lots of workers, lots of ecological responsibilities. If it is opaque it is
not going to be popular. Finally, there is the issue of nationalisation, which we can never
ignore. A private company is a lot easier to nationalise than a public one."8 Following this
public relations campaign, Yukos started to be praised in Western media as a model of
financial transparency and Khodorkovsky became the darling of the Western press. While
this strategy was not sufficient in preventing Putin from seizing Yukos, it certainly made
it more costly for him to do so.

           As Khodorkovsky quotes suggests, Russians care about their reputation vis-à-vis
the international community for three reasons. First, they might want to access
international markets (for financing, joint ventures, and even sale contracts). Second, as
an insurance policy, both to protect the legitimacy of their holdings and to facilitate an
asylum request in case they become persecuted in Russia. Third, for personal satisfaction.
After becoming rich, executives in many developing countries seek broader acceptance in
the international community by joining the World Economic Forum at Davos, seeking
positions on the boards of trustees of prominent international institutions, and so on.
Negative news reported in international media can also have the effect of ostracizing the
executives from these desired social circles. While the Russian oligarch Vladimir Potanin
was successful in his efforts to join the trustees of the Guggenheim Museum in April
2002, Oleg Deripaska was “disinvited” from participating in the Davos meeting, and was
stripped of his designation as “one of the global leaders of tomorrow” following negative
press coverage of civil lawsuits alleging bribery, money laundering, and worse (Financial
Times 2001; Wagstyl 2002).9



8
    Robert Cottrell and Arkady Ostrovsky: “After the oligarchs,” Financial Times, 16 April 2001.
9
  One way to reconcile this effect with the traditional reputation effect is to posit that every manager has the option to
start a political career and, thus, she cares about her general reputation. But since a political career is not a source of
large monetary gains, the existence of such an interest can be justified only with an extra term in the utility function. It
is simpler, then, to posit from the beginning that managers care about their reputation in this broader sense.


                                                                                                                        13
II. 2 Can we identify an exogenous shift in news coverage?
       In addition to the two factors mentioned above, Russia provides an excellent
environment to identify the impact of the press on governance, because there exists a
fund that consciously plays a media strategy: the Hermitage Fund.
       Founded in 1996 as a generic hedge fund with a Russian focus, the Hermitage
Fund changed its strategy and focus after the 1998 Russian crisis. In the words of its
chairman: “Our basic approach is to thoroughly research and understand where the
corporate malfeasance is taking place and then go to great pains to simplify the story so
the average person can understand what is going on. One of the reasons that certain
companies have gotten away with various violations in the past is that no one really
understood what was happening because the stories were so complicated. We then share
the stories with the press. By doing so, we want to inflict real consequences – business,
reputational and financial” (Dyck, 2002).
       In explaining why his strategy is successful in increasing coverage, he says:
       “You have to understand that the press doesn’t know about the stories,
       have the ability to understand some of these complicated activities, or
       can’t afford to do research. We have a lot of money invested. We are
       affected. We can devote the resources to do what it takes to truly
       understand what is going on. Our goal is to frame the issue so that it is
       clear to everyone what has happened. We do talk to the Russian press, but
       our focus is on the international press” (Dyck, 2002, emphasis added).


       Since the Hermitage fund focuses on generating coverage in those companies
where it owns shares, the presence of the Hermitage fund among the shareholders of a
company should represent an exogenous shift in news coverage, which can be used to
identify the causal mechanism between news coverage and governance outcomes.

II.3 Does Hermitage generate news?

       For Hermitage to produce an exogenous shift in coverage, it must not only want to
generate coverage, but also be successful in doing so. In talking with its chairman, we
identified two mechanisms the fund has used: to be a helpful source and to become news.

1) Being a helpful source




                                                                                          14
       One mechanism whereby Hermitage generates news is to conduct research and
then present and document this information to a selected group of reporters. Becoming a
source for information has the immediate effect of providing the specific news Hermitage
wants to present and determining the time of the release of the news.
       To illustrate the impact of Hermitage on news coverage, consider the coverage
Gazprom, Russia’s largest company, received regarding some related-party transactions.
There had been widespread concerns about Gazprom’s deals with related parties, but this
became a focus of attention (and was finally addressed seriously) only when Hermitage
provided crucial information to the press. In the words of Bill Browder, head of the
Hermitage fund:
      My head of research was able to buy the entire Moscow registration
      database from a hawker on a street corner. With the securities commission
      database, we knew the names of the companies that stole assets from
      Gazprom, and with the registration chamber data, we knew which
      individuals owned the companies. From that we were able to piece together
      exactly how much was stolen and by which members of management. …
      [We] decided to share our findings with the world by selectively releasing
      different examples of the graft to the major Western newspapers in
      Moscow. (Dyck (2002))

      By October of 2000, Hermitage had put this information together in a 41 page
PowerPoint presentation that laid out the story they wanted told, and presented the
underlying information, including the sources. As Table 1 shows, there is a clear overlap
between their information and resulting stories.
      Not only did Browder present new information in his continuing campaigns, he
also worked hard to time the presentation of information, and to ensure continued
coverage of stories they cared about.
       Originally, we would give one reporter the whole story. They would want
       to check every bit of it out, get the other side’s point of view, or ignore it,
       seeing this as too complicated and time consuming to pursue. Now we
       give a small piece of the story to a journalist and let them know that we’ll
       give it to someone else in three days if they don’t write anything. It seems
       that journalists are more concerned about losing the story to a competitor
       than almost anything else. (Dyck (2002))

      Suggestive of the success of this strategy, we also see continued coverage of these
allegations in the international news, as well as successful outcomes. Concrete steps were


                                                                                         15
taken to limit the dilutions of Gazprom, including new requirements for board approval,
new audits of these related party transactions, and the removal of the chief executive at
the center of these allegations. Panel B of Table1 provides a timeline of these outcomes.
It also shows that this story, unlike so many other allegations of shareholder violation in
Russia, did not die, but rather was repeated again and again over the next 6 months.


2) Becoming news
        Another channel through which Hermitage generates news is by becoming news,
filing a lawsuit. As Bill Browder argues,
       We also go to courts. We’ve been involved in 32 lawsuits. And we win in
       terms of public attention regardless of the outcome, where we’ve lost 31
       times. I think the proportion of number of words written in the press when a
       lawsuit is initiated to when it is dismissed is 50 to 1. The court of public
       opinion is much more effective than the Russian legal system and much
       fairer. (Dyck (2002))

        The case of Sberbank illustrates this channel. At the end of 2000, the Sberbank
board announced plans to go forward with a new share issue, which had the potential of
diluting the ownership stakes of existing shareholders. It was hard for shareholders to
fight against this decision using traditional methods, since there were no representatives
of minority shareholders on the board. Hermitage, instead, chose to launch 12 different
lawsuits against Sberbank and the Central Bank. Although the lawsuits were all
dismissed, they generated a large amount of publicity, which came at a time when the
Russian Duma was debating a new law on investor protection. Panel C of Table 1
illustrates the various lawsuits brought by Hermitage and the companies involved.10
        Not only a lawsuit is news itself and induces newspapers to write about an issue, it
also allows journalists to write about it without any fear of being sued for libel. If a
journalist writes an article about dubious related party transaction, he might get sued by
the company. But if he reports the same facts as the allegation made in a legal case, he
incurs no risk. And this is a concern, since the first reaction of many Russian oligarchs to



10
  The difference in the proportion of successful suits between Browder’s quote and the table stems from
two factors. First, in the quote Browder is referring to domestic Russian suits. Second, the table includes
additional recent lawsuits that had not been initiated when the quote was made..


                                                                                                          16
the bad Western press was to sue the journalists that wrote the articles in the court of
London, a court more favorable to the plaintiff in libelous cases.


II.3 Selection vs. causality
        For marketing purposes, hedge funds have an obvious interest in self-promotion.
To justify hefty management and performance fees to their own investors, hedge fund
managers have to claim they have a strategy that adds value. For this reason, we have to
be suspicious of Hermitage’s claim to be so successful in exposing corporate governance
violations in the international press. To this purpose in section V.2 we will test whether it
is indeed true that the presence of Hermitage as a shareholder leads to more coverage,
after controlling for a series of companies’ characteristics.
        Yet, finding such a correlation is not necessarily evidence of a causal link. An
equally plausible explanation is that Hermitage buys into companies that are more visible
or when it knows they will receive more attention from the press.
        To minimize this concern, we chose to use the earliest Hermitage portfolio
composition we have available, i.e. December 1998. This predates the major wave of
corporate governance violations following the Russian crisis, and hence could hardly be
thought as the result of an active strategy to pick more media sensitive companies. It also
predates the period when Hermitage actively used the press as part of its strategy to
increase returns in its portfolio.


III. Data Description

III.1   The sample
        Ideally, we would like a complete sample of corporate governance violations
during a certain period. Fortunately, between 1998 and 2002 Troika Dialog, a prominent
Russian investment bank, published the Bulletin on Corporate Governance Actions. This
bulletin, usually averaging 8-10 pages in length, provided extensive coverage of all
companies in Russian capital markets. It contained a one to two paragraph description
written by specialists at Troika of corporate actions that came to their attention over the
previous week. The Bulletin ceased publication in July 2002 as a result of the heavy



                                                                                              17
lobbying done by Troika Dialog’s clients, who did not like the negative publicity
generated by the Bulletin.
       We read all sections in each issue of the Bulletin for the period December 4, 1998
to July 22, 2002. We focused primarily on the events reported in a sub-section titled
“Reported/Potential Governance Violations”. But we also looked at other sub-sections,
such as “New Share Issues” and “Split/Swap /Conversions”, and include an event
whenever the paragraph description raised concerns that the proposed action would have
a negative impact on the cashflows or voting rights of investors. This search resulted in a
sample of 480 events.
       We then refined the sample introducing a number of additional criteria. We
eliminated all events that update earlier mentioned events, and dropped obvious minor
events (e.g., minor delays in reporting) to arrive to 201 non-repeat potentially serious
governance violations. We then read the English and Russian press to learn more about
these events. We used this additional qualitative information to eliminate: (a) minor
events, e.g., directors recommend one dividend level and AGM recommends another (32
observations); (b) events that we discovered upon further reading were not initiated by
insiders but rather by government actions, e.g., the State blocks a shareholder from
getting seats commensurate with his ownership stakes citing security concerns) (47
observations); (c) 24 additional observations where we were still left with uncertainty
about the nature and severity of the potential violation. The remaining 98 events form the
core sample for our study. In the Appendix we provide more details on this initial
screening. Table 2 reports a brief description of the alleged violations in these events and
the date as reported by Troika, with the exception of the few cases in which we found an
earlier news report in our reading of the Russian and English-language press. Table 3
defines the other variables used in the empirical analysis and reports their sources.
       Reading all these allegations, we groups the different strategies used in seven
categories. The first groups all attempts to disenfranchise shareholders. This was done
through a variety of mechanisms: threatening investors with imprisonment or worse if
they don’t go along with wishes of controlling shareholders, not allowing shareholders to
vote their shares, changing the venue at the last moment to make it impossible for




                                                                                           18
shareholders to vote, and making decisions to sidestep shareholder approval for corporate
transactions.
        The other six categories groups different methods to dilute the cashflow rights of
minority shareholders. The first popular method consists in large share issues reserved to
insiders at deep discount vis-à-vis the current market price. The second method consists
of a share swap between companies and subsidiaries on terms that are viewed as hurting
the interests of minority shareholders. The third method involves a reorganization of the
firm and its subsidiaries that provides increased scope for self-dealing transactions. The
fourth method involves debt holders using bankruptcy proceedings to reallocate assets to
themselves, and in so doing diluting minority investors. The fifth method involves
selling assets or business opportunities to companies closely affiliated with management.
Finally, we include a sixth category, ‘other’, that captures other ways in which
controlling shareholders dilute controlling shareholders. Table 4 identifies the type of
alleged violations for each event in our sample.


III.2   Performance measures
        To measure the impact of media pressure on the ability to contain or overturn the
corporate decisions that violated minority shareholders’ rights, we look at the actual
outcomes. After reading the Russian and the English language press over the subsequent
year, we coded an outcome as 0 if the initial decision went through as planned and there
were no governance changes in the firm linked to the (possible) furor surrounding this
event. We coded an outcome as 2 if the proposed violation led to a significant response
in the firm (11 istances). This includes reverting the initial decision, introducing
significant changes in the terms of the transaction, or approving structural governance
changes that makes further such actions unlikely (e.g. change in CEO, change in charter,
change in number of independent board members, change in national law). We code an
outcome as 1 if there is a partial redress of the shareholder concerns (17 cases). Overall,
there was a (partial) positive outcome in 29 % of the cases.
        We thought to use the long-term performance of the stock price as a measure of
the outcome. We discarded the idea for three reasons. First, the paucity of actively traded
companies dramatically reduces the sample. Second, the timing of the possible reversal



                                                                                           19
(stretching over months) make it difficult to identify out-performance, especially in an
environment, such as the Russian one, characterized by high volatility in stock prices.
Last but not least, if the market is so rational to anticipate the impact of media, the stock
price performance will underestimate their effect.


III.3   News measures
        Table 5 reports the news coverage of the 98 companies in our sample. The
arguments exposed in section I suggest that we have to distinguish between three
categories of the press: Russian media published in the Russian language, which have
access to the Russian public but have limited credibility11; foreign-owned media in the
Russian language, which have access to the Russian public but enjoy greater credibility;
Anglo-American media, which have access to the international centers of economic and
political power, where English is the lingua franca, and enjoy greater credibility.
        For the Russian language press we focus on three large and/or prominent
newspapers: Kommersant, Izvestia, and Vedemosti. We consider Vedemosti, to be the
most credible as it is jointly published by the Wall Street Journal and by the Financial
Times. For the English language news, we focus on the Financial Times and the Wall
Street Journal as credible western news outlets. We measure the news coverage of the
violation in a window surrounding the announcement of the event (t-1 to t+2 months).
We use the period pre-dating our definition of announcement date to allow for the
possibility that we may have misspecified the announcement date, particularly since the
Bulletin is only a weekly publication.         Our results are robust to just including t to t+2
months. For the most part we focus on the combined coverage in the English (Russian)
press, although we also break down coverage by publication.


III.4   Reputation measures
        Since, in Russia, all legal remedies are very weak and the large shareholders are
widely considered the villains rather than the monitors, an important source of restraint is


11
  As Mikhail Lesin, formerly President Putin’s Media Minister, described it, Russian language media are
characterized by ““information wars,” which saw oligarchic groups trying to destroy each other through the
media, ultimately causing the media’s authority to dwindle and undermining trust in the written word.”
February 24, 2005, “Protection and the Media”, RussiaProfile.org.


                                                                                                       20
given by the reputation these companies have vis-à-vis foreign investors. We try to
capture the scope of such reputation concerns through two proxies: the percentage of
equity owned by foreigners and the presence of the European Bank of Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD) among the company’s lenders.
        We obtained the EBRD investment information from the EBRD publication for
Russia, “EBRD Investments: 1991- 2004” and indicate with a dummy if the EBRD had
an investment prior to the commencement of the potential governance violation. We
obtained the foreign ownership data from a variety of sources, starting with the official
recording of the identities of all shareholders with more than 5 percent stake, collected by
the Federal Commission on Security Market Disclosure project. In almost all cases, this
was insufficient as many owners of record are shell companies with unclear ownership
structure (e.g. Cypress based companies) and/or are nominal owners (e.g. Citibank)
without further information. We complemented this information with accounts in the
business press (Russian and English) and in Troika Dialog “Bulletin on Corporate
Governance Actions.” Recognizing the noise in this measure, we also assembled an
alternative measure of foreign interest in the stock, which is a dummy variable that takes
the value 1 if Troika Dialog collected and reported governance scores for the company
sometime in the period from 2000 to end of 2002. It was time consuming and expensive
to assemble such scores and Troika would only do so for companies with significant
foreign investor interest. Below, we report results using the continuous measure of
ownership, but the results are robust (and statistical significance strengthened), if we use
this alternative indication of foreign interest. Foreign ownership and the EBRD dummy
are reported in Table 6, while Table 7 presents the summary statistics of the variables
used in the subsequent regression.


III.5   Other controls
        Other factors may affect the probability of reversal of a corporate governance
violation. The nature of the violation itself, for example, can make it more or less
reversible. To this purpose, as noted above, we have classified all the corporate
governance violation into 7 categories.




                                                                                            21
       Another factor that might influence the reversal of a corporate governance
decision is the size of the potential loss inflicted to investors. To this purpose we create a
variable measuring the maximum amount of potential dilution of shareholders’ value as a
result of this decision. Specifically, for the companies where the potential violation is one
of the six categories of dilution, we calculate what the loss would be, were the dilution to
go through and this would lead to the worst outcome for minority shareholders.
       For example, with new share issues at a very low price to company insiders, we
know the number of shares issued and the price at which they are granted so we can
straightforwardly calculate the percentage change in the minority shareholders’ claim
over the firm’s cashflow. As an illustration, if the minority shareholders held 10 percent
of the firm, and insiders issued 100% more shares at a zero price to insiders, then
minority shareholders claims would now be for only 5 percent of the firm and would see
a 50% dilution in their claim.
       Sometimes this maximum percentage loss calculation involves more assumptions,
as in the cases of bankruptcies or reorganizations. We made these assumptions based on
the practices in Russia at the time, when solvent companies were pushed into bankruptcy
and they valuable assets stripped at knock-down prices. On the bases of this fear, for
instance, we set the maximum dilution for Chernorgorneft at 100 percent, since its main
creditor had the possibility to force the viable oil producer into bankruptcy where it could
transfer of all valuable assets to itself at knock-down price, leaving nothing but debts to
the shareholders.
       We found it much more difficult to identify the maximum possible loss for
shareholders in those violations that we categorized as disenfranchisements, since these
were usually the first stage of a longer process that could deprive shareholders of
significant rights and returns. Here, we used our judgment to classify
disenfranchisements into three categories, from most severe (coded as a’3’) to least
severe (coded as a ‘1’).
       Finally, the probability of reversal of a corporate governance violation can be
affected by the visibility of a company. Visible companies are more likely to get the
attention of the press regardless of any intervention of hedge fund managers and this
attention may pressure these companies into reversing their decisions. As proxies for



                                                                                            22
visibility we use a measure of size (the logarithm of the book value of fixed assets in
1999), a dummy for oil and gas industry (by far the most important and internationally
attractive sector) and the “natural” newsworthiness (the number of references to this
company in the Wall Street Journal and the Financial Times during the 6 month period
from January to end of June 1998, a time preceding our sample period and prior to the
unique period surrounding the Russian default). In controlling for these variables we are
going to underestimate the effect of the press. Nevertheless, we include these variables
to isolate the causal link.


IV. What Determines News in the International Press?

        As we will see in the next section, the type of news coverage that influences
governance outcomes is coverage in the international press. But what determines news in
the international press? We address this question in Table 8, where we analyze the
determinants of press coverage. As a dependent variable, we use the natural logarithm of
1 plus the number of articles that appeared in the FT and WSJ around the event windows.
        To explain a company’s coverage by Anglo-American newspapers, we need to
capture the intrinsic interest Anglo-American readers have for these companies. Oil
companies, for example, attract much more interest than domestic car manufacturers.
Similarly, larger companies tend to have more following than small ones. To capture
these dimensions, we insert a measure of size and a dummy for the oil and gas industry.
        A second potential driver of coverage in the international newspapers is the
percentage of a company owned by foreigners and the presence of the EBRD among its
lenders. Hence we control for both these variables.
        Even controlling for all these variables, it is not obvious that we have captured the
different level of “newsworthiness” of different companies. A candy factory called “Red
October” might intrinsically make a better story than an oil company with an
unpronounceable name such as Orenburgneft. To measure this otherwise difficult-to-
capture effect, we compute the natural logarithm of one plus the number of articles
present in the foreign press during a quiet period before the Russian crisis (i.e., between




                                                                                           23
January first and June 30 of 1998).12 Finally, to capture the different intrinsic
newsworthiness of different corporate governance violation, we insert dummies for the
seven different types of violations and a measure of the intensity of this violation.
        As column 1 shows, the two main determinants of coverage are the size of the
firm and the “natural” newsworthiness. Together they explain 47% of the variation in
coverage. In column 2 we insert as an additional explanatory variable: the percentage of a
company owned by the Hermitage fund at the end of the 1998 from the Hermitage
consolidated financial statements13 If our conjecture (and the claims of the Hermitage
Fund chairman) is correct, the level of coverage should be higher when the Hermitage
Fund owned a stake, because it has an incentive to intervene and prompt journalists to
write stories. The Hermitage ownership variable enters in a positive way and it is
statistically significant at the 5% level. One standard deviation increase in this variable
almost doubles the expected level of coverage, raising the explanatory power of the
regression to 53%.
        In columns 3 and 4, we test whether the Hermitage presence has more effect on
the WSJ or on the FT. The estimate of the impact of the Hermitage on the WSJ is twice
as large as the one on the FT, and, given the paucity of data, this is not statistically
significant for the FT while it is significant at the 1% level for the WSJ.


V. The Effect of Media on Outcomes

        The second question we try to address is whether press coverage has any impact
on the probability that a corporate governance violation is partially or completely
addressed. The simplest way to test whether news coverage makes a difference is with a
non-parametric test. Since the biggest difference is between companies whose violation is
reported in the international media (17 of the cases) and violation that do not get reported,
in Table 9, we split the sample along this dimension. 59% of the violations covered by
international media are reverted against a mere 22% of the violation that are not covered.


12
   We also explored an earlier period, July 1, 1997 to December 31, 1997 and found a very high correlation
(.966) between the two measures and that our results are strengthened with this alternative measure.
13
   This is the earliest financial statement we have available. For the 5 companies with an event before
December 1998 we use the December 1998 holdings unless we know from the financial statement when the
stake was acquired or disposed. We checked that our results are robust to dropping these 5 observations.


                                                                                                       24
A Mann-Whitney test rejects that the two distributions are the same at the 1% level,
(p=.0025). The same approach tells us that the Hermitage fund enjoys a much better
record of reversal among its portfolio companies than average: 45% successes in the
companies owned versus 24% success in the companies he did not own.
        Of course, this approach does not factor other possible differences between the
two samples. For this reason, Table 10 repeats the exercise in a standard regression
format. In Table 10A (column 1), we present our basic specification. The dependent
variable is our measure of outcome (which can be either two, or one, or zero), hence we
run an ordered logit. As control variables we insert two proxies for reputation (foreign
ownership and EBRD as a creditor), two proxies for the visibility of the company (log of
assets and dummy for the oil industry), 6 dummies for the type of violation and a measure
of the severity of the violation. For the disenfranchising action, our measure is an ordinal
one. For the dilutive issues, it is the maximum potential loss due to dilution. Since the
two measures are not homogenous, we insert them in the regression interacted with a
dummy for the type of damage inflicted to the shareholders (dilutive or disenfranchising).
Since we are able to construct this variable only for 94 companies, the sample is reduced
to this number.14
        Of all these variables, only one (the maximum loss due to dilution) is statistically
significant. A one standard deviation increase in the maximum possible loss due to the
dilutive decision raises the probability of seeing the corporate governance violation
reverted by seven percentage points.
        The lack of significance of all these variables is not too surprising. A rational
manager will only commit violations he thinks he can get away with. So if the probability
of having to revert the decision is significantly higher for certain types of violations,
rational managers should commit fewer of those. Similarly, if the probability of having to
revert the decision is significantly higher for certain companies, the managers of these
companies should be more reluctant in abusing their shareholders’ rights.
        To this basic specification, in column 2 of Table 10A, we add a measure of
foreign press coverage (number of articles published in the FT and WSJ in the period one


14
 For four observations the violation involves assets where we were unable to assess their market value so
were unable to calculate the extent of the dilution.


                                                                                                       25
month before to two months following the event).15 Press coverage has a positive and
statistically significant effect. One standard deviation increase in the number of articles
published in foreign newspapers increases the probability of full redress (outcome = 2) by
14 percentage points. One more article increases this probability by 5 percentage points.
         Given the mass of observations with zero coverage, in column 3, we re-run the
same specification with a dummy variable for positive coverage instead of the actual
number of articles. The result is very similar. In column 4, instead, we use the logarithm
of 1 plus the number of articles, which seems to be a good compromise between the two
previous specifications. The results are unchanged.16
         Since we do not have a compelling theory of which news get covered in the
international press and which does not, it is possible that the effect of coverage is
spurious. Companies that are more interesting to the media, for instance, can also be
companies where the shareholders are better able to fight off managers’ violations. To
account for this possibility in column 5 we add to the previous specification a measure of
“natural newsworthiness”, which we measure as the natural logarithm of 1 plus the
number of articles referring to this company in the Wall Street Journal and the Financial
Times during the 6 month period from January to end of June 1998.17 All the effect
seems to be captured by the actual coverage, not by the newsworthiness.
         The distinction between partial and full redress could be considered somewhat
arbitrary, hence in the last column of Table 10 we collapse these two categories into one
and we re-run the same regression as a logit. The results are virtually identical. The only
difference is that we lose one observation since the dummy for violations that take the
form of asset stripping perfectly predicts the outcome.



15
   We use this longer window to capture the possibility that there might be noise in our identification of the
announcement date (e.g. the bulletin on corporate governance actions is issued only weekly). All results
are robust to focusing on the narrower window of t to 2 months after the announcement of the proposed
infraction.
16
   For simplicity we have presented results using one set of controls. The results are robust to alternative
specifications including omitting the severity of infraction variable (which allows us to use all 98
observations), excluding the category of violation, using a more comprehensive set of industry controls
rather than a simple oil dummy, using another measure of foreign interest in a stock (Troika Dialog
provides company analysis including governance scores) to address possible concerns about
mismeasurement of foreign ownership..
17
   We also checked this with an alternative period, July 1, 1997 to December 31, 1997 (correlation =.966
with later period) and found our results to be robust.


                                                                                                           26
        In Table 10B, we try to probe deeper into which articles are more important for a
positive outcome. Column 1 inserts, as an explanatory variable, the coverage in Russian
newspapers (log of 1 plus the combined number of articles in Kommersant, Izvestia, and
Vedemosti.) The effect is negative but economically and statistically indistinguishable
from zero.
         Column 2 decomposes the effect of foreign press coverage between the
Financial Times (FT) and the Wall Street Journal (WSJ). The coefficient of the WSJ is
three times bigger than that of the FT and it is statistically different from zero (unlike the
FT’s one). Even correcting for the higher mean and standard deviation of FT articles, the
WSJ has more impact: one standard deviation increase in the number of WSJ articles
increases the probability of a good outcome by 6 percentage points versus 3 percentage
points for FT articles.
        One of the Russian newspapers, Vedemosti, is a joint venture between the
Financial Times and the Wall Street Journal, with both publishers appearing on the
masthead below the Russian name. As such, it should enjoy a reputation similar to that of
its owners. On the other hand, by being written in Russian language, it only circulates in
Russia. This allows us to distinguish whether the difference in the impact of Anglo-
American newspapers and Russian ones is due to differences in their credibility or in the
audiences they have access to.
        In Table 10C (column I), we re-estimate the basic specification using, as a
measure of press coverage, just Vedemosti (the log of one plus the number of articles
published in Vedemosti). The coefficient is negative and not statistically significant. The
same occurs in column II, where we also control for the coverage in other Russian
newspapers. In fact, the coefficient on Vedemosti is lower than that of the other, less
credible, Russian newspapers. Hence, keeping the audience constant, differences in
credibility do not seem to have a major effect. Finally, in column III we insert also the
coverage in Anglo-American newspapers. While the coefficient on Anglo-American
newspapers is positive and significant, the coefficient on Vedemosti remains negative
(albeit insignificant).




                                                                                            27
       In sum, newspapers in Russian, even when credible, do not seem to play much of
a role. Hence, we have to infer, consistent with the views of Hermitage’s chairman, that
the main source of leverage is the access to an international audience.


VI. Addressing the causality problem


VI.1   Instrumental variables estimation
       There is a potential objection to the results presented in Table 10: more severe
violations are likely to trigger more news stories. If it is also true that more severe
violations are more likely to be redressed, then our result may be spurious. In part, we
have addressed this problem by controlling for the type of violation and the severity of
the violation.
       But to confront it directly, we now exploit the regressions on the determinants of
news coverage described earlier and presented in Table 8. Having identified some
exogenous determinants of press coverage, we can now verify whether the effect of
coverage on outcome is spurious by using this exogenous factor as an instrument. For
comparability reasons, in column 1 of Table 11, we reproduce the estimate of the basic
specification using OLS. In column 2, we instrument foreign press coverage with the
stake owned by the Hermitage fund in 1998. The IV coefficient remains positive and
statistically significant, now at the 5% level. A one-standard deviation increase in
coverage driven by the presence of Hermitage increases the probability that a corporate
governance violation is reverted by 50%.


V.2    Other implications
       For some corporate managers to be forced into changing their initial decisions, it
must be the case that they were surprised by the intensity of the reaction to their corporate
governance violation. If this learning is occurring in our sample, we should observe that
the frequency of violations decreases over the sample period. Furthermore, if the
Hermitage fund does indeed play a role in boosting the international reaction, the
frequency of violation should drop more for companies that have the Hermitage fund
among its shareholders.



                                                                                           28
       To test these propositions we collected a second larger sample. This sample
identifies all of the companies mentioned by name in the Troika Dialog Bulletin in all
sections during our sample period. This sample of 493 companies includes firms that
commit violations, firms against which violations are committed, and firms that are
mentioned in passing as part of a discussion of ongoing events in the Russian market.
This sample represents the universe of potential firms that Troika could have identified
governance violations in.
       Armed with this sample, we then identified, for each six month period, whether a
violation had been committed, using as our sample of violations the 98 events mentioned
above. Since our sample begins in November 1998, the first complete semester starts in
January 1999. Figure 1 reports the temporal behavior of these frequencies for the sample
of companies owned by Hermitage as of the end of 1998 and for the rest of the
companies.
       Both curves show a strong negative trend, as implied by the hypothesis that
corporate managers learned about the power of the international press during the sample
period. The frequency of violations among companies not owned by the Hermitage fund
dropped from 4% to less than 1%. Among companies owned by the Hermitage, this drop
was much more pronounced: from 15% to zero. Hence, companies owned by the
Hermitage were much more likely to experience a corporate governance violation at the
beginning of the sample period, but not so at the end. This graphic impression is also seen
to be statistically significant if we run a linear probability model of corporate governance
violation, with company fixed effects, a time trend and an interaction between the time
trend and the presence of the Hermitage fund (regression not reported).


VII. How does press coverage lead to better outcomes?


      The question we have not addressed yet is how press coverage succeeds in
changing outcomes. In the Gazprom example, the coverage given to the corporate
governance violation had several effects. First, the government officials on the Gazprom
board felt compelled to side with minority shareholders and pass a motion that required
board approval for any subsequent dilutions. Publication of this news also helped



                                                                                           29
coordinate the actions of small institutional shareholders, who demanded an audit of these
transactions. These stories inflamed the investment community, and helped Hermitage to
convince other investors to sign their proxies to get the necessary 10% required to
demand an independent audit of these and other transactions in December of 2000. The
revelations also provided additional motivation for the government to change the CEO of
Gazprom in May of 2001.
        As this example illustrates, the mechanism through which media coverage affects
outcomes is very complex. It is difficult to identify one single force. All the factors that
played a role in the Gazprom case seem to have gained strength as a result of news
coverage. Nevertheless, we can say that in this Gazprom case, the final difference was
made by a political intervention.
        Dyck (2002) provides further examples of how media pressure influences political
actions, one notable example being the reversal of a proposed dilution by the Russian
Securities regulator when Hermitage made the issue sufficiently high profile that he had
the freedom to act. As Browder claims,
        The reason he made this decision is that I was screaming bloody murder.
        He had a great scandal on his hands. Nobody had ever taken such a visible
        and outspoken position. I was shooting from the trenches, and this gave
        him cover to take his own steps. You have to remember that, as has
        become clearer since then, oligarchs owned the government and Vasiliev
        was worried about terrible things happening to him, professionally or even
        worse.18 By not initiating but responding to an attack, he felt more
        empowered to act. He asked us on a number of occasions to raise specific
        points in the press because he couldn’t go on the offensive until something
        came out publicly. He was clear that he couldn’t be seen as initiating but
        responding. (Dyck (2002))

        With this logic of trying to identify the primary channel which leads to redress
(and caveat that all events are complex and open to multiple interpretations) in mind, in
Table 12, we try to group the positive outcomes according to the main force behind
reversal. Roughly 36% of the cases reach a (at least partially) positive outcome as a result
of the intervention of a regulator. What does press coverage have to do with the decision
of a regulator to intervene? By overcoming Downs’ (1956) rational ignorance result,

18
  Vasiliev resigned from FSCR in October 1999 complaining about a lack of support to address
governance violations.


                                                                                               30
press coverage makes more people aware of the issues involved, increasing the
regulator’s reputation costs of not acting (Dyck, Moss, and Zingales, (2005)).
        Another 14% of the cases get resolved because of political intervention. If Russia
were a typical democracy, the reasoning would be very similar. Politicians feel compelled
to intervene on issues that are highly visible, because their political reputation is on the
line. Being Russia (and being press coverage in a language not read by most of the
voters), the reasoning might be different. The important factor here is the reputation vis-
à-vis foreign (and in particular Anglo-American) investors and policy makers. Even Putin
has some concerns about the way he is perceived in the West.
        In addition, coverage of certain events by the foreign press might provide political
coverage for a Government intervention motivated by other reasons. In the UES case, for
instance, Putin took advantage of the negative coverage that his political rival Anatoli
Chubais, chairman of UES, was receiving in the Western press and intervened to reduce
his power. Had foreign media not attacked Chubais, Putin might have been more
reluctant to intervene for fear of the repercussions his actions might have on his
reputation in the West.
        In another 29% of the cases, a positive resolution is due to effect of press
coverage on the pre-existing opposition. For example, in the Kamaz case, the EBRD was
fighting the share dilution approved by the company. Press coverage strengthened the
EBRD case because it increased the awareness of investors as to the behavior of Kamaz
and in so doing increased the reputation cost of misbehavior.
        In the remaining 21% of the cases, it looks like the company voluntarily changed
its course of actions. In these cases it is more difficult to establish what role did press
coverage play.
        In sum, it looks like the primary mechanism through which media coverage has
an effect is by increasing the reputation cost of misbehavior vis-à-vis a relevant audience
(in this case Anglo-American investors). Obviously, the success of this strategy is highly
dependent on the importance the key actors attribute to their reputation vis-à-vis this
constituency.


VIII. Conclusions and Implications



                                                                                               31
         Our paper aimed at establishing two facts. First, news coverage is driven not only
by the intrinsic appeal of each piece of news, but also by the lobbying effort exerted by
those with an interest in the news being published. Second, media coverage is not just a
mirror of reality, but it can have important effects on reality itself, in particular on
corporate governance. We show that in Russia, during the period 1998-2002, both these
statements are true. The natural question is how generalizable these results are.
         There are undoubtedly many characteristics that make this sample unique. First,
the Russian situation at the end of 1998. As Figure 2 shows, the Russian default made it
extremely difficult for Russian companies to access the international capital market.
Eager to return to this market, Russian companies might have been particularly sensitive
to their image in the Western press. The ostracism toward Russians is also illustrated by
the huge drop in the number of Russians attending the World Economic Forum (Figure
3).19 Both these figures show that at the end of 1999, Russia was at the bottom of its
international credibility. These contingencies (and the desperate need for foreign aid and
capital) might have contributed to Russians’ sensitivity to foreign press coverage.
         The second aspect that makes this sample unique is the presence of the Hermitage
fund. While a hedge fund, Hermitage takes only long positions, does not turn around its
portfolio very much, and is completely invested in Russia.20 In this sense, Hermitage is
very different from an investor like Kenneth Dart, who fought aggressively against one
corporate governance violation, but was happy to let the issue drop when he received a
higher payment not enjoyed by other minority shareholders. Being invested in many
Russian companies, Hermitage has an interest in developing a reputation of not accepting
side deals. Being long makes Hermitage also a credible source of bad news about a
company: it has no interest in depressing the stock price. The same cannot be said for
many hedge funds.
         The third unique aspect of this sample is the naiveté of Russian companies vis-à-
vis the public relations game at the time. In a more sophisticated environment, a fund like



19
   Unfortunately, we were unable to obtain data for the invitees only, so this pattern might be a combination
of demand shifts (people being disinvited from Davos as the oligarch Deripaska) and supply shifts
(politicians and businessmen not being willing to participate during tough economic times).
20
   Hermitage Fund Consolidated Financial Statements, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002.


                                                                                                          32
the Hermitage will find it more difficult to influence the publication of news, because the
press is subject to an opposing PR campaign by the company.
       Finally, the social context in which Bill Browder, the Hermitage Fund chairman,
operates is very special. On the one hand, he is a foreigner who does not belong to the
same social circles of the Russian elites and, as a result, does not fear to be ostracized by
them for attacking other members of the elite. This gives him much more freedom of
action. On the other hand, he operates in a country where the rule of law is very weak, as
shown by his need to have a body guard and by the fact that, in November 2005, he was
prevented from returning to Russia as “persona non grata”.
       Given all these factors, the point estimates obtained in this paper cannot easily be
extrapolated to other environments. What can be extrapolated, however, are the two main
ideas: news coverage can be effectively manipulated by the parties involved and this
manipulation can have real effects on corporate governance. The magnitude of this effect
will depend upon the degree of competition among the groups pressuring the media and
some intrinsic characteristic of the events that makes them more or less appealing to the
press (Dyck, Moss and Zingales (2005)).
       Finally, our results carry an important implication for developing economies. As a
result of English being the lingua franca in international circles, Anglo American media
have an enormous influence on policy making of developing countries, especially
countries in need of foreign aid and investment. Since Anglo American media reflect
Anglo American social norms and values, these media play a non-minor role in the
“Americanization” of values around the world. It is not surprising, thus, that French
President Chirac, concerned with the loss of influence of France, has endorsed an
initiative for a French CNN that will eventually broadcast also in English.




                                                                                           33
                                      References

Almazan , Andres, Jay C. Hartzell and Laura T. Starks, 2005, “Active Institutional
      Shareholders and Costs of Monitoring: Evidence from Executive Compensation”
      Financial Management, Vol. 34, No. 4, Winter 2005

Baron, David, 2003, “Competing for the Public Through the News Media,” Stanford
       GSB Research Paper.

Baron, David, 1996, Business and its Environment, (Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River,
       New Jersey.)

Becker, Gary S., 1968, “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach, “Journal of
       Political Economy 76: 169-217.

Becker, Gary S. and K. Murphy, 1993, “A Simple Theory of Advertising as a Good or
       Bad,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108: 941-964.

Besley, Timothy, and Andrea Prat, 2001, “Handcuffs for the Grabbing Hand? Media
       Capture and Government Accountability,” London School of Economics and
       Political Science, London.

Bhattacharya, Utpal, Hazem Daouk , 2002, "The World Price of Insider Trading",
       Journal of Finance, 2002, vol 57, 75-108

Bhattacharya, Utpal, Hazem Daouk, Brian Jorgenson and Carl-Heinrich Kehr, 2000,
       "When an Event is Not an Event: The Curious Case of an Emerging Market,"
       Journal of Financial Economics, vol 55, 69-101.

Della Vigna, Steffano and Kaplan, 2006, “The Fox news Effect: Media Bias and Voters,”
       NBER Working paper, W12169.

Diamond, D., 1989, "Reputation Acquisition in Debt Markets," Journal of Political
      Economy, August.

Downs, A., 1957, An economic theory of democracy, Harper & Brothers, New York.

Dyck, Alexander, 2002, “The Hermitage Fund: Media and Corporate Governance in
      Russia,” HBS case # N2-703-010.

Dyck, A. and Luigi Zingales, 2002, The Corporate Governance Role of the Media”,
          in R. Islam ed. The right to tell: The role of the Media in Development, The
          World Bank, Washington DC, 2002.

Dyck, A. and Luigi Zingales, 2003, “Asset Prices and the Media” , working paper.

Dyck, A. and Luigi Zingales, 2004, “Private Benefits of Control: An International


                                                                                         34
                  Comparison”, Journal of Finance.

Dyck, A., David Moss, and Luigi Zingales, 2005, “ Media vs. special interests”, working
      paper.

Fama, Eugene F. 1980. “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm.” Journal of
      Political Economy 88(2): 288-307.

Fama, Eugene, and Michael Jensen. 1983. “ Separation of Ownership and Control.”
      Journal of Law & Economics 26(2): 301-25.

Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2006, “Media Bias and Reputation,”             Graduate School of
      Business University of Chicago Working Paper.

George, Lisa and Joel Waldfogel, 2003, “Who Affects Whom in Daily Newspaper
      Markets?” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 11, pp. 765-785.

Gillan, Stuart and Laura Starks, 2003, “Corporate Governance, Corporate Ownership and
        the Role of Institutional Investors: A Global Perspective,” Journal of Applied
        Finance, Vol. 13, No. 2, Fall/Winter.

Gomes, A., 2000, “Going Public without Governance: Managerial Reputation Effects”,
      Journal of Finance, 55 (2), April 2000, pp. 615-646.

Guriev, Sergei and Andrei Rachinsky, 2005, “The Role of Oligarchs in Russian
       Capitalism,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 19, No. 1.

Hamilton, James, 2004, All the news fit to sell, Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ.

Kahan, Marcel and Edward Rock, 2006, “Hedge Funds in Corporate Governance and
      Corporate Control,” University of Pennsylvania working paper.

Karpoff, Jonathan M., 2001, “The Impact of Shareholder Activism on Target Companies:
      A Survey of Empirical Findings” University of Washington - Business School

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, 1998,
      “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 1113-1155.

Miller, Greg, 2006, “The Press as a Watchdog for Accounting Fraud,” HBS Working
        Paper.

Mullinaithan, Sendhil and Andrei Shleifer, 2005, “The Market for News,” American
      Economic Review, 1031-1053.

Reuter and Edward Zitzewitz, 2003 , “Do Ads Influence Editors? Advertising and Bias in
       the Financial Media.” Working paper



                                                                                        35
Shleifer, Andrei, 2005, A Normal Country:            Russia After Communism, Harvard
       University Press, Cambridge MA.

Slinko, Irina, Yakolev, Evgeny and Ekaterina V. Zhuravskaya, 2004, “Laws for Sale:
        Evidence from Russia”, American Law and Economics Review, Vol. 7, pp. 284-318.

Wagstyl, Stefan. 2002. “The Road to Recognition.” Financial Times, April 6/7, p. I.

Zhuravskaya, Ekaterina, 200




                                                                                      36
Appendix

This table shows how we arrived at our final sample based on an initial sample of 480 potential
governance violations from the “Bulletin on Corporate Governance Actions” published weekly by the
Russian investment bank Troika Dialog, for the period December 4, 1998 to July 22, 2002 (Bulletin #23-
#142). This sample was based primarily on all the events reported in a sub-section titled
“Reported/Potential Governance Violations”, “New Share Issues”, and “Split/Swap/Conversions.” The
table identifies the criteria for excluding observations, the number of observations removed from the
sample, and, where relevant, examples of excluded companies.

    Reasons for excluding                              Examples                            Number of
        observation                                                                       observations
                                                                                              480
Event is an update of an                                                                      176
earlier mentioned event
Only reason for inclusion is
that firm has an ADR in
association with the money
laundering investigation in the
United States
Minor delay in financial                                                                       89
reporting
Identified company is the one   Yukos, March 1999 - “Proposed share swap with                  14
committing the governance       subsidiaries causing rift among shareholders”
violation.                      Sibneft, October 2001 - “Reverse split scheme comes
                                under criticism from Noyabrskneftegaz small
                                shareholders”
                                Subtotal of non-repeat, potentially serious governance violations = 201
Uncertainty - Description of    Aphipsky refinery, Sep 1999 – auction of this asset            24
event presents conflicting or   owned by Rosneft subsidiary cancelled at last
unclear information that could  moment (but unclear why or what is going on here)
not be clarified through        Kauchuk, Dec 1998 – Company in bankruptcy but
additional investigation        some assets slated for auction are seized by creditors
Minor event – Description of    Ammonfos, April 2000 – Directors recommend one                 32
event suggests minor event      dividend level and AGM recommends another in
                                apparent violation of law.
                                Aviastar, April 1999 – Government report suggests
                                company should issue shares to dilute and limit
                                foreign ownership, but rejected by company.
                                Lensvyaz, Nov 1999, Event highlighted is that
                                finally pay dividends that promised earlier.
Not valid event – Description   Kaztransgaz, March 2000 – appears violation of                 47
suggests event not a governance contract with western JV partner, (with
violation initiated by insiders compensation)
but rather government action or Krasnoye Sormovo, June 1999- Repeated efforts by
action consistent with contract controlling shareholder to get seats on board
                                commensurate with stakes blocked by state, that
                                insists on keeping board members given to company
                                at time of privatization to protect state secrets over
                                submarine.
                                                                  Observations included in data set = 98




                                                                                                       37
                              Figure 1: Evolution of the Frequency of Corporate Governance Violations in
                              Russian Firms
                              This figure plots the frequency of governance violations in two sub-samples of Russian firms. The
                              frequency in each semester is determined by dividing the total number of companies classified as corporate
                              governance violators during that semester using companies identified by the Russian investment bank
                              Troika Dialog in their weekly “Bulletin on Corporate Governance Actions,” (December 1998- June 2002)
                              by the total number of companies covered by Troika Dialog during the same period. The companies
                              committing violations are those described in Table 2. The first sub-sample consists of the companies where
                              the Hermitage fund had a stake in at the beginning of the sample period (based on their portfolio as of end
                              of 1998), the second one by the rest of the Russian companies followed by Troika Dialog where Hermitage
                              had no stake at the end of 1998.
                             0.18



                             0.16



                             0.14



                             0.12
Probability of a Violation




                              0.1



                             0.08



                             0.06



                             0.04



                             0.02



                               0
                               1999-1            1999-2               2000-1               2000-2                2001-1               2002-2                2003-1
                                                                                            Date

                                               Firms where Hermitage has a stake (end of 1998)      Firms where Hermitage has no stake (end of 1998)




                              Source: Calculations by based on data from Troika Dialog, Hermitage Capital.




                                                                                                                                                       38
                    Figure 2: Russian Bond and Share Issues in the 1994-2004 Period
                    This figure plots capital raising in public markets for Russian firms from 1994-2004, based on data on
                    equity issuance and issuance of bonds or notes from Security Data Corporation. The figures are in millions
                    of Euros.
                   20000


                   18000


                   16000


                   14000


                   12000
Euros (millions)




                   10000


                   8000


                   6000


                   4000


                   2000


                      0
                      1994       1995      1996       1997         1998    1999          2000         2001      2002   2003        2004
                                                                           Year

                                                  Value of Stock Issues           Value of Bonds/Notes Issues

                    Source: Securities Data Corporation.




                                                                                                                              39
                                                         Figure 3: Russian Participants at the World Economic Forum in Davos
                                                         Switzerland
                                                         This figure plots the number of Russian participants in the corporate and public figures categories at the
                                                         annual meeting at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland from 1997-2002. These two
                                                         categories are combined as many figures had positions in both the private industry and the public sector.


                                                        40
Number of participants - corporate and public figures




                                                        35




                                                        30




                                                        25




                                                        20




                                                        15
                                                         1997                 1998                  1999                  2000                  2001                   2002
                                                                                                               Year


                                                         Source: World Economic Forum




                                                                                                                                                                      40
Table 1: How Does Hermitage Generate News?

Panel A - Generating Initial News

Below we present slides from a 41 slide Hermitage Powerpoint presentation produced in early 2000 that
detailed a series of self-dealing actions by company management involving Stroytransgaz, Itera, Rospan,
Zapsibgazprom and other entities. This information was provided to journalists at the Financial Times and
Wall Street Journal. We follow the slides with newspaper coverage in the Financial Times and the Wall
Street Journal that picks up on this news.

Hermitage Slide


       Stroytransgaz: a family affair                                                                                                          DRAFT

      Who owns Stroytransgaz?

      Victor Chernomyrdin                      Rem Vyakhirev                                Arngolt Bekker                                           Vyacheslav Sheremet
     (former Chairman of the Board        (former Chairman of the Board                   (Member of the Board of                                   (Member of the Board and first
      and former CEO of Gazprom)              and CEO of Gazprom)                              Gazprom)                                              deputy of CEO of Gazprom)




                   sons                            daughter                                      children                                                        kin


      Vitaly                 Andrei                 Tatyana                N. Bekker             E.Bekker             V.Bekker                             Kormanovski A.
   Chernomyrdin           Chernomyrdin              Dedikova




     5.96% of               5.96% of               6.40% of                 6.99% of            2.68% of              2.65% of       20.00% of                6.40% of
   Stroytransgaz          Stroytransgaz          Stroytransgaz            Stroytransgaz       Stroytransgaz         Stroytransgaz   Stroytransgaz           Stroytransgaz




                                                                           57.04%
    Source: Stroytransgaz securities market reports, Gazprom, Stroytransgaz securities market reports.
                                                                                                                                                                                5




News Reporting Based on Slide

Financial Times reporting, October 25, 2000

“The FT has learned of one case in which Gazprom has been awarding large contracts to a company which
is majority owned by the relatives of Gazprom’s past and present management. Stroytransgaz documents
from 1999 show that over 50 percent of the pipeline construction company is owned by people close to
Gazprom’s senior management. These include 6 per cent each by Vitaly and Andrei Chernomyrdin, the
sons of the former prime minister, and former head of Gazprom Viktor Chernomyrdin, and a further 6.4 per
cent by Tatyana Dedikova, the daughter of Gazprom’s chief executive Rem Vyakhirev. A further 20 per
cent is held by Arngolt Bekker, Stroytrransgaz’s chief executive and a Gazprom director, and three of his
relatives hold another 12.3 percent between them.…”

Financial Times reporting, October 28, 2000

“The Federal Securities Commission, the market regulator, yesterday confirmed it had asked for an
explanation from Gazprom following the publication of an article in Wednesday’s Financial Times on
relations between the group and Stroytransgaz, a construction company in which present and past senior
managers of Gazprom and their relatives are significant shareholders.

Wall Street Journal, October 30, 2000

“Revelations that top Gazprom managers and their family members own a big chunk of Gazprom main
pipeline-building contractor, OAO Stroytransgas, also caused concern among investors last week.
Gazprom has awarded many lucrative contracts to Stroytransgas…”




                                                                                                                                                                             41
Hermitage Slides




                 Rospan Transfer to Itera                                              DRAFT                           Zapsibgazprom dilution                                                                 DRAFT
                                                                                                               Valuation arrived from placement price valued the whole
                 400                                                                                           Zapsibgazprom at $7 million
                                                                                                                             160
                 350                                                                                                                                                                    137.6 mln shares
                                                                                                                             140
                 300                                                                                                                                                                       Others 9%
                                                                                                                             120                                                                               50.3 mln
                                                                                                                                                                                           Port Corp.         New shares
   Million USD




                 250                                                                                                                                                      58% capital        20%                $3 mln
                                                                                                                                                                           increase




                                                                                                                 Million shares
                                                                                                                             100                 87.3 mln shares                                                worth
                 200
                                                                       $345 mln                                                   80                  Others                            Zapsibgazprom man-t
                                                                                          Loss of
                                                                                                                                                       29%                                      34%
                 150                                                                     $345 mln
                                                                                                                                  60               Port Corp. 7%
                                                                                                                                             Zapsibgazprom man-t 13%
                 100
                                                                                                                                  40
                                                  $104 mln
                  50                                                                                                                              GAZPROM                                   Gazprom
                           $0.000286 mln                                                                                                                                                     37%
                                                                                                                                  20                51%
                   0
                                                                                                                                   0
                       Price paid by Itera   Gazprom valuation    Valuation based on   Gazprom loss                                            Before new issue                         After new issue
                                                                 the average Russian                         Source: Izvestia, Federal Commission of Securities Market.                                                         36
  Source: Vedomosti                                                $/boe of reserves                  32




News Reporting Based on Slides

Wall Street Journal reporting, October 24,                                                                 Wall Street Journal reporting, October 30,
2000                                                                                                       2000
Investors holding about 20% of Gazprom                                                                     “The board briefly discussed the erosion of
complain that Itera has been allowed to gobble                                                             Gazprom’s stake in Zapsibgazprom, A Siberian
up valuable Gazprom assets on the cheap. Take                                                              firm whose 700 billion cubic meters of gas
Rospan, a joint venture holding licenses to two                                                            reserves are valued at about $600 million.
fields with reserves of 230 billion cubic meters                                                           Gazprom didn’t take up its rights in a recent
of natural gas and 80 million metric tons of gas                                                           share issue, allowing its stake to fall to 37% from
condensate. In 1998, Gazprom decide it couldn’t                                                            51% according to securities commission
afford to invest in Rospan production and sold its                                                         documents. Two shell companies of unknown
51% stake to two shell companies founded and                                                               ownership acquired 21% of the company during
owned by Itera: ZAO STI-Sigma and OOO                                                                      the issue. The price of the new stock issued puts
Lanka-Promkomptekt. Despite Rospan’s rich                                                                  the company’s market capitalization at just $12
gas reserves, MR. Vyakhirev ordered the stake                                                              million.”
sold at its nominal price, or par value, of 4,258
rubles -- $284 at the time. Gazprom’s minority
shareholders value the lost gas and gas
condensate reserves at $345 million.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           42
Panel B – Continued Reporting of Allegations
This panel plots the number of articles published in the Wall Street Journal and in the Financial Times
following the first announcement of a corporate governance violation at Gazprom.

                                       6
                                                                                                           Minority shareholders get
                                                                                                           10% of votes to call for audit
                                                                                                           of events. Board passes
                                                                                                           proposal to appoint current
                                       5   - EBRD makes $250 mn                                            auditor to investigate Itera
                                           loan contingent upon
                                           transparency regarding
                                           ITERA
                                           - Securities regulator
  Number of articles about violation




                                       4   initiates investigation
                                                                            Board passs
                                                                            motion to block
                                                                            transfers of
                                                                            assets or
                                       3                                    dilutions of                                                            CEO replaced
                                                                            holdings in
                                                                            subsidiaries
                                                                            witout board

                                       2




                                       1




                                       0
                                               October           November       December            January             February            March      April

                                                                                       Financial Times   Wall Street Journal




                                                                                                                                                               43
Panel C – Lawsuits Initiated by Hermitage
This panel reports the list of all the legal suits brought by the Hermitage fund during the sample period and
their final outcome.

    Issuer                Description of the Case by Hermitage Capital                    Date of    Total Cases
                                                                                          Initial    Cases Won
                                                                                          Filing

AVISMA          Isle of Man suit to stop offshore transfer pricing by majority            Nov-98       1         1
                shareholder (Menatep)
AVISMA          Irish suit to stop offshore transfer pricing by majority shareholder      Nov-98       1         1
                (Menatep)
AVISMA          Isle of Man suit to enforce 1999 Settlement Agreement (see above)         Oct-99       1         1
                when Menatep/AVISMA attempts to breach
Central Bank    Investors in Sberbank filed a lawsuit with the Moscow Arbitration        24-Apr-01     4         0
                Court against the Central Bank of the Russian Federation requested
                the Court to recognize as invalid the Central Bank’s registration of
                the new Sberbank share issue.
Sberbank        Investors in Sberbank filed a lawsuit with the Moscow Arbitration        24-Apr-01     4         0
                Court against Sberbank. Investors requested the Court to recognize
                as invalid the decision of Sberbank’s supervisory board to approve
                the new share issue
Volzhanka       Hermitage Capital Management*, the East Europe Development               05-Oct-01     3         1
                Fund managed by INVESCO** and U.F.G.I.S. Limited filed lawsuit
                against Yurprovider, a company allegedly affiliated with Baring
                Vostok, by the minority shareholders.
                The lawsuit was followed by lawsuits against personal directors of
                Volzhanka affiliated with Baring Vostok which allegedly liable for
                interested parties transactions. These lawsuits were some of the first
                of their kind in Russia that pursued directors for violating their
                fiduciary responsibilities.
Gazprom         Lawsuit in Moscow Commercial Court against PwC for false and             15-Apr-02     4         0
                misleading forensic audit of Gazprom’s relationship with Itera
Gazprom         Lawsuit in Moscow Commercial Court against PwC for false and             15-Apr-02     4         0
                misleading 2000 annual audit of Gazprom
Bank Austria / Suit to recover damages from broker taking illicit spreads on equity        2002        1         1
Creditanstalt trades on the Russian stock market
Surgutneftegas A group of international investors, including Hermitage Capital           04-Mar-04     4         0
               Management, Firebird Management LLC, Prosperity Capital
               Management, and the Russian Investor Protection Association
               launched a legal action in the Khanty Mansiysk Arbitration Court
               against Surgutneftegaz aiming to have the court cancel 62% of
               Surgutneftegaz treasury shares that are being held by the company.
Sberbank       Sberbank shareholders requested the Court to support their call for                     4         0
               an extraordinary shareholders meeting made on March 12 by over
               10% of Sberbank shareholders.
Sberbank       Defamation case for the article published by Vedomosti                                  5         4
Sberbank        Defamation Case for the article published by Vremya Novostei                           4         2
                                                                                          Total        40        11
                                                                                         Domestic      37         8
Source: Hermitage Capital.



                                                                                                            44
Table 2: Sample of Reported Corporate Governance Violations
This table describes the 98 alleged governance violations we use in our empirical analysis. We define as potential corporate governance violations those actions
that, according to the Russian investment bank Troika Dialog, have a negative impact on the cashflow or voting rights of outside investors. This definition does
not necessarily imply that any Russian law was infringed. This sample is based on an initial set of 480 potential governance violations identified using Troika
Dialog’s “Bulletin on Corporate Governance Actions” from December 1998 to June 2002. In the Appendix we describe the steps involved in refining the initial
set of 480 potential infractions to this final sample. The description of the violations in quotes comes from the Troika Dialog’s Bulletin. In some cases such a
succinct description was not available and we provide our own description based on the reading of the events in the Russian and English language press.

                                Date of
           Company             reported                  Reported governance violation (Date of Troika Dialog Corporate Governance Bulletin)
                               violation
Aeroflot                    12-Aug-99         "An Aeroflot spokesman has said that the company may increase the number of outstanding shares by 185%..." (August 12,
                                              1999)
                                              “Shareholders will be asked to increase both the authorized share capital and the number of outstanding shares. It is proposed
Alpha Cement                8-Dec-99          to place the new shares with Alpha Cement-related structures via pre-arranged subscription.” (January 20, 2000) In the end,
                                              31% of shares were placed with designated related party with no disclosed sale price.
Amurkabel                   15-Mar-00         "Amurkabel… was the stage for a violent clash between the current and self-proclaimed directors…in January the company
                                              re-registered as a state unitary enterprise… a shareholder-friendly ruling does not seem imminent." (March 15, 2000)
Amursvyaz                   28-May-01         As part of a plan for consolidation of regional telecom companies, shareholders were asked to approve a swap with Urals
                                              Telecom. The terms of the swap are viewed as detrimental to the interest of minority investors.
                                              "Michael Hunter, president of Dart Management, said that investors like Dart learned from the Austrian bank Creditanstalt,
AVISMA                      27-Oct-98         which organized their 1997 purchase from Menatep of Avisma shares, of a damaging "distributions arrangement" at Avisma.
                                              Hunter said that upon taking control of Avisma, the investors sued TMC international and Isle of Man-based company
                                              receiving the ill-gotten Avisma revenues, to close down the scheme." (Moscow Times August 24, 1999)
                                              "On December 30, Avtosvet BoD approved a 50% share capital increase. In essence, this means a prearranged subscription,
Avtosvet                    30-Dec-99         allowing a small group of insiders to increase their control over the company and barring other shareholders from taking up
                                              the new shares. The decision was passed by the directors, one day after a proposal to increase the share capital by 100% had
                                              been voted down at the EGM on December 29." (February 2, 2000)
                                              "AvtoVAZ management has revealed a reorganization program calling to split the company into 9 business divisions arranged
AvtoVAZ                     23-Jun-00         under a management company…AvtoVAZ may simply end up with R1.2 billion ($78 million) in debt, while its assets may be
                                              transferred to these same subsidiaries. If this happens, shareholders will be left with little more than the parent company’s
                                              debt. The likelihood of the company's subsequent bankruptcy and liquidation should not be ruled out." (June 23, 2000)
                                              "The AvtoVAZ AGM on May 26 …flouted the law by omitting to mail voting slips to shareholders…Many of those who did
AvtoVAZ                     31-May-01         brave the flight to Samara and the 60 odd mile car ride on May 26 fared no better. They were thrown out as gatecrashers: the
                                              company had set May 24 as the deadline for registration." (May 31, 2001)




                                                                                                              45
                              Date of
        Company              reported                Reported governance violation (Date of Troika Dialog Corporate Governance Bulletin)
                             violation
                                         "AvtoVAZ preferred shareholders may soon lose their title to dividends worth 10% of the company's net profits, without
                                         recompense or even a chance to cash out…some shareholders visited the AvtoVAZ HQ, 1000 km from Moscow, to study the
AvtoVAZ                    26-Apr-02     full AGM materials and reported that the unpopular proposition was indeed on the agenda, lumped together with other, mostly
                                         technical amendments...Why...Possibly because it hopes to have all changes, damaging and innocuous, approved en bloc.
                                         This is clearly against the law..." (May 20, 2002.)
                                         "Babayevsky Confectionery 51% shareholder, Inkombank, reported plans for a court appeal over the legality of the February
Babayevsky Confectionery   22-Feb-00     22 EGM, which voted to increase the number of outstanding shares by 33%. The EGM decision means a 13% decrease in the
                                         bank's stake, reducing it from a majority to a blocking stake, Inkombank said. …. At present, 27.8 million new shares are to
                                         be issued to three obscure outside investors, SeptStroi, Bimish Investment and Endora." (March 1, 2000)
                                         "On November 23, the Bashkirenergo BoD approved an increase in the company's share capital…The size of the issue is not
Bashkirenergo              3-Dec-01      known…The law which allows a BoD to approve share issues is on its last legs. From January 1, 2002, share issuance will be
                                         entirely subject to shareholder approval. It seems as if Bashkirenergo is rushing through a dilutive issue before it is too late."
                                         (December, 3, 2001)
                                         "RusAl began to concern itself with the timber industry after it took a blocking minority in Irkustkenergo in mid
Bratsk Pulp                18-Feb-02     2001…RusAl forcibly replaced Sergei Kovostikov as Bratsk Pulp CEO with loyal Georgi Trifonov and established
                                         operational control…He rescinded an agreement to restructure Bratsk Pulp's R750 ($25 million) debt to Irkutskenergo, thus
                                         delivering the plant into RusAl's hands." (February 18, 2002)
                                         TNK, a holder of Chernogorneft debt, publicly proposes a buyout of Chernogorneft's business. This raises fears that this
Chernogorneft              17-Jun-99     auction of assets will not be conducted fairly and will result in a dilution of existing stakes of shareholders in Chernogorneft
                                         including Sidanco shareholders who hold a 73% stake.
                                         "A full-blown struggle has broken out for control of Elektrosila, Russia's monopoly manufacturer of power station generators,
                                         with current leadership sparring against new management appointed by the plant's holding company. … German giant
Elektrosila                1-Feb-99      Siemens AG, which holds a 20 percent stake in the plant, has accused massive holding company EMK of violating
                                         Elektrosila's charter by trying to fire the factory director and replace him with its own man. " (Moscow Times, November 11,
                                         1999)
                                         "Andrew Fox, a British investor in the Far Eastern Shipping Company, or FESCO - Russia's largest shipping concern, with
                                         112 ships and over $350 million annual turnover - says he was threatened with imprisonment in early June by Yevgeny
FESCO                      23-Jun-99     Nazdratenko, governor of the Primorye region. Fox says Nazdratenko paired his threat with a demand that seven percent of
                                         the foreign investors' 42 percent stake in FESCO be turned over in trust to his administration, and that his man be elected
                                         FESCO's chairman of the board. " (Moscow Times, November 2, 1999)
GAZ                        21-Dec-00     News of eventual special GM that gave management increased powers to issue up to 3 billion new shares, against 4.5 million
                                         shares outstanding raises concerns about dilution.
                                         "Allegations that Gazprom would transfer revenues away from the gas producer and quietly give ITERA super-profitable
Gazprom                    12-Aug-99     contracts intensified last week in the mass media. Gazprom's top managers denounced allegations of doing illicit business
                                         with ITERA and enriching themselves at the company's cost..." (August 12, 1999)
Gazprom                    25-Oct-00     Reports of extensive transactions between Gazprom and companies linked to the management, including transactions
                                         involving ITERA, Rospan and Stroitransgaz.




                                                                                                            46
                              Date of
        Company              reported                Reported governance violation (Date of Troika Dialog Corporate Governance Bulletin)
                             violation
                                         Stakes of significant vehicle for minority shareholding in Gazprom (UFG) are restricted from voting in the upcoming AGM,
Gazprom                    11-May-01     making it very unlikely that minority shareholder voice on board will be reelected, thereby strengthening the position of the
                                         incumbent management.
                                         "Although the Irkutskelektrosvyaz (ESIR) BoD had recommended skipping dividends for 1998, which the company finished
                                         in the red, ESIR's majority shareholder Svyazinvest (38%) pushed through a nominal dividend of R0.01 per preferred share,
Irkutskelectrosvyaz        23-Sep-99     payable from the company's special reserve. A group of preferred shareholders, led by Energia-Invest, is now seeking to prove
                                         in court that the nominal dividend infringes upon their rights, as preferred shareholders would enjoy voting rights at the next
                                         AGM if no dividend had been paid." (September 23, 1999)
                                         "(Shareholders can) vote twice for one and the same BoD, and have your vote discounted both times. (And as a result not be
Izhorsk Works              23-Jun-00     able to vote for BoD)" One of principal assets is company Izhorsk Pipe. On July 20, 2000, this company "proposes plans to
                                         float new shares, increasing the share capital by 100-200%" (June 23, 2000) with allocation already slotted for three parties,
                                         creating the possibility for asset shifting.
                                         "TNK subsidiary, Kaluganefteproduct, is poised to increase its share capital hundreds fold from R4835 to R6.6 million.
                                         Although the shares will be offered to the general public and current shareholders will enjoy their pre-emptive right to buy
Kaluganefteproduct         11-Mar-00     into the issue, many of the latter are likely to be diluted, as few will want to pay R66 ($2.3) for an illiquid share." (March 15,
                                         2000) Extra shares are to be swapped for shares in refinery, so essentially diluting minority shareholders of these oil product
                                         suppliers, so that TNK can control the refinery.
                                         Company announces plans to pay debt holders through the new issuance of 600 million company shares with a par value of 50
KAMAZ                      2-Sep-99      rubles, to be distributed among company creditors. While the company argued, "this would allow the company to avoid its
                                         debt increasing due to penalties and fines" minority shareholders which included KKR, with a 26% stake, and EBRD, as
                                         creditor, raised concerns about dilution.
Kazan Helicopter           17-Jun-99     "Shareholders decided to limit foreign capital participation to 25%. Non-residents are also restricted from heading the
                                         company and board membership. The decision was made to split existing shares 5:1." (June 17, 1999)
Khantymansiiskokrtelecom   25-Jul-01     As part of a plan for consolidation of regional telecom companies, shareholders are asked to approve a swap with Urals
                                         Telecom. The terms of the swap are viewed as detrimental to the interest of minority investors.
                                         "Lukoil will issue 11.5 million convertible preferred shares to KomiTEK shareholders. They will subsequently be converted
KomiTEK                    8-Jul-99      into voting common stock." (July 8)"clause 6.3 of the issue prospectus, registered with the FCSM on August 26, provides that
                                         owners of 19%+ of KomiTEK shares can buy extra LUKoil preferreds for just R75 ($3) per share (clause 6.4). This
                                         translates into LUK oil common share price of just $0.5 (it was close to $7.0 on September 23)."(September 23, 1999)
                                         "At their June 18 AGM, KRSG shareholders approved the BoD decision to float new shares and waived their right of first
Krasnoyarsk GES            23-Jun-99     refusal…As a result of the issue, the majority shareholder, RAO UES will see its stake reduced from 51% to 34%." (June 23,
                                         1999)
                                         "On June 26, Krasnoyarsk GES is holding an AGM at 10 am and an EGM at 2pm convened for the sole purpose of replacing
                                         the BoD elected four hours earlier…The company has sent around AGM and EGM notices, but not voting ballots, which it
Krasnoyarsk GES            8-Jun-00      promised to dispatch later, nor AGM and EGM materials, which shareholders can study at their leisure in Divnogorst, in the
                                         Siberian hinterland. “Make sure to bring your ballot,” the EGM notice sternly warns, "You will not get a ballot at the meeting,
                                         if you do not show the one which has been mailed to you." (June 8, 2000) Only no ballots have been mailed of course.




                                                                                                           47
                             Date of
        Company             reported               Reported governance violation (Date of Troika Dialog Corporate Governance Bulletin)
                            violation
Krasnoyarsk Tire          20-Jan-00     "At their February 4th EGM, Krasnoyarsk Tire shareholders will be asked to approve a reorganization program…The potential
                                        threat is that outside shareholders will be left with nothing but debt." (January 20, 2000)
                                        "The AGM voted to approve an additional share issue which will raise $110 million and double KrAZ’s capital. The state,
KrAZ                      7-Jun-99      which owns 20% of the company, and small shareholders face a 50% dilution, as the new issue will be placed via closed
                                        subscription." (July 15, 1999)
                                        "KrAZ has announced plans to place 15 million new shares, representing a 53% increase in the share capital, with
KrAZ                      3-Feb-00      shareholders which control at least 9.8% of existing equity. …. The intricate scheme favors shell companies, registered in the
                                        Seychelles, Virgin Islands and in Cyprus, ostensibly related to Tanako and KrAZ management, which control 90% of KrAZ
                                        equity capital." (February 9, 2000)
Kuzbassugol               3-Aug-00      "The Kemervo authorities sold the stake in a negotiated deal to an obscure entity, Belon, in January 2000. Koks argued that
                                        the state-owned shares could only be sold at an auction or investment tender…" (August 3, 2000)
                                        "MDM Bank, the new owner of Kuznetsk Ferrous Alloys (KFA), (proposed) to float 29 million new shares, which would
Kuznetsk Ferrous Alloys   22-May-01     have increased the number of shares outstanding by 600%. The shares were to be issued to MDM-controlled structures,
                                        diluting the KFA management stake from 44% to 6%." (November 12, 2001)
                                        “New shares, issued at a 31% discount to the current market offer price, are designed to dilute preferred shareholders, as the
Lakokraska                7-Sep-00      program gives them no right of first refusal. Lakokraska has never declared, nor paid dividends, which means that preferred
                                        shares, by default, have had voting rights. And it is these votes which seem poised to be diluted by new issue.”
Leningrad Metal Plant     5-Oct-99      "The new share issue aimed to clear outstanding debts was approved by the November 1 EGM and represents a 114%
                                        increase in share capital. This program will dilute existing LMZ shareholders by at least 54%." (November 24. 1999)
Leningrad Metal Plant     3-Apr-00      Holder of firm debt forces firm into bankruptcy proceedings and, while in proceedings, initiates a new share issue that has the
                                        potential to dilute existing controlling shareholder and other shareholders.
Lomonosov Porcelain       1-Jul-99      "Leningrad Porcelain Factory: nationalized? State Property declared Ministry leaves 75% stakeholders in cold." (July 1,
                                        1999)
Moscow Refinery           3-May-00      Amendment to charter - instead of paying 10% of net profit to preferred shareholders, it was approved to pay 10% of nominal
                                        value of shares as dividends.
                                        Firm announces plans to acquire two power plants from major shareholder UES in exchange for the issuance of new shares.
Mosenergo                 9-Feb-99      This share issue moves UES from less than 50% to more than 50%. Concerns rose about dilution of existing minority
                                        shareholders, value of the acquired plants, and increased scope for transactions that could hurt minority shareholder interests.
                                        "Mosenergo last week reported plans to call an EGM to replace CEO Alexander Remezov…From a corporate governance
Mosenergo                 17-Jul-01     point of view, the outgoing team, headed by Remezov, has been investor-oriented, accessible and efficient. Any change will
                                        therefore likely cause a recession in the company's performance and prompt market players to reassess the stock" (July 17,
                                        2001)
                                        "Last week's announcement of KamAZ' plan to increase its NefAZ (Neftekamsk truck manufacturer) share capital…no
NefAZ                     25-Jan-99     additional issues has yet been discussed, nor has an EGM to approve the issue so far been called…seems to have little or no
                                        regard for other investors rights." (January 25, 1999)




                                                                                                          48
                                Date of
        Company                reported               Reported governance violation (Date of Troika Dialog Corporate Governance Bulletin)
                               violation
                                           "The proposed share swap is causing a rift among shareholders. The swap is part of NNG reorganization and proposed spin-
Nizhevartovskneftegaz        18-Feb-99     off of two upstream divisions… it is proposed to transfer 27% of NNGs assets and liabilities to Samotlorneftegaz and
                                           Nizhnevartovsk, 24% and 3% respectively." (February 18, 1999)
Nizhnevartovsk Oil and Gas                 Nizhnevartovsk Oil and Gas Production Company “will now be offering its shareholders the opportunity of a swap into a
                             6-Sep-01      parent company single share, leaving them with no option but to exit their companies.” (September 17, 2001) Viewed as
Production Company
                                           swap at poor terms.
                                           “Nizhni Tagil Smelter has reported plans to … vote on a revision of the charter … likely to lead to the spinning off of
Nizhni Tagil Metal Plant     25-May-00
                                           company assets, leaving shareholders exposed to the risk of share devaluation.” (May 25, 2000)
                                           Export trading arm Norimet is bought with shares of production subsidiary, Norilsk Mining. Shareholder raise concerns on
Norilsk Nickel               15-Jun-00     terms for swap, ("valued 37.9% of NMC at a ludicrously small R83.9 million ($2.9 million at the exchange rate prevalent in
                                           April)") (January 25, 2001) particularly as trading arm linked with controlling shareholder in Norilsk Nickel, and while
                                           transfer may have met all legal rules, it was not put to shareholders for approval.
                                           Announces plans to wind up holding company, Norilsk Nickel, by swapping shares with production subsidiary, Norilsk
Norilsk Nickel               18-Sep-00     Mining. "We are negative about the effect of the NMC-Norimet-Norilsk Nickel consolidation, which would dilute the
                                           publicly owned stake in the NMC, and particularly about the way in which insiders have steamrollered the restructuring
                                           through, without consulting outside shareholders." (November 23, 2000)
                                           "At their Feb 15 meeting, NWT directors voted to sell off the company's 43% stake in Delta Telecom (24% of the votes) to an
                                           obscure offshore company, TELCO Overseas, for just $2.9 million." "The latest decision by North Western Telecom to sell
North Western Telecom        18-Feb-02     off assets below their market value raises a question mark over the management's commitment to increasing the shareholder
                                           value and turns a spotlight on the inadequate accountability of the board... The recent deal cannot be anything but detrimental
                                           to NWT' outside minority." (March 4, 2002)
NOSTA                        23-Jun-99     "Nost Metallhandels owns 63% of Nosta's share capital, but as yet has no say in company's operations." (June 23, 1999) “New
                                           issue being planned by the company would increase its charter capital by 50%." (July 8, 1999)
                                           "Avtobank has given NOSTA some $80-120 million in loans that were reportedly used to settle wage and tax arrears. The
NOSTA                        7-Oct-99      regional government is anxious because it says that the company cannot service so much debt and threatens that the new
                                           creditors may eventually seize the assets." (October 7, 1999)
                                           Management attempted hostile takeover through $100 million share issue in closed subscription to large shareholders. “CCM,
Novolipetsk Metal            27-Jan-99     which manages 29% of Novolipetsk share capital, has said that Novolipetsk management is using Russia’s crises as an excuse
                                           to “hijack the business” and disenfranchise minority shareholders.” (February 10, 1999).
Novolipetsk Metal            13-Jul-00     Management refused large shareholders to access financial information pertaining to the sale of its business unit, the Stinol
                                           factory.
                                           "Shareholders will be asked to vote on what amounts to a 200 fold reduction in the size of minimum preferred dividends…"
Novorossiisk Shipping        19-Apr-01     Ministry of transport officials in Moscow said that the government, which owns 35% of Novoship's shares, recently
                                           discovered the sale of 75% minus one share of Novoship-Invest. The deal, the sources said, took place about a month ago.
                                           Novoship-Invest is an affiliate of Novoship and holder of 8% of the parent company's shares." (Loyds list, April 20, 2001)




                                                                                                            49
                        Date of
           Company     reported                Reported governance violation (Date of Troika Dialog Corporate Governance Bulletin)
                       violation
Novosibirskenergo    19-Apr-01     "A court on April 17 issued an injunction against the voting of two blocks of shares in the company (some 20% of the votes)"
                                   (April 19, 2001)
Noyabrskneftegaz     1-Dec-98      Sibneft consolidated daughter companies (Noyabrskneftegaz and Noyabrsknetegasgeophysika) using the transfer to a single
                                   share scheme at what are viewed as unfair swap ratios.
Noyabrskneftegaz     27-Dec-00     Sibneft asks subsidiary Noyabrskneftegaz for further consolidation through reverse share split.
                                   "Omskenergo proposes changes increasing exposure to restructuring risks…it has also been proposed to authorize the
Omskenergo           5-Nov-01      executive board to approve any deal involving company assets worth 25% of the company's book value…they reduce the
                                   accountability of the management and increase the exposure of outside shareholders to asset stripping." (November 5, 2001)
Orenburgneft         28-Apr-00     "YUKOS, which owns at least 16% (or 31%, according to some accounts) of this Onaco subsidiary, claims that the company
                                   did not send it an AGM notice (and called) …for a revision of the authorized capital…" (May 25, 2000)
                                   "Two Petmol shareholders … sold a 47% stake in Roska Dairy … to three outside individual investors without allowing its
Petmol Dairy         1-Feb-00      fellow shareholders to exercise their right of first refusal. Even worse, it flouted the UPD articles of incorporation, signed in
                                   November 1999, which stipulated that equity contributions could not be disposed of for at least five years." (March 15, 2000)
                                   "It is proposed to approve the issue of 160 billion new shares, 75% common and 25% preferred, which implies a 1,436 fold
Purneftegaz          12-Apr-00     increase in the number of share outstanding…it does leave shareholders exposed to future dilution, as, according the
                                   purneftegaz charter, the power to approve new share issues (under 75% of the company’s asset values) rests with the BoD. "
                                   (April 12, 2000)
                                   "(Purneftegaz) EGM approved the sale to Rosneft of a total of 18 million tons of crude oil at an average price of $5 /bbl
Purneftegaz          6-Jul-01      ($36.5/ton) which barely covers Purneftegaz' production costs. ...Purneftegaz shareholders also agreed to transfer $273
                                   million worth of equipment to the holding company, to repay R 8.2 billion ($273 million) in debt...Shareholders were never
                                   told what the equipment being transferred was. Yes, and is it really worth only $273 million?" (August 3, 2001)
                                   "Rosneft has been a mediocre parent to Purneftegaz: last year it snatched away its value-creating assets and is now poised to
Purneftegaz          18-Feb-02     dilute dissenting shareholders by forcing them to buy stock of empty subsidiaries at a premium to their net value." (March 4,
                                   2002)
RAO UES              5-Apr-00      UES proposes restructuring plan for industry that minority shareholders contend will open up ample opportunities for self-
                                   dealing by company insiders.
                                   "Rospan was under external management, with Itera comfortably controlling 51% of the equity and 80% of its own debt,
Rospan               10-Aug-00     when, just four months before external management was due to expire, two related gas traders, Nafta-Energia and Yamalstroi,
                                   were added to the company’s creditors' list. Between them, they had suddenly been discovered to control some 60% of its
                                   debt." (August 10, 2000)
Rosshelf             18-Feb-02     "Rosshelf, which is 55% owned by Gazprom, has reported plans to issue 100 million new shares to clear the outstanding $150
                                   million in debt to the gas giant…little more than a predatory asset hunt, disguised as asset restitution." (February 18, 2002)
Rostselmash          4-Dec-98      "Kontrast, which is a RSM minority shareholder, filed a lawsuit against RSM, appealing to reverse the deal that siphoned off
                                   all of the parent company’s viable assets, leaving it with massive liabilities and no assets." (December 4, 1998)




                                                                                                     50
                            Date of
         Company           reported                Reported governance violation (Date of Troika Dialog Corporate Governance Bulletin)
                           violation
                                       "Rosneft subsidiary Sakhalinmorneftegaz will hold an AGM on April 26. Shareholders will … be asked to waive their
Sakhalinmorneftegaz      14-Mar-00     statutory right to have their stakes redeemed by a shareholder which has accumulated more than 30% of the company's
                                       equity...The mere fact of waiving their major right, combined with the general lack of transparency, should be enough to put
                                       small shareholders, which control at least 10% of the company, on their guard." (April 12, 2000)
                                       “It is proposed to place 3 million new shares with the Sakha government, which increases its control up to 59%, to reimburse
Sakhaneftegaz            16-Feb-00     it for R26.6 million ($930,000) in capital investment. The implied market capitalization is therefore only $3.99 million, with
                                       the shares priced at a 30% discount to their current market value ($1)… Shareholders will vote by correspondence, which
                                       increases the scope for potential corporate governance violation.” (March 15, 2000)
                                       “Samaraneftegaz has announced plans to issue 67,490.280 additional common shares. The issue represents a 238% increase in
                                       SNGs charter capital (Threat: capital dilution). The company proposed to place the issue via closed
                                       subscription…Shareholders will be asked to approve all Samaraneftegas BoD decisions made through 1997 and 1998 …
Samaraneftegaz           24-Feb-99     Furthermore, Samaraneftegas directors believe that it will do no harm to get carte-blanches for future restructuring deals and
                                       ask shareholders to authorize any spin-offs and asset stripping that the BoD may, at any time, consider appropriate. They will
                                       therefore ask shareholder to okay future deals “in bulk.” (February 24, 1999) “On March 23, a bailiff opened the
                                       Samaraneftegaz EGM by reading out a court ruling barring four companies … from voting their shares. By
                                       “excommunicating” its four major critics Yukos secure 95.7% of votes. (March 24, 1999)
                                       "The proposed share swap is causing a rift among shareholders. The swap is part of NNG reorganization, and proposed the
Samotlorneftegaz         18-Feb-99     spin-off of two upstream divisions… it is proposed to transfer 27% of NNGs assets and liabilities to Samotlorneftegaz and
                                       Nizhnevartovsk 24% and 3% respectively." (February 18, 1999)
Samotlorneftegaz         6-Sep-01      “Will now be offering its shareholders the opportunity of a swap into a parent company single share, leaving them with no
                                       option but to exit their companies.” (September 17, 2001) Viewed as swap at poor terms.
                                       "Over the last 12 months, the Moscow Industrial Bank has accumulated 20% of Samson outstanding debts, carried out a
Samson                   24-Aug-00     major restructuring at the company, and is now set to replace the top management. As part of a restructuring program Samson
                                       has hived off some 20% of each of its seven subsidiaries." (August 24, 2000) assets, moved away form the company in 17
                                       consequent deals in late 1999-early 2000, were undervalued by "at least R320-550 million".
                                       "On December 27, Sberbank BoD reportedly discussed 1999 financial results and a new share issue program…if the bank
Sberbank                 27-Dec-00     decides to fill in the authorized cap, by issuing a further 4.99 million share, then this will lead to a 36% increase in the voting
                                       shares…" we assess the exposure to potential dilution of outside shareholders as "vulnerable to high." (Jan 25, 2000)
                                       “This summer SIBUR staged several shareholders meetings at Sibneftegazperabotka. The meeting pushed through the
                                       reorganization of the company, whereby its crown jewels (ten gas refineries) were transferred to SIBUR-Tyumen and the
Sibneftegazpererabotka   22-Jun-99     parent company was left with debt and little else ... SbNG offered to pay dissenting shareholders R0.002 per share, which was
                                       the value arrived at by an outside appraiser, the obscure Audit-master, hired by SIBUR (it was not the auditor appointed by
                                       the AGM)."

SibUr-Neftekhim          3-Aug-00      “(Large shareholder) is suing the Neftekhim CEO for signing off his company’s $18.8 million (R525 mln) stake. This 48%
                                       stake was allegedly sold to a third party without consulting the parent company and controlling shareholder”




                                                                                                          51
                             Date of
          Company           reported                Reported governance violation (Date of Troika Dialog Corporate Governance Bulletin)
                            violation
                                        "Liquidation proceedings were initiated by Beta-Eco, one of Sidanco's creditors, claiming that it was owed R 0.5
Sidanco                   7-Apr-99      million…pending the Court's decision, a Beta-Eco representative was appointed to run the company as an outside manager."
                                        (April 7, 1999)
Slavneft-Megionneftegaz   6-Jul-00      "TNK, a 12.8% shareholder in Slavneft, got no seat on the new board…Ahead of the Slavneft AGM, the adamant Slavneft
                                        won a court indictment, barring TNK from voting on its stake." (July 6, 2000)
                                        "Stepan Razin to dilute shareholders… The decision to increase the share capital by 83% was approved by shareholders…It is
Stepan Razin Brewery      8-Dec-99      proposed to distribute new shares equally between three private companies, via closed subscription…the shares will be paid
                                        for by veksels, issued by those companies." (December 8, 1999)
                                        "The number of authorized shares was increased by 260% on November 11, raising the specter of dilution, as will any such
                                        increase whose purpose is kept secret. What makes it particularly worrying in SUAL's case is that insiders completely
SUAL                      11-Nov-01     dominate the board." Nov 16 "holding company sold 1.5 billion new shares at an 80% discount to the market to an obscure
                                        offshore company, Dirraffe. That issue increased SUAL's share capital by 260% but earned the company a mere $50
                                        million." (July 8, 2002)
                                        "In early January Surgutneftegaz crafted a consolidation program, which, if approved by the EGM called for February 10,
                                        would increase management's holding of voting share to 40% and give it control over "treasury stock" (33%). Outside
                                        shareholders would see their combined stake decline from 31% to less than 25%, less than a blocking minority...There are
Surgutneftegaz            24-Jan-00     several reasons for concern. (1) The swap rates remain unknown...(2) ...there may be no way to verify interested-party
                                        transaction requirements...(3) The company has yet to confirm that preferred shareholders will be allowed to vote...(4)... the
                                        shares which the company currently owns in the subsidiary, rather than being cancelled...management will have the proxy to
                                        vote them." (February 2, 2000)
TNK-Nyagan                6-Sep-01      TNK initiated reverse share split that has the potential to squeeze out minority investors.
                                        "The decision of a 25% dilution was accompanied by a generous proposal from the BoD to all existing shareholders to take up
Tomsk Refinery            24-Jun-99     the new shares at R848 ($35) each and a dubious offer to buy shares from dissenting shareholders at R21 ($0.86) per share."
                                        (June 24, 1999)
                                        "Tomskneft… will hold an EGM… The agenda of the meeting includes the approval of a 41% increase in of Tomskneft share
                                        capital, and the authorization of 82 million new shares issued to five Yukos-affiliated offshore companies… It is also
                                        proposed that all structural changes made by the BoD from 1997 until the EGM be approved (i.e. the creation of 32 daughter
                                        companies and the transfer of $159 million in Tomskneft assets to subsidiaries). Shareholders will be asked to vote on
Tomskneft VNK             24-Feb-99     amendments to the charter… (that) would give the BoD unbridled powers, leaving shareholders defenseless. (March 10, 1999)
                                        “When shareholders arrived that morning to the address announced in the EGM notice, they discovered a note, on a sheet of
                                        paper stuck to the wall, saying that the meeting would take place at a different location, the now well-known town of Mosalsk
                                        (a 2-3 hour drive from Moscow). By doing so YUKOS, which had so far been selective in barring shareholders from general
                                        meetings (keep the ‘undesirables’ out and let ‘good old boys’ in), has displayed unusual impartiality by leaving all outside
                                        shareholders out of the action…” (June 17, 1999)




                                                                                                           52
                        Date of
           Company     reported                Reported governance violation (Date of Troika Dialog Corporate Governance Bulletin)
                       violation
                                   "At the Transneft AGM, the government, which owns 100% of voting stock, voted to slash preferred dividends to R0.5
                                   (compared with R56.6 in 1997). Transneft still owes about R133.6 million ($5.5 million) in 1997 preferred dividends.
Transneft            8-Jul-99      Preferred shareholders have not received any dividends, but because dividends were announced, they could not vote at the
                                   AGM. The state has pushed through an amendment, whereby the company, instead of 10% of net profit, will pay fixed
                                   preferred dividends of only R0.5." (July 8, 1999)
                                   "Tulanefteproduct, a Transnefteproduct subsidiary, has announced plans to increase its share capital by 59% via additional
Tulanefteproduct     8-Dec-99      share issue. It is proposed to place the new shares with insiders via closed subscription. The proposal will be discussed at the
                                   EGM, scheduled for January 8." (December 8, 1999)
Tyumenneftegaz       6-Sep-01      “Will now be offering its shareholders the opportunity of a swap into a parent company single share, leaving them with no
                                   option but to exit their companies.” (September 17, 2001) Viewed as swap at poor terms.
                                   "Ugraneft is controlled by Sibir Energy, which has a majority on its board. However, TNK, which own only 2.4% of
Ugraneft             3-Aug-01      Ugraneft through Chernorgorneft, staged a general meeting for Ugraneft shareholders on June 28, which elected rival
                                   executive and supervisory bodies." (August 3, 2001)
                                   "Uralkaly shareholder received their voting ballots on May 22, two days prior to the cutoff date. At the AGM on May 26,
Uralkaly             25-May-00     shareholders are scheduled to revise the charter…These changes…appear controversial and hardly in the best interest of
                                   outside shareholders." (May 25, 2000)
Ust-Ilimsk Timber    27-Aug-01     A prominent investor forces production subsidiary (Ust-Ilimsk Timber) into bankruptcy and in the process allegedly transfers
                                   assets to himself.
Vannady              4-Nov-00      "On October 24, the creditor’s board approved a decision to issue new shares, made by the external manager, Oleg Kozyrev.
                                   No further details were released…this latest blow is aimed against the shareholders of Vannady." (November 4, 2000)
Viksunsk Pipe        26-Jan-99     Proposed share redemption at a price 4 times lower than the price of new shares.
                                   "At their AGM on June 3, Vladimir Tractor shareholders will vote on changes to the company charter. The board would also
Vladimir Tractor     1-Jun-00      be authorized to approve, without shareholders consent, interested and related party transactions if the party involved is an
                                   executive director, a BoD member or an entity which owns at least 20% of the company. Yet another proposal would give the
                                   BoD discretion over transaction involving 25-50% of the company's assets..." (June 1, 2000)
                                   "Filed suit against Volgotanker management, hoping to force a reversion of its earlier decision to split the largest Russian
Volgotanker          10-Mar-99     river shipping company into three separate companies…the parent company fleet to be transferred to its daughters. By
                                   spinning off its profitable assets, the parent company (of which the regional government owns 20%) will be left with bad
                                   debts." (March 10, 1999)
                                   "A small group of investors…claim that they were barred from exercising their right of first purchase, when VSMPO placed
VSMPO                28-Nov-98     two 19.9% stakes with affiliated companies…(which led to) the election of a VSMPO-dominated BoD at the May AGM. The
                                   placement price was R6.5 per share, 84 times below market."
VSMPO                01-Sept-99    Controlling shareholder sues minority shareholders (who previously sued management) in US court.
                                   “Alrosa, a diamond prodsucer based in the far north of Russia, has reported acquiring a majority stake in Viloyskos, a power
Yakutskenergo        19-Oct-00     plant currently under construction … (from) Yakutskenergo. The price of the deal has not been disclosed … Yakutskenergo
                                   had alone invested $606 million in its constructions.” (October, 19, 2000)




                                                                                                     53
                     Date of
        Company     reported               Reported governance violation (Date of Troika Dialog Corporate Governance Bulletin)
                    violation
                                "(Slavneft) immediately pushed through a motion to reduce the number of Yaroslavneftegorgsintez directorships from ten to
YANOS             16-Jun-00     seven. These they easily filled with their own representatives, banishing TNK, which had had the other seats, from the
                                board." (June 16, 2000)
                                “Approval of oil sales by YFGA to Yukos-controlled entities at R250 per ton for the next three years. Retroactive approval of
                                the establishment of 59 daughter companies and prospective approval of 60 more subsidiaries to be created over the next three
Yuganskneftegaz   24-Mar-99     years. Transfer of $1 billion in assets from the parent company to 119 subsidiaries. Shareholders that do not attend the
                                meeting or vote against the proposals, will be bought out for as little as R7.5 per share (33 cents), which values
                                Yuganskneftegaz’s oil reserves at just $0.0003 per barrel. (March 24, 1999)
                                "YUKOS NK shareholders approve suspicious major transaction and waive "tag-along right." At their June 29 AGM,
YUKOS             8-Jul-99      YUKOS NK shareholders effectively voted to sell a major stake to an offshore company, Hulley Enterprises Ltd. On June 8,
                                the BoD approved a new issue, which represents a 25% increase of the charter capital." (July 8, 1999)




                                                                                                54
Table 3 – Variable Definitions and Sources

Variable                          Definition                                                             Source
Type of governance violation      Based on a reading of the event reported in Troika Dialog’s            Troika Dialog’s “Bulletin on Corporate Governance
                                  “Bulletin on Corporate Governance Actions” and news stories            Actions” + Russian and English news sources in
                                  about the event in Russian and English news sources, we code 7         Factiva.
                                  mutually exclusive categories of alleged violation, which include
                                  disenfranchisement and six types of dilution (Share Issuance,
                                  Share Swap, Reorganization, Bankruptcy, Asset Stripping and
                                  Other).
Maximum loss due to dilution      The maximum potential loss variable assumes the proposed               Federal Comission on Security Market Disclosure
                                  action went through and the worst fears were realized for              project, and Troika Dialog “Bulletin on Corporate
                                  minority shareholders.                                                 Governance Actions.”
Maximum loss due to               When the action is a disenfranchisement, we use a three point          Same as above
disenfranchisement                scale from lowest (1) to highest (3) severity of the potential loss.
Outcome of potential governance   For each alleged violation we code the outcome equal to 0 if it        Troika Dialog’s “Bulletin on Corporate Governance
violation                         was not redressed at all, 1 if partially redressed, and 2 if           Actions” + Russian and English news sources in
                                  substantially redressed.                                               Factiva.
News coverage of alleged          The number of articles in English newspapers (WSJ and FT) and          Factiva, ISI Emerging Markets
governance violation              in Russian papers (Kommersant, Izvestia and Vedemosti) is based
                                  on a count of the number of articles mentioning a company in the
                                  specified newspaper during the period from t-1 month to t+2
                                  months after the date of the alleged violation. We read the
                                  complete text of all articles with the company name, and retained
                                  only those articles that made a reference to the alleged violation.
Newsworthiness                    Number of articles mentioning a company in the in English              Factiva, ISI Emerging Markets.
                                  newspapers (WSJ and FT) in a period prior to the violation and
                                  before the Russian currency crises, which we define as January-
                                  July 1998.
Foreign ownership stake           Proportion of stock held by foreign investors.                         Official recording of the identities of all shareholders
                                                                                                         with more than 5 percent stake, collected by Federal
                                                                                                         Commission on Security Market Disclosure project
                                                                                                         complemented with accounts in the business press
                                                                                                         (Russian and English) and in Troika Dialog “Bulletin
                                                                                                         on Corporate Governance Actions,”
EBRD dummy                        Dummy variable equal to 1 if the EBRD has provided loan                EBRD Investments: 1991-2004, which lists loans by




                                                                                                         55
                  financing to the company prior to committing the infraction.       company and date.
Log of assets     Log of assets is the log of book value of fixed assets in 1999.    Federal Commission on Security Market Disclosure
                                                                                     Project
Hermitage stake   The table indicates with a dummy variable whether Hermitage        Hermitage Fund Consolidated Financial Statements,
                  Capital had a stake in the company based on their reported         1998.
                  portfolio composition at the end of 1998, the earliest available
                  date for the Hermitage fund.




                                                                                     56
Table 4: Types of Alleged Corporate Governance Violations and Outcomes
For each alleged violation, this table reports its type, the maximum potential loss, the outcome, and for those with a positive outcome, a description of notable
events regarding the outcome. We include 7 mutually exclusive categories of alleged violation, which include disenfranchisement and six types of dilution
(Share Issuance, Share Swap, Reorganization, Bankruptcy, Asset Stripping and Other).The maximum potential loss variable assumes the proposed action went
through and the worst fears were realized for minority shareholders. When the action is a disenfranchisement, we use a three point scale from lowest (1) to
highest (3) severity of the potential loss. For each alleged violation we code the outcome equal to 0 if it was not redressed at all, 1 if partially redressed, and 2 if
substantially redressed. The outcome description is based on our reading of the English and Russian press and Troika Dialog’s “Bulletin on Corporate
Governance Actions.”

Company                         Date             Type of Corporate Governance          Maximum           Outcome       Description
                                                 Violation                             Potential
                                                                                       Loss
Aeroflot                        12-Aug-99        Dilution through Share Issuance       64.9              0
Alfa Cement                     08-Dec-99        Dilution through Bankruptcy           31                0
Amurkabel                       15-Mar-00        Dilution through Other Methods        100               0
Amursvyaz                       28-May-01        Dilution through Share Swap           74                0
AVISMA                          27-Oct-98        Dilution through Asset Stripping      27                1             Financial settlement in lawsuit.
Avtosvet                        30-Dec-99        Dilution through Share Issuance       33                0
AvtoVAZ                         23-Jun-00        Dilution through Bankruptcy           100               0
AvtoVAZ                         28-May-01        Disenfranchisement                    2                 0
AvtoVAZ                         26-Apr-02        Disenfranchisement                    2                 2             Reverted on 3/14/2003, by court
Babayevsky Confectionery        22-Feb-00        Dilution through Share Issuance       24.8              0
Bashkirenergo                   29-Nov-01        Disenfranchisement                    2                 1             Provision passed at BoD never exercised.
                                                                                                                       RusAl used debt to seize control of company, then sold
Bratsk Pulp                     20-Dec-01        Dilution through Reorganization       100               1             out to Ust-Ilim.
                                                                                                                       TNK seized control of asset, but later agreed to return
Chernogorneft                   17-Jun-99        Dilution through Reorganization       100               1             for shares.
                                                                                                                       Old CEO was dismissed improperly by controlling
                                                                                                                       shareholder. On next GM minority shareholders won
Electrosila                     29-Oct-98        Disenfranchisement                    3                 2             with their CEO firmly back in play by July of 1999.
FESCO                           23-Jun-99        Disenfranchisement                    3                 0
GAZ                             21-Dec-00        Dilution through Share Issuance       100               1             Provision passed at AGM never exercised.
Gazprom                         12-Aug-99        Dilution through Other Methods        10                0
                                                                                                                       Steps to address transactions including removal of
Gazprom                         25-Oct-00        Dilution through Other Methods        10                2             management in spring 2001, recovery of some assets.




                                                                                                              57
                                                                                         CEO replaced in advance of AGM, followed by removal
                                                                                         of restriction on UFG shares, with Fyodorov gaining
Gazprom                     11-May-01   Disenfranchisement                2     2        seat at AGM.
                                                                                         On March 1, 2000, Irkutsk Region arbiters ruled the
                                                                                         Irkutskelectrosvyaz EGM decision to announce 1998
Irkutskelectrosvyaz         23-Sep-99   Disenfranchisement                2     2        preferred dividends illegal.
Izhorsk Works               23-Jun-00   Dilution through Share Issuance   44    0
Kaluganefteproduct          11-Mar-00   Dilution through Share Swap       100   0
                                                                                         Share issue goes through. EBRD challenges case,
                                                                                         initiating lawsuits, eventual agreement whereby
                                                                                         transform half of debt into equity (4-5%) and remaining
KamAZ                       02-Sep-99   Dilution through Reorganization   80    1        half into rescheduled debt backed by the government.
Kazan Helicopter            17-Jun-99   Disenfranchisement                1     0
Khantymansiiskokrtelecom    25-Jul-01   Dilution through Share Swap       70    0
                                                                                         The allowance for large shareholders to buy extra shares
KomiTEK                     30-Jun-99   Dilution through Share Issuance         1        was not exercised.
Krasnoyarsk GES             23-Jun-99   Dilution through Share Issuance   33    0
Krasnoyarsk GES             08-Jun-00   Disenfranchisement                1     0
Krasnoyarsk Tire            20-Jan-00   Dilution through Bankruptcy       100   0
KrAZ                        07-Jun-99   Dilution through Share Issuance   50    0
KrAZ                        03-Feb-00   Dilution through Share Issuance   33    2        Shareholders declined the agenda of EGM.
Kuzbassugol                 03-Aug-00   Disenfranchisement                1     0
                                                                                         On October 26, 2001 FCSM refused to register new
Kuznetsk Ferrous Alloys     22-May-01   Dilution through Share Issuance   86    2        issue.
Lakokraska                  07-Sep-00   Dilution through Share Issuance   50    0
Leningrad Metal Plant       05-Oct-99   Dilution through Share Issuance   54    0
Leningrad Metal Plant       03-Apr-00   Dilution through Reorganization   70    0
                                                                                         Private investors managed to overturn the court decision
Lomonosov Porcelain         01-Jul-99   Dilution through Other Methods    100   2        and got company back.
Moscow Refinery             03-May-00   Disenfranchisement                1     0
Mosenergo                   09-Feb-99   Dilution through Share Issuance   9.5   0
Mosenergo                   12-Jul-01   Disenfranchisement                2     0
NefAZ                       25-Jan-99   Dilution through Share Issuance   57    0
Nizhnevartovskneftegaz      15-Jan-99   Dilution through Share Swap       27    0
Nizhnevartovsk Oil & Gas
Production                  06-Sep-01   Dilution through Share Swap       85    0
Nizhniy Tagil Metal Plant   25-May-00   Disenfranchisement                2     0




                                                                                    58
Norilsk Nickel           15-Jun-00   Dilution through Share Swap       27.5   0
Norilsk Nickel           18-Sep-00   Dilution through Share Swap       11     0
North Western Telecom    18-Feb-02   Dilution through Other Methods           0
NOSTA                    23-Jun-99   Dilution through Share Issuance   33     0
NOSTA                    07-Oct-99   Dilution through Reorganization   100    0
Novolipetsk Metal        27-Jan-99   Dilution through Share Issuance   50     0
Novolipetsk Metal        13-Jul-00   Dilution through Other Methods    5      0
                                                                                       State Property Fund cancelled the deal to strip assets
Novorossiisk Shipping    19-Apr-01   Dilution through Other Methods    8      1        from Novoship to offshore company.
Novosibirskenergo        04-Apr-01   Disenfranchisement                2      0
Noyabrskneftegaz         01-Dec-98   Dilution through Share Swap              0
Noyabrskneftegaz         27-Dec-00   Disenfranchisement                3      0
Omskenergo               05-Nov-01   Disenfranchisement                1      0
Orenburgneft             28-Apr-00   Disenfranchisement                1      0
Petmol Dairy             01-Feb-00   Disenfranchisement                2      0
Purneftegaz              12-Apr-00   Disenfranchisement                3      0
Purneftegaz              06-Jul-01   Dilution through Other Methods    80     0
Purneftegaz              18-Feb-02   Dilution through Other Methods    66     0
                                                                                       Reorganization plan radically altered in face of protests
RAO UES                  05-Apr-00   Dilution through Bankruptcy       100    1        and publicity.
Rospan                   20-May-00   Dilution through Reorganization   100    0
                                                                                       On June 27, 2002 Lukoil managed to block the decision
Rosshelf                 07-Feb-02   Dilution through Share Issuance   97     2        to issue new shares proposed by Gazprom
Rostselmash              12-Apr-98   Dilution through Other Methods    8      0
Sakhalinmorneftegaz      14-Mar-00   Disenfranchisement                2      0
Sakhaneftegaz            16-Feb-00   Dilution through Share Issuance   30.5   0
Samaraneftegaz           24-Feb-99   Dilution through Share Issuance   75     0
Samotlorneftegaz         18-Feb-99   Dilution through Share Swap       27     0
Samotlorneftegaz         06-Sep-01   Disenfranchisement                3      0        .
Samson                   04-Jul-00   Dilution through Reorganization   20     0
                                                                                       Dilutive issues go through, but minorities get board seat
Sberbank                 27-Dec-00   Dilution through Share Issuance   26.3   1        and later law passed limiting future issues
Sibneftegazpererabotka   22-Jun-99   Dilution through Reorganization   100    0
SibUr-Neftekhim          03-Aug-00   Disenfranchisement                3      0
                                                                                       BP and Interros eventually agree to a deal that allows
Sidanco                  07-Apr-99   Dilution through Reorganization   100    1        them to get the company out of bankruptcy.




                                                                                  59
Slavneft-Megionneftegaz   06-Jul-00   Disenfranchisement                 3      0
Stepan Razin Brewery      08-Dec-99   Dilution through Share Issuance    50     0
SUAL                      11-Nov-01   Dilution through Share Issuance    72     0
Surgutneftegaz            24-Jan-00   Dilution through Share Swap        19.4   0
TNK-Nyagan                06-Sep-01   Disenfranchisement                 3      0
                                                                                         On October 4, 1999 the FCSM (national securities
Tomsk Refinery            24-Jun-99   Dilution through Share Issuance    20     2        regulator) cancelled the new issue
                                                                                         On January 17, 2000 the FCSM suspended the
Tomskneft VNK             24-Feb-99   Dilution through Share Issuance    29     2        Tomskneft share issue prospectus.
                                                                                         On July 3, 2000, the general meeting approved the
Transneft                 08-Jul-99   Disenfranchisement                 2      1        paying of dividends for 1997
Tulanefteproduct          08-Dec-99   Dilution through Share Issuance    37.1   0
Tyumenneftegaz            06-Sep-01   Disenfranchisement                 3      0
Ugraneft                  29-Jun-01   Disenfranchisement                 3      0
Uralkaly                  25-May-00   Disenfranchisement                 1      0
Ust Illimsk Timber                                                                       The bankruptcy proceedings were ceased and assets
Concern                   27-Aug-01   Dilution through Bankruptcy        100    1        were returned to Rosprom.
Vannady                   04-Nov-00   Dilution through Reorganization    90     0
                                                                                         Agreement was achieved between shareholders and
Viksunsk Pipe             26-Jan-99   Dilution through Share Issuance    45     1        managers, with support of FCSM and NAUFOR.
Vladimir Tractor          01-Jun-00   Disenfranchisement                 2      0
                                                                                         On May 27, at the General Meeting the regional
                                                                                         authority owning 20% of the company voted against the
                                                                                         restructuring plan proposed by Yukos. Still Yukos
Volgotanker               10-Mar-99   Dilution through Reorganization    100    1        managed to appoint its CEO.
VSMPO                     28-Nov-98   Disenfranchisement                 1      0
                                                                                         Suit to force minority investors in VSMPO is dropped,
VSMPO                     01-Sep-99   Disenfranchisement                 2      1        and investors agree to exit firm.
Yakutskenergo             19-Oct-00   Dilution through Asset Stripping          0
YANOS                     28-Apr-00   Dilution through Share Issuance    48.5   0
                                                                                         Conflict between FCSM and Yukos. FCSM stop trading
                                                                                         of Yukos shares on RTS and Yukos was forced to
                                                                                         switch to another stock exchange. Yukos doubled the
Yuganskneftegaz           24-Mar-99   Dilution through Share Swap        70     1        swap ratio.
Yukos                     1-Jun-99    Dilution through Share Issuance    20     0




                                                                                    60
  Table 5: News Coverage of Alleged Corporate Governance Violations
   This table reports our primary measures of news coverage used in tables 8-10. The number of articles in
   English newspapers (WSJ and FT) and in Russian papers (Kommersant, Izvestia and Vedemosti) is based
   on a count of the number of articles mentioning a company in the specified newspaper during the period
   from t-1 month to t+2 months after the date of the alleged violation. The measures of newsworthiness are
   based upon a 6-month period prior to the violation and before the Russian currency crises.
                                            # of articles     # of articles  Newsworthiness- Newsworthiness-
                                             in English       in Russian        coverage in        coverage in
                                            newspapers: newspapers:               English            Russian
        Company                  Date
                                              WSJ and       Kommersant,        newspapers          newspapers
                                              Financial      Izvestia and     January-June        January-June
                                               Times          Vedomosti            1998                1998
Aeroflot                      12-Aug-99           0                 0                7                  97
Alfa Cement                   08-Dec-99           0                 0                0                   2
Amurkabel                     15-Mar-00           0                 0                0                   0
Amursvyaz                     28-May-01           0                 0                0                   0
AVISMA                        27-Oct-98           0                 0                0                   1
Avtosvet                      30-Dec-99           0                 0                0                   0
AvtoVAZ                       23-Jun-00           0                 3                2                  92
AvtoVAZ                       28-May-01           0                 6                2                  92
AvtoVAZ                       26-Apr-02           0                 2                2                  92
Babayevsky
Confectionery                 22-Feb-00           0                 5                0                   6
Bashkirenergo                 29-Nov-01           0                 0                0                   1
Bratsk Pulp                   20-Dec-01           0                 6                0                   0
Chernogorneft                 17-Jun-99           5                 4                0                   5
Electrosila                   29-Oct-98           0                 0                0                   2
FESCO                         23-Jun-99           0                 3                0                   8
GAZ                           21-Dec-00           1                 5                4                  35
Gazprom                       12-Aug-99           0                 1               110                381
Gazprom                       25-Oct-00          16                 6               110                381
Gazprom                       11-May-01           7                21               110                381
Irkutskelectrosvyaz           23-Sep-99           0                 0                0                   0
Izhorsk Works                 23-Jun-00           0                 0                0                   8
Kaluganefteproduct            11-Mar-00           0                 0                0                   0
KamAZ                         02-Sep-99           0                 0                0                  94
Kazan Helicopter              17-Jun-99           0                 0                0                   4
Khantyman                      25-Jul-01          0                 2                0                   0
KomiTEK                       30-Jun-99           0                 3                0                   4
Krasnoyarsk GES               23-Jun-99           0                 0                1                   7
Krasnoyarsk GES               08-Jun-00           0                 0                1                   7
Krasnoyarsk Tire               20-Jan-00          0                 0                0                   0
KrAZ                          07-Jun-99           1                 1                0                  21
KrAZ                          03-Feb-00           0                 3                0                  21
Kuzbassugol                   03-Aug-00           0                 1                0                   0
Kuznetsk Ferrous Alloys       22-May-01           0                 0                0                   0
Lakokraska                    07-Sep-00           0                 0                0                   0
Leningrad Metal Zavod         05-Oct-99           0                 0                0                   4
Leningrad Metal Zavod         03-Apr-00           0                 4                0                   3
Lomonosov Porcelain            01-Jul-99          0                 1                0                   0
Moscow Refinery               03-May-00           0                 1                0                  11
Mosenergo                     09-Feb-99           0                 0                0                  39


                                                                                                      61
Mosenergo                   12-Jul-01    2   47   0    39
NefAZ                       25-Jan-99    0    1   0    11
Nizhnevartovsk Oil &
Gas Production              06-Sep-01    0   1    0     0
Nizhnevartovsk Oil &
Gaz Production               15-Jan-99   0    1    0    11
Nizhniy Tagil Metal Plant   25-May-00    0    1    0    11
Norilsk Nickel              15-Jun-00    0    5    9    45
Norilsk Nickel              18-Sep-00    8   18    9    45
North Western Telecom       18-Feb-02    0    3    0     0
NOSTA                       23-Jun-99    0    1    0    11
NOSTA                       07-Oct-99    0    1    0    11
Novolipetsk Metal            27-Jan-99   0    1    2    25
Novolipetsk Metal            13-Jul-00   0    1    2    25
Novorossiisk Shipping       19-Apr-01    0    1    0    11
Novosibirskenergo           04-Apr-01    0    4    0     6
Noyabrskneftegas            01-Dec-98    0    3    0    15
Noyabrskneftegas            27-Dec-00    0    1    2    15
Omskenergo                  05-Nov-01    0    1    0    11
Orenburgneft                28-Apr-00    0   10    0     4
Petmol                      01-Feb-00    0    2    0     4
Purneftegaz                 12-Apr-00    0    1    0    11
Purneftegaz                  06-Jul-01   0    1    0     5
Purneftegaz                 18-Feb-02    0    3    0     5
RAO UES                     05-Apr-00    5   16   30   230
Rospan                      20-May-00    0    1    0    11
Rosshelf                    07-Feb-02    0    1    0    11
Rostselmash                 12-Apr-98    0    1    0    11
Sakhalinmorneftegaz         14-Mar-00    0    1    0     8
Sakhaneftegaz               16-Feb-00    0    0    0     1
Samaraneftegaz              24-Feb-99    3    1    0     6
Samotlorneftegaz            18-Feb-99    0    1    0    11
Samotlorneftegaz            06-Sep-01    0    3    0     0
Samson                       04-Jul-00   0    1    0    11
Sberbank                    27-Dec-00    3    3    6   212
Sibneftegazpererabotka      22-Jun-99    0    0    0     0
SibUr                       03-Aug-00    0    5    0     0
Sidanco                     07-Apr-99    4    5   40    58
Slavneft-Megionneftegaz      06-Jul-00   1    6    0    14
Stepan Razin Brewery        08-Dec-99    0    1    0    11
SUAL                        11-Nov-01    0    1    0    11
Surgutneftegaz               24-Jan-00   5   12    1    41
TNK-Nyagan                  06-Sep-01    0    1    0     0
Tomsk Refinery              24-Jun-99    0    0    0     0
Tomskneft VNK               24-Feb-99    4    1    2     5
Transneft                    08-Jul-99   0    0    3     7
Tulanefteproduct            08-Dec-99    0    0    0     0
Tyumenneftegaz              06-Sep-01    0    2    0     1
Ugraneft                    29-Jun-01    0    1    5    11
Uralkaly                    25-May-00    0    0    0     2
Ust Illimsk Timber Mill     27-Aug-01    0    5    0     2
Vanady                      04-Nov-00    0    1    0    11



                                                            62
Viksunsk Pipe      26-Jan-99   0   0    0    0
Vladimir Tractor   01-Jun-00   0   1    1   11
Volgotanker        10-Mar-99   0   1    0   11
VSMPO              28-Nov-98   0   0    0    0
VSMPO              01-Sep-99   1   5    0    1
Yakutskenergo      19-Oct-00   0   1    0    1
YANOS              28-Apr-00   0   1    0   11
Yuganskneftegaz    24-Mar-99   3   1    0   10
YUKOS              08-Jun-99   1   1   39   90




                                             63
Table 6: Control Variables
This table reports control variables used in our main regressions (Table 8-10). Foreign ownership is the
proportion of stock held by foreign investors. EBRD is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the EBRD has provided
loan financing to the company prior to committing the infraction. Log of assets is the log of book value of
fixed assets in 1999. The last column is the percentage of the Hermitage fund invested in each of the
companies involved as of December 1998. For the 5 companies with an event before December 1998 we use
the December 1998 holdings unless we know from the financial statement when the stake was acquired or
disposed.

                                                           Foreign
                                                                                      % of Hermitage
               Company                       Date         ownership    EBRD stake
                                                                                    invested in company
                                                            stake
Aeroflot                                  12-Aug-99           0.2            0               0.00
Alfa Cement                               08-Dec-99           0.5            0               0.00
Amurkabel                                 15-Mar-00            0             0               0.00
Amursvyaz                                 28-May-01            0             0               0.00
AVISMA                                    27-Oct-98          0.58            0               0.03
Avtosvet                                  30-Dec-99         0.216            0               0.00
AvtoVAZ                                   23-Jun-00            0             0               0.00
AvtoVAZ                                   28-May-01            0             1               0.00
AvtoVAZ                                   26-Apr-02            0             1               0.00
Babayevsky Confectionery                  22-Feb-00            0             0               0.00
Bashkirenergo                             29-Nov-01            0             0               0.00
Bratsk Pulp                               20-Dec-01            0             0               0.00
Chernogorneft                             17-Jun-99         0.184            1               0.00
Electrosila                               29-Oct-98          0.24            0               0.00
FESCO                                     23-Jun-99           0.4            1               0.00
GAZ                                       21-Dec-00           0.2            1               0.00
Gazprom                                   12-Aug-99         0.058            0               0.10
Gazprom                                   25-Oct-00           0.1            0               0.10
Gazprom                                   11-May-01          0.11            0               0.10
Irkutskelectrosvyaz                       23-Sep-99         0.026            0               0.00
Izhorsk Works                             23-Jun-00            0             0               0.00
Kaluganefteproduct                        11-Mar-00            0             0               0.00
KamAZ                                     02-Sep-99          0.26            1               0.00
Kazan Helicopter                          17-Jun-99         0.072            0               0.00
Khantyman                                  25-Jul-01        0.065            0               0.00
KomiTEK                                   30-Jun-99           0.1            0               0.01
Krasnoyarsk GES                           23-Jun-99          0.13            0               0.00
Krasnoyarsk GES                           08-Jun-00          0.13            0               0.00
Krasnoyarsk Tire                           20-Jan-00           0             0               0.00
KrAZ                                      07-Jun-99          0.14            0               0.00
KrAZ                                      03-Feb-00          0.14            0               0.00
Kuzbassugol                               03-Aug-00            0             0               0.00
Kuznetsk Ferrous Alloys                   22-May-01            0             0               0.00
Lakokraska                                07-Sep-00            0             0               0.00
Leningrad Metal Zavod                 05-Oct-99      0.1   0   0.00
Leningrad Metal Zavod                 03-Apr-00    0.147   0   0.00
Lomonosov Porcelain                    01-Jul-99    0.84   0   0.00
Moscow Refinery                       03-May-00       0    0   0.00
Mosenergo                             09-Feb-99     0.35   1   0.01
Mosenergo                              12-Jul-01    0.29   1   0.01
NefAZ                                  25-Jan-99    0.22   0   0.00
Nizhnevartovsk Oil & Gas Production    15-Jan-99    0.23   0   0.00
Nizhnevartovsk Oil & Gas Production   06-Sep-01       0    0   0.00
Nizhniy Tagil Metal Plant             25-May-00     0.2    0   0.00
Norilsk Nickel                        15-Jun-00      0.2   0   0.00
Norilsk Nickel                        18-Sep-00      0.2   0   0.00
North Western Telecom                 18-Feb-02    0.286   0   0.00
NOSTA                                 23-Jun-99    0.19    0   0.00
NOSTA                                 07-Oct-99    0.19    0   0.00
Novolipetsk Metal                      27-Jan-99     0.4   0   0.00
Novolipetsk Metal                      13-Jul-00    0.4    0   0.00
Novorossiisk Shipping                 19-Apr-01      0.1   1   0.00
Novosibirskenergo                     04-Apr-01       0    0   0.00
Noyabrskneftegas                      01-Dec-98       0    0   0.00
Noyabrskneftegas                      27-Dec-00       0    0   0.00
Omskenergo                            05-Nov-01       0    0   0.00
Orenburgneft                          28-Apr-00       0    0   0.00
Petmol                                01-Feb-00     0.37   0   0.00
Purneftegaz                           12-Apr-00     0.31   0   0.00
Purneftegaz                            06-Jul-01   0.404   0   0.00
Purneftegaz                           18-Feb-02    0.404   0   0.00
RAO UES                               05-Apr-00    0.33    0   0.09
Rospan                                20-May-00       0    0   0.00
Rosshelf                              07-Feb-02       0    0   0.00
Rostselmash                           12-Apr-98       0    0   0.00
Sakhalinmorneftegaz                   14-Mar-00    0.106   1   0.00
Sakhaneftegaz                         16-Feb-00       0    0   0.00
Samaraneftegaz                        24-Feb-99     0.15   0   0.00
Samotlorneftegaz                      18-Feb-99     0.18   0   0.00
Samotlorneftegaz                      06-Sep-01       0    0   0.00
Samson                                 04-Jul-00      0    0   0.00
Sberbank                              27-Dec-00    0.119   1   0.03
Sibneftegazpererabotka                22-Jun-99    0.113   0   0.00
SibUr                                 03-Aug-00       0    0   0.00
Sidanco                               07-Apr-99     0.12   0   0.02
Slavneft-Megionneftegaz                06-Jul-00   0.126   0   0.00
Stepan Razin Brewery                  08-Dec-99       0    0   0.00
SUAL                                  11-Nov-01       0    0   0.00
Surgutneftegaz                         24-Jan-00    0.31   0   0.06



                                                                      65
TNK-Nyagan                06-Sep-01      0    0   0.00
Tomsk Refinery            24-Jun-99      0    0   0.00
Tomskneft VNK             24-Feb-99     0.2   0   0.00
Transneft                  08-Jul-99     0    1   0.00
Tulanefteproduct          08-Dec-99      0    0   0.00
Tyumenneftegaz            06-Sep-01      0    0   0.00
Ugraneft                  29-Jun-01      0    0   0.00
Uralkaly                  25-May-00      0    0   0.00
Ust Illimsk Timber Mill   27-Aug-01      0    0   0.00
Vanady                    04-Nov-00      0    0   0.03
Viksunsk Pipe             26-Jan-99      0    0   0.00
Vladimir Tractor          01-Jun-00      0    0   0.00
Volgotanker               10-Mar-99     0.3   0   0.00
VSMPO                     28-Nov-98    0.08   0   0.00
VSMPO                     01-Sep-99    0.38   0   0.03
Yakutskenergo             19-Oct-00      0    0   0.00
YANOS                     28-Apr-00    0.3    0   0.00
Yuganskneftegaz           24-Mar-99    0.15   0   0.00
YUKOS                     08-Jun-99    0.32   0   0.01




                                                         66
      Table 7: Summary Statistics
      This table reports summary statistics for variables included in tables 8-10. Foreign ownership is the proportion
      of stock held by foreign investors. EBRD is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the EBRD has provided loan
      financing to the company prior to committing the infraction. Log of assets is the log of fixed assets for 1999.
      The oil industry dummy identifies firms in the oil and gas industry. The number of articles is based on a count
      in the period from t-1 month to t+2 months after the proposed violation. The measures of natural
      newsworthiness are based on the same publications in January-July 1998. We include 7 mutually exclusive
      categories of alleged violation, which include disenfranchisement and six types of dilution (Share Issuance,
      Share Swap, Reorganization, Bankruptcy, Asset Stripping and Other). The maximum potential loss variable
      assumes the proposed actions went through and the worst fears were realized for minority shareholders.
      When the violation is a disenfranchisement, we use a three point scale from lowest (1) to highest (3) severity
      of the potential loss.

                                                                                                         Number
                                                                   Standard
Outcome                                   Mean        Median                   Minimum      Maximum      of obser-
                                                                   Deviation
                                                                                                         vations
Foreign ownership                         0.13        .1           0.16        0            .84          98
Dummy for EBRD stake                      0.12        0            0.33        0            1            98
Log assets                                14.88       14.87        1.99        10.07        20.9         98
Oil Industry dummy                        0.01        0            0.02        0            1            98
# articles in FT & WSJ                    0.71        0            2.18        0            16           98
Log of (1+ # articles in FT+WSJ)          0.25        0            0.6         0            2.83         98
Natural newsworthiness (log of (1+ #
articles in FT+WSJ) January-July 1998)    0.5         0            1.1         0            4.71         98
Log of (1+ # articles in FT)              0.2         0            0.5         0            2.48         98
Log of (1+ # articles in WSJ)             0.12        0            0.36        0            1.79         98
Log of (1+ # articles in Russian press)   0.77        0.69         0.77        0            3.56         98
Log of (1+ # articles in Vedomosti)       0.43        0            0.56        0            2.64         98
Type of Dilutions
Share issuance                            0.29        0            0.45        0            1            98
Share swap                                0.11        0            0.32        0            1            98
Bankruptcy                                0.1         0            0.3         0            1            98
Reorganization                            0.06        0            0.24        0            1            98
Asset stripping                           0.02        0            0.14        0            1            98
Other forms of dilutions                  0.1         0            0.3         0            1            98
Disenfranchisement                        0.32        0            0.47        0            1            98
Maximum Loss in Dilution                  0.57        50           0.33        5            100          63
Maximum loss in Disenfranchisement        2.06        2.0          0.77        1            3            31




                                                                                                                     67
Table 8: The Determinants of Press Coverage
The dependent variables are different measures of news coverage. In the first two columns it is the log of 1 plus the number of articles in
the Financial Times and the Wall Street Journal in the period from t-1 month to t+2 months around the date of the alleged violation. In the
third column the dependent variable is one plus the number of articles in the Financial Times during the same period. In the last column it
is one plus the number of articles in the Wall Street Journal during the same period. Newsworthiness is the log of the number of references
to a company in the WSJ and FT in the 6 month period from January to end of June 1998. Hermitage is the percentage of Hermitage
portfolio invested in the company as of end of 1998. All the other control variables are defined in Table 3. When the violation takes the
form of a disenfranchisement, we use a three point scale from lowest (1) to highest (3) severity of the potential loss. All the estimates are
obtained by OLS. Huber/ White robust standard errors are reported in brackets, * means significant at 10%, ** 5% and *** 1%.


                                                          Log of (1+ # articles in Log of (1+ #      Log of (1+ #
                                                              FT and WSJ)          articles in FT) articles in WSJ)
                                                              I            II            III               IV
   Natural "newsworthiness"                               0.248***       0.128         0.163*           (0.020)
                                                           (0.080)      (0.092)        (0.082)          (0.052)
   Percentage of Hermitage assets                                      11.340**         6.295         11.285***
   invested in the company (1998)                                       (5.486)        (4.674)          (3.445)
   Foreign ownership (%)                                    0.555       0.572*          0.344           0.309*
                                                           (0.341)      (0.301)        (0.252)          (0.185)
   EBRD as an investor dummy                                0.030        0.126          0.147            -0.025
                                                           (0.182)      (0.175)        (0.148)          (0.113)
   Log of assets                                          0.087***       0.049*        0.044*            0.014
                                                           (0.032)      (0.026)        (0.022)          (0.017)
   Dummy for oil industry                                   0.189       0.222*         0.175*            0.106
                                                           (0.126)      (0.123)        (0.098)          (0.081)
   Controls for nature of violation
   Share issuance dummy                                      -0.059           -0.029              -0.02               -0.006
                                                            (0.179)          (0.170)            (0.147)              (0.101)
   Share swap dummy                                           0.111           0.116              0.100                0.124
                                                            (0.339)          (0.344)            (0.292)              (0.192)
   Bankruptcy dummy                                          -0.028           -0.006             0.023                 0.01
                                                            (0.258)          (0.252)            (0.215)              (0.137)
   Reorganization dummy                                      -0.171           -0.213             -0.147               -0.061
                                                            (0.244)          (0.221)            (0.190)              (0.123)
   Asset stripping dummy                                     -0.274         -0.628***           -0.326*             -0.514***
                                                            (0.261)          (0.208)            (0.180)              (0.130)
   Other form of dilution dummy                              -0.323           -0.403             -0.262               -0.176
                                                            (0.340)          (0.318)            (0.272)              (0.188)
   Maximum loss due to dilution                               0.001           0.001              0.001                0.000
                                                            (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.002)              (0.001)
   Maximum loss due to disenfranchisement                     -0.07           -0.068             -0.049               -0.039
                                                            (0.069)          (0.061)            (0.055)              (0.031)
   Observations                                                94               94                 94                   94
   R-squared                                                 0.468            0.526              0.522                0.482




                                                                                                                                         68
Table 9: International Press Coverage and Outcomes
This table summarizes two key features of our sample of 98 observations: whether there was coverage in the
international press; and, the type of outcome. The variable ‘coverage in the international press’ takes on the
value 1 if there was any coverage in the Wall Street Journal or Financial Times in the period from t-1 month to
t+2 months around the date of the alleged violation and 0 otherwise. In this table we club together outcomes
coded as 1 (partial redress) and 2 (full redress) as positive outcome.

                                                   Positive                        Percentage of
                                                   Outome:                         Observations
                                                  Paritally or            Total       where
                                                     Fully     Outcome: Number of    Positive
                                                   Blocked Not blocked Observations Outcome
Media coverage in the International Press             10          7        17          0.59
No media coverage in the International Press          18          63       81          0.22
Total                                                 28          70       98          0.29

Companies where Hermitage fund has a stake             9             11            20            0.45

                          Two-sample Wilcoxon rank-sum (Mann-Whitney) test

                    Null hypothesis outcome (coverage==0) = outcome (coverage==1)
                                    z = -3.021, Prob > |z| = 0.0025




                                                                                                            69
Table 10: The Effect of Press Coverage on Outcomes
The dependent variable is the outcome of the proposed governance violation. This outcome variable is equal
to 0 if the potential governance violation was not redressed at all, 1 if partially redressed, and 2 if substantially
redressed. The estimations are obtained using an ordered logit. In column VI of panel A we club outcome 1
and 2 and we run a simple logit. The number of articles is based on a count in the period from t-1 month to
t+2 months around the date of the alleged violation. News coverage in English is a dummy variable that takes
the value 1 if there was any news coverage and 0 otherwise. Newsworthiness is measured as the log of one
plus the number of references to a company in the WSJ and FT in the 6 month period from January to end of
June 1998. All the other control variables are defined in Table 3. Huber/ White robust standard errors are
reported in brackets, * means significant at 10%, ** 5% and *** 1%.

Panel 10A:

                                      I          II            III          IV            V           VI
Total English articles                        0.522***
t-1 to t+2 months                              (0.153)
News coverage in English                                   1.725***
Dummy (t-1 to t+2 months)                                   (0.633)
Log of (1+ # articles in                                                1.644***     1.569***      1.956***
FT or WSJ)                                                               (0.425)      (0.505)       (0.725)
Natural                                                                                0.074          0.056
"newsworthiness"                                                                      (0.250)       (0.337)
Foreign ownership (%)                0.021      -0.358       -1.034        -0.886      -0.829         -0.87
                                   (1.906)     (1.971)      (2.065)       (1.982)     (1.974)       (1.737)
EBRD as an investor dummy            0.876     1.198*         0.815        1.024       1.059        1.994**
                                   (0.658)     (0.669)      (0.668)       (0.668)     (0.691)       (0.876)
Log of assets                        0.134       -0.15       -0.042        -0.168       -0.18        -0.191
                                   (0.158)     (0.153)      (0.139)       (0.151)     (0.160)       (0.175)
Dummy for oil industry              -0.283      -0.677       -0.675       -0.866      -0.862         -0.708
                                   (0.739)     (0.806)      (0.767)       (0.812)     (0.804)       (0.730)
Controls for nature of violation
Share issuance dummy                 0.003      -0.004       0.123         0.154        0.142        -0.11
                                   (1.292)     (1.369)      (1.349)       (1.369)      (1.373)      (1.491)
Share swap dummy                    -1.325      -2.185      -1.227        -1.785       -1.753       -2.183
                                   (1.544)     (1.833)      (1.529)       (1.679)      (1.670)      (1.914)
Bankruptcy dummy                    -0.731      -1.188      -0.327        -0.775       -0.784       -0.589
                                   (1.572)     (1.756)      (1.706)       (1.784)      (1.785)      (1.792)
Reorganization dummy                -0.447      -0.689       0.054         -0.282       -0.307       0.078
                                   (1.655)     (1.773)      (1.744)       (1.773)      (1.782)      (1.889)
Asset stripping dummy                2.122      2.300       2.818*        2.712*       2.684*
                                   (1.471)     (1.456)      (1.506)       (1.435)      (1.435)
Other for of dilution dummy         0.302       0.095        0.988         0.731        0.690        0.152
                                   (1.402)     (1.503)      (1.391)       (1.367)      (1.372)      (1.672)
Maximum loss due to                0.020*      0.023*        0.016         0.019        0.019       0.024*
dilution                           (0.012)     (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.013)
Maximum loss due to                  0.281      0.431        0.379         0.493        0.486        0.349
disenfranchisement                 (0.547)     (0.609)      (0.596)       (0.612)      (0.612)      (0.606)
Observations                          94          94           94            94           94           93




                                                                                                                  70
Panel 10B: Different types of coverage

                                                    I           II
Natural "newsworthiness"                        0.452**       0.161
                                                (0.219)      (0.270)
Log of (1+ # articles in Russian newspapers)     -0.017
                                                (0.359)
Log of (1+ # articles in FT)                                 0.653
                                                            (0.739)
Log of (1+ # articles in WSJ)                               1.874**
                                                            (0.864)
Foreign ownership (%)                             0.163      -0.795
                                                 (1.884)    (2.058)
EBRD as an investor dummy                        1.131*      1.302*
                                                 (0.616)    (0.704)
Log of assets                                      -0.02     -0.172
                                                 (0.160)    (0.162)
Dummy for oil industry                            -0.419     -0.773
                                                 (0.764)    (0.781)
Controls for nature of violation
Share issuance dummy                              -0.125       0.202
                                                 (1.318)     (1.397)
Share swap dummy                                  -1.356      -1.855
                                                 (1.585)     (1.678)
Bankruptcy dummy                                  -0.835      -0.759
                                                 (1.616)     (1.764)
Reorganization dummy                              -0.656      -0.514
                                                 (1.725)     (1.835)
Asset stripping dummy                             2.022      2.745*
                                                 (1.448)     (1.492)
Other form of dilution dummy                      0.058       0.502
                                                 (1.423)     (1.388)
Maximum loss due to dilution                      0.021       0.021
                                                 (0.013)     (0.013)
Maximum loss due to disenfranchisement             0.291       0.483
                                                 (0.607)     (0.625)
Observations                                   94          94




                                                                       71
Panel 10C: Audience vs. Credibility

                                                         I        II        III
Natural "newsworthiness"                             0.443*     0.416      0.091
                                                     (0.227)   (0.264)   (0.255)
Log of (1+ # articles in Vedemosti)                   -0.142    -0.19     -0.239
                                                     (0.510)   (0.540)   (0.522)
Log of (1+ # articles in other Russian newspapers)              0.117     -0.787
                                                               (0.360)   (0.703)
Log of (1+ # articles in FT or WSJ)                                      2.318**
                                                                         (0.928)
Foreign ownership (%)                                 0.056     -0.107    -0.480
                                                     (1.888)   (1.913)   (2.218)
EBRD as an investor dummy                            1.134*    1.130*    1.173*
                                                     (0.612)   (0.618)   (0.656)
Log of assets                                         -0.009   -0.018     -0.153
                                                     (0.160)   (0.160)   (0.157)
Dummy for oil industry                                -0.443     -0.44    -1.243
                                                     (0.769)   (0.766)   (0.924)
Controls for nature of violation
Share issuance dummy                                  -0.163    -0.154    0.167
                                                     (1.303)   (1.301)   (1.326)
Share swap dummy                                      -1.361    -1.383    -1.536
                                                     (1.562)   (1.559)   (1.661)
Bankruptcy dummy                                      -0.876    -0.892    -0.674
                                                     (1.609)   (1.615)   (1.782)
Reorganization dummy                                  -0.689    -0.701    -0.074
                                                     (1.734)   (1.745)   (1.781)
Asset stripping dummy                                 2.017     2.090    2.551*
                                                     (1.452)   (1.426)   (1.545)
Other form of dilution dummy                          0.064     0.120     0.758
                                                     (1.452)   (1.446)   (1.446)
Maximum loss due to dilution                         0.021*     0.021     0.024
                                                     (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.016)
Maximum loss due to disenfranchisement                 0.296     0.270     0.849
                                                     (0.584)   (0.601)   (0.681)
Observations                                            94        94        94




                                                                                   72
Table 11: The Instrumental Variable Estimates
In this table we again look at outcome as the dependent variable. Outcome is defined to be equal to 0 if the
potential governance violation was not redressed at all, 1 if partially redressed and 2 if substantially redressed.
Column I is estimated by OLS. Column II is estimated by Instrumental Variables (IV), where the instrument
for the log of the number of articles in the FT and WSJ is the percentage of Hermitage portfolio invested in a
company at the end of 1998. Newsworthiness is measured as the log of one plus the number of references to a
company in the WSJ and FT in the 6 month period from January to end of June 1998. We define control
variables in Table 3. All the estimates are obtained by OLS. Huber/ White robust standard errors are reported
in brackets, * means significant at 10%, ** 5% and *** 1%.


                                                   OLS            IV
Log of (1+ # articles in FT or WSJ)             0.438***       0.855**
                                                 (0.148)       (0.432)
Natural "newsworthiness"                          0.051         -0.053
                                                 (0.071)       (0.133)
Foreign ownership (%)                             -0.111        -0.342
                                                 (0.567)       (0.609)
EBRD as an investor dummy                          0.288         0.275
                                                 (0.221)       (0.248)
Log of assets                                     -0.048        -0.084
                                                 (0.043)       (0.059)
Dummy for oil industry                            -0.155        -0.234
                                                 (0.187)       (0.190)
Controls for nature of violation
Share issuance dummy                              0.014         0.039
                                                 (0.324)       (0.331)
Share swap dummy                                  -0.416        -0.462
                                                 (0.336)       (0.416)
Bankruptcy dummy                                  -0.303        -0.291
                                                 (0.392)       (0.414)
Reorganization dummy                              -0.192        -0.121
                                                 (0.435)       (0.441)
Asset stripping dummy                            0.760*        0.875**
                                                 (0.387)       (0.395)
Other form of dilution dummy                      0.104         0.239
                                                 (0.318)       (0.333)
Maximum loss due to dilution                      0.005         0.005
                                                 (0.003)       (0.004)
Maximum loss due to disenfranchisement             0.097         0.126
                                                 (0.136)       (0.135)
Observations                                        94            94
R-squared                                          0.22         0.148




                                                                                                                 73
Table 12: Who Acts to Redress Reported Corporate Governance Violations?
In this table we classify the successful outcomes according to the primary mechanism through which media
pressure worked. Coding of the primary mechanism is based upon a reading of the Russian and English
language press.

                Intervention by Government Actors             Private Sector Actors
                 Intervention of        Political      Company relents Company relents
                regulators/courts     intervention     when faced with
                                                         significant
                                                         opposition
                AvtoVAZ             Gazprom           KAMAZ               Chernogorneft
                Irkutskelectrosvyaz RAO UES           KrAZ                GAZ
                Kuznetsk Ferrous
                Alloys              Sberbank          Ust-Ilimsk Timber   Gazprom
                Tomsk Refinery      Novoship          Viksunsk Pipe       Transneft
                Tomskneft                             Bratsk Pulp         Rosshelf
                Yuganskneftegaz                       KomiTEK             Bashkirenergo
                Sidanco                               Volgotanker
                Lomonosov
                Porcelain                             VSMPO
                Elektrosila
                AVISMA
Number of
cases                  10                  4                   8                   6
Percentage of
cases with
positive
outcome               36%                 14%                29%                 21%




                                                                                                           74
