                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 HIGH SCHOOL ALCOHOL USE AND YOUNG ADULT LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES

                                          Pinka Chatterji
                                         Jeffrey DeSimone

                                       Working Paper 12529
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12529


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2006




We thank participants in sessions at the 2005 Southern Economic Association and 2006 American
Society of Health Economists meetings, especially Sandy Decker and Rey Hernandez, for helpful
comments. Chatterji gratefully acknowledges research support from grant K01 AA000328-03 from
the National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Pinka Chatterji and Jeffrey DeSimone. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
High School Alcohol Use and Young Adult Labor Market Outcomes
Pinka Chatterji and Jeffrey DeSimone
NBER Working Paper No. 12529
September 2006
JEL No. I1,J2,J3

                                             ABSTRACT

We estimate the relationship between 10th grade binge drinking in 1990 and labor market outcomes
in 2000 among National Educational Longitudinal Survey respondents. For females, adolescent drinking
and adult wages are unrelated, and negative employment effects disappear once academic achievement
is held constant. For males, negative employment effects and, more strikingly, positive wage effects
persist after controlling for achievement as well as background characteristics, educational attainment,
and adult binge drinking and family and job characteristics. Accounting for illegal drug use and other
problem behaviors in 10th grade eliminates the unemployment effect, but strengthens the wage effect.
As the latter is not explicable by the health, income or social capital justifications that are often used
for frequently observed positive correlations between adult alcohol use and earnings, we conjecture
that binge drinking conveys unobserved social skills that are rewarded by employers.

Pinka Chatterji
Center for Multicultural Mental Health Research
Cambridge Health Alliance
Harvard Medical School
120 Beacon Street, 4th Floor
Somerville, MA 02143
and NBER
pchatterji@charesearch.org

Jeffrey DeSimone
Department of Economics
College of Business Administration
University of South Florida
4202 East Fowler Avenue, BSN 3403
Tampa, FL 33620-5500
and NBER
jdesimon@coba.usf.edu
1.     Introduction

       Because of its varied potentially harmful consequences in both the short and long terms,

there is considerable interest among the public as well as policymakers in limiting underage

drinking. National U.S. surveys show that heavy alcohol use is widespread among older

adolescents. In the 2005 Monitoring the Future (MTF) study, 28 percent of high school seniors

reported having at least one alcohol binge, i.e. five or more drinks in a row, in the past 2 weeks

(Johnston, O’Malley & Bachman 2006). In the 2004 National Survey on Drug Use and Health,

clinically defined criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence are met by 13.5 percent of 17 year

olds, 15.0 percent of 18 year olds, and 17.2 percent of 19 year olds (SAMHSA 2004).

       Many teenagers do not view heavy drinking as risky. For instance, in 2005, 55 percent of

high school seniors disagreed with the suggestion that binge drinking once or twice each

weekend would put an individual at “great risk” for harmful consequences (Johnston, O’Malley

& Bachman 2006). Yet, drinking is a primary risk factor for a variety of potentially damaging

behaviors. These include drunk driving, physical violence (Markowitz & Grossman 1998),

unsafe sexual practices (Markowitz et al. 2005) that can lead to the contraction of sexually

transmitted diseases such as AIDS and gonorrhea (Grossman et al. 2004, Carpenter 2005), and

suicide attempts (Chatterji et al. 2004) that are sometimes completed (Markowitz et al. 2003,

Carpenter 2004). As others have noted (e.g. Dave & Kaestner 2002), these serious health

consequences of drinking at least partially justify alcohol control policies aimed at youth.

       Beyond these direct and immediate effects, teen drinking may also indirectly impact a

variety of longer term outcomes, including those involving the labor market. If alcohol

consumption during adolescence lowers academic achievement or educational attainment or

raises future alcohol consumption levels, it could potentially affect employment and wages




                                                 1
during adulthood. For instance, Zeigler et al. (2005) describe how adolescents who engage in

heavy episodic or binge drinking are at elevated risk of neurodegeneration, particularly in

regions of the brain responsible for learning and memory, and link this with poor study habits.

       Yet to our knowledge, only one study in the economics literature, Mullahy and Sindelar

(1993), has addressed this topic. They find that previously meeting the diagnostic criteria for

alcoholism worsens future labor market outcomes, at least in part through negative impacts on

human capital accumulation. Even their study does not directly address our question of interest,

however. Their drinking measure captures early onset of alcoholism at any time prior to a single

interview occurring at age 30–59. In contrast, we are interested more broadly in drinking that is

heavy, but does not necessarily meet clinical criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence, and more

specifically takes place during adolescence.

       Though pioneering, the Mullahy and Sindelar (1993) study uses data that were collected

over 25 years ago and are cross-sectional, thus requiring reliance on retrospective information

regarding previous drinking. Moreover, they analyze a sample that is small and geographically

restricted. These limitations warrant further work on the topic. Other research on long-run

human capital effects of adolescent drinking, however, has been restricted to educational

outcomes. Conversely, prior work on labor market consequences of alcohol use has focused on

the contemporaneous relationship for adults.

       The aim of this paper is to empirically investigate the effects of drinking as a teenager on

labor market experiences during early adulthood. We examine data from the National Education

Longitudinal Study (NELS), which sampled a cohort of 8th graders in 1988 and followed up with

them several times over the subsequent 12 years. The analysis regresses employment and wages




                                                2
in the year 2000, when respondents were about 26 years old, on binge drinking ten years

previously, when most respondents were in 10th grade.

       Our initial strategy mimics the approach of Mullahy and Sindelar (1993) by successively

adding controls for various intermediate outcomes that are apt to both respond to adolescent

drinking and influence early adult labor market success. This provides an opportunity to identify

indirect pathways linking teen alcohol consumption to adult wages and employment, which

yields information regarding a prospective causal aspect of this link.

       Our findings differ by gender. Among females, an observed inverse association between

teen binge drinking and adult employment disappears when high school academic achievement is

held constant, and adult wages are unrelated to teen drinking. For males, in contrast, significant

correlations between adolescent alcohol use and adult labor market outcomes persist even after

controlling for the above factors as well as background characteristics, educational attainment,

and adult binge drinking and family and job characteristics. More remarkably, the sign of the

correlation is negative for employment, as hypothesized, but positive for wages.

       To further investigate the male results, we add controls for various 8th grade

characteristics and 10th grade problem behaviors that are potentially related with both teen

drinking and adult labor market performance. Accounting for 10th grade problem behaviors,

particularly marijuana use, eliminates the negative employment effect. We interpret this to

reflect the presence of unobservable factors that are associated with both more teen binge

drinking and poorer adult labor market prospects. However, including these additional 10th

grade covariates only reinforces the positive wage effect. Ultimately, among males employed at

age 26, the wages of those who binge drank ten years previously are about six percent higher

than those of their non-binging peers.




                                                 3
       This result is consistent with a recurring observation among previous researchers that

some forms of adult drinking are associated with higher contemporaneous earnings.

Conventionally offered explanations include health and psychological benefits conveyed by

moderate drinking, reverse causation through income effects on alcohol consumption, and a

positive effect of drinking on the accumulation of social capital. However, none of these stories

is compatible with our finding, particularly considering that our models also control for adult

binge drinking. A contribution of our work, therefore, is its implication that unobserved

heterogeneity could well be a more important component of the observed positive relationship

between adult drinking and earnings than many researchers had previously thought. We are

unable to identify the relevant unobserved factors, but posit that the wage premium from

adolescent binge drinking represents social skills that are valued by employers.



2. Previous studies of drinking and human capital outcomes

       The economics literature on the relationship between alcohol use and labor market

success is motivated by the observation that excessive drinking adversely affects physical and

mental health, memory, cognition and behavior (e.g. U.S. DHHS 2000). On this basis, drinking

that is heavy or intense is expected to impair contemporaneous labor market performance.

Moreover, previous physiologically problematic alcohol consumption has the potential to

negatively impact current labor market outcomes by reducing human capital accumulated in the

interim. This is particularly true given that adolescent drinking is associated with brain damage

and neurocognitive deficits, and that the resulting impairments in learning and intellectual

development can last into adulthood (Zeigler et al. 2005).




                                                 4
       Yet, we know of only one study that has examined the relationship between previous

alcohol consumption and current labor market outcomes. Using 1980–1981 data on 555 males

age 30– 59 from the New Haven site of the Epidemiologic Catchment Area survey, Mullahy &

Sindelar (1993) investigate the earnings impact of previously meeting diagnostic criteria for

alcoholism. Their main result is that ever-alcoholics earn 31 percent less than others, but this

difference falls to 17 percent when health status, schooling, marital status and non-earned

income are held constant. This suggests that alcoholism reduces the subsequent acquisition of

productivity-enhancing human capital. The lack of any additional association between current

alcoholism and earnings, after controlling for previous alcoholism, further supports this

proposition. Mullahy and Sindelar also show that the negative alcoholism gradient is larger for

the less educated and less healthy, and that most of the impact of alcoholism is on the likelihood

of full-time employment rather than on the wages of those employed full-time.

       Considerable recent work has been devoted to examining the contemporaneous

relationship between alcohol use and labor market performance during adulthood. Several

studies of employment have found deleterious drinking effects after accounting for the potential

endogeneity of drinking. Mullahy & Sindelar (1996) and Terza (2002), using data from the 1988

Alcohol Supplement to the National Health Interview Survey, and MacDonald & Shields (2004),

analyzing data from the Health Survey of England, each report that problem drinking

significantly reduces the probability of employment. Meanwhile, Cook & Peters (2005) estimate

reduced form equations in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), finding that the

prevalence of full-time work increases with alcohol prices. On the other hand, in 1979–1995

outgoing rotation files of the Current Population Survey, Dave & Kaestner (2002) estimate a

weak and indeterminate relationship between alcohol taxes and both employment and wages.




                                                 5
Similarly, using individual fixed effects models in data from the Russian Longitudinal

Monitoring Survey (RLMS), Tekin (2004) finds that alcohol consumption has no significant

effect on employment.

       In contrast, most prior research on wages and income suggests positive effects of alcohol

use, at least for moderate drinking levels. Numerous studies report an inverse U-shaped

relationship between earnings and the amount of alcohol consumed, with moderate drinkers

earning more than either abstainers or heavy drinkers. These include Berger & Leigh (1988) in

the 1972–1973 Quality of Employment Survey, French & Zarkin (1995) in 1991–1993 data from

four worksites, Heien (1996) in the 1979 and 1984 National Household Surveys on Alcohol Use,

Hamilton and Hamilton (1997) in 1985 Canadian General Social Survey data on prime-age

males, and Barrett (2002) in 1989–1990 Australian National Health Survey data on males

employed full-time. Several additional studies find drinking wage premiums that are largely

invariant to the level of consumption, including Zarkin et al. (1998) in 1991–1992 National

Household Survey on Drug Abuse data on prime-age males, Tekin (2004) as documented above,

van Ours (2004) in 2001 Dutch survey data on males, and Auld (2005) in 1985 and 1991

Canadian General Social Survey data on prime-age males. Recent estimates of drinking earnings

premiums range from 7–12 percent (Zarkin et al. 1998, van Ours 2004, Auld 2005).

       The main exceptions to the above, besides Dave & Kaestner (2002) as previously

mentioned, are Peters (2004) and Cook & Peters (2005). Peters (2004) finds in NLSY data that

positive drinking coefficients are rendered statistically insignificant when individual fixed effects

are included. Cook & Peters (2005) estimate a positive association between alcohol prices and

the earnings of full-time workers in the NLSY, even though in separate regressions drinking

enters earnings regressions positively.




                                                 6
       Two particular rationales have been offered to explain how drinking might play a causal

role in increasing earnings. First, moderate alcohol use could improve labor market performance

because of its beneficial effects on physical and mental health (DHHS 2000). The sizes of these

premiums, however, seem implausibly large under this scenario, given that the primary health

benefit from drinking is a reduction in the risk of heart disease in middle-aged and older

individuals (Dufour 1996). Moreover, there is little reason to believe that heavy drinking would

convey any health benefits to offset the well-documented problems that it can create. Second, as

authors such as van Ours (2004) and Cook & Peters (2005) describe, drinking could generate

productivity-enhancing social capital if it sometimes occurs in situations that lead to career

networking. Yet, no study has either directly examined or obtained evidence uniquely consistent

with this hypothesis.

       Others have posited that the positive relationship is not causal, but rather a manifestation

of the endogeneity of drinking in earnings equations. Endogeneity could arise from income

effects in models that do not or inadequately control for reverse causation, or from omitted

factors that influence both drinking and earnings. Either circumstance would explain the contrast

between the reduced form results of Dave & Kaestner (2002) and Cook & Peters (2005), as well

as the individual fixed effects models of Peters (2004) and Tekin (2004) for employment, and the

remaining studies that use either single equation or instrumental variables models.

       Although unobserved heterogeneity is the typical reason for controlling for endogeneity

when estimating effects of behavioral variables in general, most authors in this literature have

focused on the possibility of reverse causation. We emphasize this because the distinction

between unobserved heterogeneity and the other explanations for drinking wage premiums is

particularly important for us. A positive effect of adolescent drinking on adult employment or




                                                 7
wages, particularly while controlling for adult drinking, is consistent with the presence of time-

invariant unobserved heterogeneity but unlikely to reflect any of the other justifications above.

Because of this, our analysis potentially informs the literature on adult drinking and earnings, a

point to which we return later.

       Another strand of literature to which our work clearly relates is that on the effects of teen

drinking on subsequent educational attainment. Using the earlier described New Haven data,

Mullahy and Sindelar (1989) find that early alcoholism reduces educational attainment by 1–1.5

years. Estimates from several additional studies using NLSY data support this conclusion. Cook

& Moore (1993) report that high school seniors who drink on at least two days in the past week

complete 2.3 fewer years of college than their peers. Yamada et al. (1996) find that a 10 percent

increase in drinking frequency reduced the probability of high school graduation by 6.5 percent.

Koch & Ribar (2001) estimate that delaying alcohol initiation by one year raises completed

schooling by up to 0.47 years for men and 0.36 years for women. Koch & McGeary (2005) find

that alcohol initiation before age 14 reduces the probability of timely high school completion by

7–22 percent. Chatterji & DeSimone (2005), using NLSY Young Adult data, similarly find that

binge or frequent drinking among 15-16 year old students lowers the probability of having

graduated or being enrolled in high school four years later by 11 percent. These studies suggest

that reduced schooling is one avenue through which youth drinking could reduce adult wages.

       On the other hand, neither Chatterji (2006), using NELS data, nor Dee & Evans (2003),

using 1977–1992 Monitoring the Future data, find evidence that high school alcohol use affects

high school completion, college entrance or college persistence. Similarly, in NLSY data, Bray

(2005) observes little relationship between alcohol use and returns to either education or work

experience.




                                                 8
       Various other intermediate outcomes could provide pathways for adolescent alcohol use

to affect adult employment and wages. Wolaver (2002), Williams et al. (2003), and DeSimone

& Wolaver (2005) each estimate negative effects of student binge drinking on grades in school,

while Jones & Jackson (1990) link grades to earnings. Grossman et al. (1998), Bentzen et al.

(1999), Baltagi & Griffin (2002), and Bask & Melkersson (2004) each obtain empirical evidence

that alcohol is (rationally) addictive. Finally, Mullahy & Sindelar (1989) show that early

alcoholism is associated with lower occupational status, while MacDonald & Shields (2001), in

1992–1996 Health Survey for England data, find positive occupational status returns to moderate

levels of drinking that drop off rapidly as consumption levels increase.



3.     Methods

       Our objective is to estimate the relationship between adolescent drinking and early adult

labor market outcomes. Ideally, we would be able to assess the causal nature of any association

that we uncover. But definitive causal statements, which are inherently tentative in any

empirical study, are made even more speculative in our case by the nature of the question that we

ask. Specifically, we would prefer to pursue an instrumental variables approach. But even in

NELS, which is a rich source of data on potential confounders of the relationship, it is difficult to

conceive of instruments that plausibly influence adolescent drinking but have no separate

correlation with young adult employment and wages. This is particularly true given the variety

of ways through which adolescent drinking can potentially affect later labor market performance.

Because our data on youth alcohol use are purely cross sectional, even if we could identify state

policies that altered adolescent drinking behavior but were exogenous with respect to labor




                                                 9
market outcomes, variation in these variables would likely be contaminated by unobserved state-

level heterogeneity.

        As an alternative, we attempt to exploit the richness of our data on intermediate human

capital outcomes by mimicking the approach that Mullahy & Sindelar (1993) used to examine

the effect of prior alcoholism on income. We begin by estimating simple regressions of adult

employment and wages on adolescent drinking, to establish baseline coefficient values. From

there, we sequentially control for additional groups of factors that might mediate the relationship.

Changes in the teen alcohol use coefficient indicate the extent to which the observed relationship

operates through the group of variables added at each stage. Both these changes, therefore, and

the coefficient that remains at the end of the process potentially convey information on the sense

in which adolescent drinking might causally effect adult labor market performance.

        More formally, we estimate equations of the form

(1)             L=       0   +    1AT   +X   2   +Y   3   +   4E   +   5AA   +Z   6   +S   7   +J   8   + ,

where terms in bold are vectors. The dependent variable, L, is an adult labor market outcome,

either employment or the wage. Teen alcohol use, AT, is a right hand side variable. The error

term, which is potentially correlated with AT, is . The                      terms are parameters that we estimate

using single equation regression models, i.e. probit for employment and OLS for the wage.

        Our analysis first estimates a simple regression of employment and wage on teen

drinking, i.e. setting       m   = 0 for m > 1. We call this model 1. Successive models add one

additional (set of) variable(s), moving from left to right in the equation. In our labeling,

therefore, model numbers correspond to the subscript of the parameter multiplying the right-most

set of variables appearing in the regression.




                                                              10
         Model 2 includes a set of presumably exogenous demographic and family background

characteristics that are measured when respondents are in 8th or 10th grade (X). The coefficient

 1   from model 2 is our baseline estimate. It represents the total association between teen alcohol

use and adult employment or wage. A direct effect of drinking lagged 10 years on labor market

outcomes, independent of any other determinant of adult productivity, seems implausible. Put

differently, therefore, our model 2 estimate represents the net effect of all indirect channels

through which adolescent drinking is related with adult employment and wage. It is likely that

the model 2 estimate of    1   captures time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity as well.

Unmeasured differences between teens who do and do not binge drink, such as personality traits

and adverse events that had occurred by the time of the 10th grade survey, might influence both

teen binge drinking status and adult labor market performance.

         We proceed by incrementally adding to Model 2 sets of variables that might

simultaneously respond to adolescent binge drinking and influence adult labor market success.

Significant changes in the estimate of     1   when inserting a set of variables into the regression

would indicate that these variables represent indirect pathways through which teen drinking

affects adult employment or wage. For example, suppose that our estimate of           1   in the wage

equation is negative and large before adding educational attainment, but loses both practical and

statistical significance once educational attainment is included. This would imply that most of

the negative correlation between adolescent drinking and the adult wage is explained by an

inverse relationship between adolescent drinking and completed schooling.

         Although causality in the latter pathway is not guaranteed, the above finding would at

least identify a direct outcome of adolescent drinking, i.e. schooling, for which further

investigation of a possible causal relationship would be important. On the other hand, little




                                                     11
change in the   1   estimate upon controlling for a potential intermediate outcome of teen alcohol

use would suggest that the corresponding outcome is not in fact an indirect pathway through

which early alcohol use and later labor market outcomes are related.

       As implied by the equation 1 notation, we estimate six additional specifications beyond

model 2. Specifically, model 3 includes a set of variables measuring high school academic

achievement (Y), model 4 adds educational attainment (E), model 5 inserts adult drinking (AA),

model 6 incorporates adult personal characteristics (Z), model 7 includes state fixed effects, and

model 8 controls for job characteristics (J). Because job characteristics are observed only for

workers, model 8 can be estimated for the wage, but not employment. The following section

provides details regarding the specific variables included in each category.

       We assume that our empirical representation of each of the explanatory factors in model

8 is adequate, and that model 8 controls for all relevant mechanisms through which adolescent

drinking could affect adult employment and wages. Consequently, we interpret a significant

model 8 estimate of     1,   regardless of sign, as evidence of unobserved heterogeneity.

       In such cases, we further investigate the source of the relationship between adolescent

drinking and adult labor market outcomes. Namely, we add two additional sets of variables,

each of which proxies for fixed unmeasured characteristics that might be correlated with both

youth drinking and adult productivity. The first set consists of behaviors, characteristics and

circumstances that existed in 8th grade, two years before teen alcohol use is measured. The

second set comprises several other potentially problematic behaviors in 10th grade. A reduction

in the association between early drinking and later labor market success upon adding any of

these supplementary 8th and 10th grade variables would provide more concrete evidence of

unobserved heterogeneity.




                                                    12
4. Data

4.1    The National Education Longitudinal Study

       Data for our analysis come from the National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS).

The survey initially interviewed students in 8th grade, prior to high school entry, and then

followed them at various points for the next 12 years, regardless of interim school enrollment

status. In the spring of 1988, a clustered and stratified probability sample of over 1,000 public

and private schools was used to collect information from about 25,000 8th graders. Students

completed baseline surveys and took curriculum-sensitive cognitive tests in reading,

mathematics, science and social studies. Parents, teachers and school principals also completed

base year questionnaires. Students were re-interviewed in 1990, 1992, 1994, and 2000. By the

last survey, respondents were generally about 26 years old, and those who had never dropped out

or repeated a grade had been out of high school for eight years. The weighted response rate for

the 2000 survey was 83.8 percent (National Center for Education Statistics, 2002).

       Our sample draws from the 12,144 respondents to the 2000 follow-up, which omitted

some of the original respondents. We also draw from the original 1988 survey and the first

follow-up in 1990, when most respondents were in 10th grade. Henceforth, we refer to the 1988,

1990 and 2000 NELS waves as the 8th grade, 10th grade and adult surveys, respectively.

       The analysis sample is limited to the 8,686 respondents who were in school, though not

necessarily at grade level, for the 10th grade survey (766 observations lost); completed the 8th and

10th grade surveys (801 observations lost); had available information from 10th grade on binge

drinking (576 observations lost), gender (62 observations lost); had available information on

employment and wages from the adult survey (466 observations lost); and were in the labor

force, i.e. either employed or seeking employment, in the adult survey (787 observations lost).




                                                 13
When information on remaining explanatory variables was missing, sample means were inserted

in place of missing values.



4.2    Adult labor market outcomes and teenage drinking

       The two adult labor market outcomes we study, from the 2000 survey, are employment

and the wage of employed respondents. Employment is represented by a binary indicator of

whether the respondent is currently employed, either part or full time. The natural log of the

hourly wage rate is converted from pre-tax earnings information, reported in hourly, weekly,

bimonthly or annual form. The sample excludes respondents who are neither currently employed

nor seeking a job.

       NELS respondents answered questions about alcohol use in both the 10th grade and adult

interviews. For both conceptual and practical reasons, at each age we focus on a binary indicator

of any binge drinking in the past two weeks. Conceptually, binge drinking is more likely than

less intense alcohol use to alter behavior, yet is far more prevalent among 10th graders than

clinically-defined alcohol abuse or dependence of the type studied by Mullahy and Sindelar

(1993). As a practical matter, NELS reported information about the number of drinks consumed

in the past month only in very wide intervals, making it difficult to separate infrequent from

frequent drinkers. Results that alternatively specify binge drinking frequency both in 10th grade

and as adults, though not reported here, are similar.



4.3    Exogenous covariates

       We perform separate analyses on the 4,139 males and 4,547 females. For each, a number

of exogenous covariates are included in models 2–7. Race/ethnicity is represented by indicators




                                                 14
of being African American, Hispanic, Asian and Native American, with white as the omitted

category. For each parent, education level is measured by a set of indicators for high school

dropout, some college, and college graduate, with high school graduate (but no college) as the

omitted group. Family structure in 10th grade is captured using indicators of having a two-parent

household with a step-parent, and having fewer than two parents in the household, with the

category having both parents in the household omitted. The number of siblings is included as a

separate variable. Family income is represented using indicators for each quartile. Age is

controlled for with indicators for having been born in 1972, 1973, 1974 or 1975, with “other”

omitted. An indicator for being at grade level in 10th grade is also held constant. Finally,

religious affiliation is captured with indicators for being Catholic, Baptist or Methodist, another

Christian religion, and a non-Christian religion, with no religious affiliation as the omitted group.



4.4    Indirect pathways

       The first indirect pathway we control for is 10th grade academic achievement. Beginning

with model 3, we include as explanatory variables GPA, percentile scores on NELS math and

reading achievement tests, and weekly number of hours spent on homework at school and at

home. GPA was constructed by assigning numerical scores on a four-point scale to self-reported

usual grades in math and English classes (e.g. “mostly As” was assigned 4.0, “As and Bs” was

assigned 3.5, etc.) and taking the average. Interval midpoints were used to convert categorical

information about homework hours into numerical form.

       Starting with model 4, we also control for educational attainment. This is measured as

the number of years of schooling completed by the adult survey. Because 97 percent of sample




                                                 15
respondents are at grade level at the time of the 10th grade survey, virtually all variation in

educational attainment occurs after the adolescent binge drinking variable is determined.

       Model 5 adds the previously defined adult binge drinking indicator. Accounting for

intertemporal drinking complementarity is important not only to illuminate an indirect pathway

through which adolescent drinking might affect adult productivity, but also to ensure that a

contemporaneous drinking effect is not misinterpreted as a lagged drinking effect.

       In model 6, adult personal characteristics are incorporated. These consist of an indicator

for whether the respondent is married and the number of child dependents at the time of the adult

interview. Both could be affected by drinking that occurs prior to the adult interview and is

related to adolescent drinking.

       A set of indicators for state of residence appear in models 7 and 8. Labor market

conditions vary across states, and decisions about where to live might be influenced by prior

drinking behavior.

       Finally, model 8 holds constant several characteristics of the adult job, and hence can be

estimated only for wage equations. These include usual weekly hours worked at the current job,

weeks worked in the previous year, and binary indicators for 39 detailed occupation categories

and employer type. The latter are indicators of being private for-profit, private not-for-profit,

local government, state government, federal government or military, with self-employed as the

omitted group.



4.4    Unobserved heterogeneity proxies

       As described below, the model 8 estimates for males are ultimately suggestive of a

spurious correlation between adolescent drinking and both employment and wages as adults. We




                                                  16
therefore gauge whether these estimates are sensitive to further including a number of additional

variables that are intended to proxy for omitted factors that might influence both drinking and

productivity. These variables can be divided into two sets, one of 8th grade characteristics and

another of 10th grade problem behaviors. Each set of variables is inserted first individually, and

then as a group. The 8th grade characteristics are an indicator of daily smoking, the number of

extracurricular activities in which the respondent participates (such as sports, music, clubs, youth

groups and religious organizations), standardized composite measures of self-concept and locus

of control, the number of stressful life events that occurred between 8th and 10th grade (including

death and illness among close family members, family structure changes, parental job loss,

family transition into or out of welfare, sibling school dropout or pregnancy, and becoming

homeless), and employment status indicators for each parent. The 10th grade problem behaviors

are indicators of past month marijuana use, lifetime cocaine use, and having been arrested and

suspended from school in the first half of the school year.



4.5    Descriptive statistics

       Table 1 shows descriptive statistics. The unemployment rates of 4.8 percent for males

and 7.0 percent for females are somewhat higher than the analogous national rates of 3.9 percent

for males and 4.4 percent for females among 25–29 year olds in 2000. The median hourly wage

among workers was $14.53 for males and $12.00 for females. Alcohol use was widespread

among 10th graders, with 25 percent of males and 20 percent of females reporting at least one

binge drinking episode in the past two weeks. These are quite similar to past two week binge

drinking prevalence rates among 10th graders in the 1991 Monitoring the Future survey, which is

also nationally representative.




                                                17
       Table 2 shows gender-specific means by 10th grade binge drinking status. As adults, 10th

grade binge drinkers are less likely to be employed than 10th graders who did not binge drink.

Females who binge drank in 10th grade earn slightly lower wages as adults than do 10th grade

non-binge drinking females. Adolescent binge drinkers have some characteristics that

predispose them to adverse labor market outcomes, such as being more likely to come from a

single parent home and below expected grade level in 10th grade. Moreover, high school binge

drinkers consistently have lower academic achievement, educational attainment and homework

hours than those who did not binge drink in high school. As expected, high school binge

drinkers are also much more likely than non-binge drinkers to binge drink as adults.



5. Results

       Table 3 summarizes the main regression results. Each cell represents a separate

regression, each panel a distinct labor market outcome, and each row a different gender-specific

sample. Columns 1–8 represent increasingly richer specifications, as described previously.

Entries are marginal effects, calculated at the explanatory variable means, for probits and are

coefficients for OLS models. Parentheses contain t-statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and

clustering by age 26 state of residence.



5.1    Employment

       Panel A shows estimates from probit regressions of employment status. The simple

regression coefficients in column 1 show that for both genders, 10th grade binge drinking is

associated negatively and statistically significantly with age 26 employment. Employment

probability reductions from binge drinking of .020 for females and .016 for males might seem




                                                18
small. But relative to the sample means, these correspond to drinking-related unemployment

increases of 29 percent for women and 33 percent for men, which are substantial. In fact, the

plausibility that causal effects could be this large is questionable.

       Column 2 adds the set of presumably exogenous characteristics to the right hand side.

Coefficient magnitudes and significance levels change little, implying total percentage effects of

24 percent for females and 35 percent for males. These are again sufficiently large to suggest

that at least some bias from the omission of relevant unmeasured factors is present. This does

not eliminate the possibility that a component of the effect is causal, however.

       In Column 3, we insert the 10th grade academic achievement measures into the model.

This is responsible for the main departure across genders in the relationship between 10th grade

binge drinking and adult employment. For females, the 10th grade drinking coefficient falls from

.017 to .008 and becomes statistically insignificant. This implies that over half of the

employment effect operates through an association between binge drinking and academic

achievement while in high school. If binge drinking lowers achievement, as Wolaver (2002),

Williams et al. (2003), and DeSimone and Wolaver (2005) find, this coefficient reduction might

stem in part from a process in which adult employment falls because of drinking-induced

achievement declines. Lower achievers might instead (or additionally) be more likely to binge

drink because of unobserved factors, such as personality characteristics or adverse events, which

affect both outcomes. Although the policy implication depends greatly on the extent to which of

these explanations hold, we do not attempt to distinguish between them. Rather, we simply

emphasize that once the negative correlation between 10th grade binge drinking and academic

achievement is accounted for, 10th grade binge drinking and age 26 employment are no longer

significantly related among females.




                                                  19
        In contrast, for males, controlling for 10th grade achievement in column 3 has little

impact on the adolescent drinking coefficient. Statistical significance is maintained, and the

effect on employment is now twice as large as for females.

        Regardless of gender, the further indirect pathways sequentially added in columns 4–6 –

educational attainment, adult binge drinking and adult family characteristics – have little bearing

on the relationship between 10th grade drinking and adult employment. Column 7 shows a slight

further decline in the 10th grade binge drinking coefficient when state of residence is held

constant, but this change is small in absolute terms and is of practical significance, in relative

terms, just for females. Because job characteristics are only defined for employed respondents,

we cannot estimate the column 8 specification in the employment regressions.

        Ultimately, therefore, the coefficient on 10th grade binge drinking in the male

employment equation is exactly the same, to three decimal places, when all indirect pathways are

accounted for as when no other explanatory factors at all are. This coefficient represents a

statistically and practically large effect of adolescent drinking on adult employment, despite the

inclusion of all indirect pathways that we observe. It seems likely, therefore, that the coefficient

primarily reflects unobserved heterogeneity that simultaneously increases high school drinking

and lowers the probability of employment ten years later. We further investigate this hypothesis

in table 4.

        For females, the relatively small size (i.e. seven percent of the average unemployment

rate) and statistical insignificance of the column 7 coefficient is consistent with the claim that the

indirect pathways we study account for the bulk of the relationship between 10th grade binge

drinking and adult employment. It is also clear from table 3 that the primary source of the

relationship is the correlation of both with 10th grade academic achievement. Unfortunately, as




                                                 20
noted above, our results do not clarify whether the link between high school drinking and

achievement and adult employment reflects a causal pathway or merely common omitted factors.

        However, three pieces of evidence point towards the latter explanation. First, DeSimone

and Wolaver (2005) estimate that most of the correlation between binge drinking and high school

grades is spurious. Second, it seems implausible that high school binge drinking would affect

high school achievement enough to have a large deleterious impact on employment ten years

later, but have no impact through the other intermediate outcomes, particularly educational

attainment. Third, a causal relationship does not appear to exist for males.



5.2     Wage

        Panel B contains estimates from OLS log wage equations. As opposed to the case for

employment, the column 1 simple regression coefficient signs vary by gender. Adolescent binge

drinking is associated with a 4.5 percent lower wage among females, but a 4.1 percent higher

wage among males. Although these magnitudes are nontrivial, both estimates are marginally

significant at best.

        Again unlike the employment results, inserting the exogenous factors in column 2 brings

about meaningful changes in the 10th grade binge drinking coefficients, similarly making them

less negative (females) or more positive (males). The wage effect of youth drinking falls to a

statistically insignificant –1.7 percent for women, but rises to a statistically significant 5.3

percent for men.

        The small and insignificant coefficient for females implies the absence of a causal effect.

This is reiterated by adding 10th grade academic achievement as a control in column 3. Once

again, the result is a large change in the 10th grade binge drinking coefficient that makes it less




                                                  21
negative, in this case flipping sign. As a group, the remaining intermediate outcomes, including

job characteristics, have little impact. The coefficient in column 8 is virtually the same as that in

column 3, implying that 10th grade binge drinkers earn 2.7 percent higher wages. This wage

premium, however, is not statistically significant.

       Our interpretation is that females who binge drink in high school differ in unobservable

ways from those who do not, and these differences are positively, albeit insignificantly, related to

productivity among those working ten years later. We return to a discussion of possible sources

of these unobserved differences shortly, in the context of males. In reduced form models, this

particular type of unobserved heterogeneity is masked by an offsetting relationship involving

academic achievement, in which student binge drinkers are also lower achievers and thus

destined to earn less.

       The impact of adding the intermediate outcomes in columns 3–7 are similar for males.

Inserting academic achievement increases the already positive coefficient by about one-half, but

including schooling, adult drinking, family characteristics and state fixed effects does little.

Consequently, the column 7 wage premium from adolescent binge drinking is eight percent.

This is highly significant and very large in magnitude. By comparison, an additional year of

education increases wages by only about 3 percent (not shown). If we have indeed captured all

the relevant indirect ways in which high school binge drinking affects the future wage, this

estimate provides strong evidence of unobserved heterogeneity, with time invariant omitted

factors raising both the propensity to binge drink while in school and the eventual wage. This is

the identical scenario to that discussed above for females, but is much stronger for males.

       In column 8, we add the job characteristics vector. As these characteristics could be

construed as additional labor market outcomes rather than intermediate outcomes of early




                                                 22
drinking that ultimately influence the wage, they are in some sense more endogenous and less

defensible to include than those covered by columns 3–7. Even after accounting for job

characteristics, though, the wage premium from earlier binge drinking is still a statistically

significant five percent. This estimate is arguably more conservative than the one in column 7,

yet is still equivalent to the return from nearly two extra years of schooling.



5.3    Sources of confounding for males

       Because the 10th grade binge drinking coefficient is insignificant in the fully-specified

employment and wage models for females, our remaining analysis is restricted to males. Table 4

investigates potential reasons that 10th grade binge drinking is significantly associated with a

lower probability of employment and a higher wage in early adulthood for males. We conduct

two separate exercises in which we extend the explanatory variable set of the models in column 7

for employment and column 8 for the wage. Panel A adds 8th grade individual and family

characteristics, while panel B adds 10th grade problem behaviors. Columns 1–2 are from

employment models and columns 3–4 are from wage models. Each row and pair of columns (1–

2 and 3–4) represents a separate regression. Columns 1 and 3 again show the 10th grade binge

drinking coefficient, while columns 2 and 4 show the adult binge drinking coefficient for

comparison.

       The top row replicates the 10th grade binge drinking estimates from the table 3 models

with all possible indirect pathways included, which serve as the baseline for the remainder of

table 4. It also shows that both adult binge drinking coefficients are positive, albeit barely

significant at the 20 percent level for employment and 10 percent level for wage.




                                                 23
       There are at least three notable aspects of this result. First, a positive coefficient for adult

binge drinking, rather than moderate drinking, is unlikely to be generated by a beneficial

contemporaneous impact of alcohol use on health and productivity. Second, the effect of adult

drinking on the wage is only about half of that of adolescent drinking. This casts doubt on the

social capital interpretation for positive wage effects of contemporaneous drinking. At the very

least, because career networking is unlikely to explain much of the 10th grade drinking effect, a

completely different explanation would have to apply for 10th grade drinking if social capital

acquisition truly was a reason for adult drinking. Third, for employment, the adult and

adolescent binge drinking coefficients are opposite in sign. This would seem to provide further

evidence that adolescent drinking does not causally reduce employment prospects. It is difficult

to conceive of reasons that a negative causal effect on employment would exist for (distant) past

but not current drinking, particularly holding constant the most obvious indirect pathways.

       In Panel A, we observe that including 8th grade characteristics has hardly any impact on

the coefficients of teenage and adult binge drinking in either the employment or wage models.

Even in the last row, when all of these characteristics are included together, the effects of

drinking are virtually the same as in the baseline model. For employment, this is surprising to

us. Time preference, proxied by daily smoking, and stressful life events in particular are two of

the main sources of unobserved heterogeneity that we had hypothesized.

       Panel B conducts an analogous exercise, but using several other 10th grade problem

behaviors that might be associated with binge drinking as additional explanatory variables.

Again, there is little effect on the adult binge drinking coefficients. Unlike the 8th grade

characteristics, though, the 10th grade problem behaviors have a noticeable downward impact on

the magnitude of the negative coefficient for 10th grade binge drinking in the employment




                                                 24
equation. Inserted on their own, three of the four problem behaviors, use of marijuana and

cocaine and being suspended earlier in the school year, reduce the 10th grade drinking effect by

at least 25 percent, enough to render it statistically insignificant. When all four behaviors are

added together, the 10th grade drinking coefficient falls by over two-thirds, from .016 to .005.

        An explanation is that 10th graders who binge drink also tend to engage in other

potentially destructive behaviors, in particular the use of marijuana and cocaine and behavior that

results in school suspension. These problem behaviors are associated with a lower future

likelihood of employment, likely because they reflect unobserved time-constant characteristics

that are linked with having fewer marketable skills or engaging in anti-social behaviors. The

negative effect of teen alcohol use on adult employment is confounded by these behaviors. Upon

accounting for them, the negative teen drinking effect disappears. It seems, therefore, that

adolescent binge drinking is not causally related to adult employment.

        An alternative explanation is that 10th grade problem behaviors are a pathway through

which teen drinking reduces labor market performance. Using marijuana use as an example,

since its insertion has the largest impact on the teen drinking coefficient, this is possible if

alcohol and marijuana consumption are complimentary for 10th graders, marijuana use is

intertemporally complementary, and adult marijuana use reduces contemporaneous employment

and wages. Even if all three of these relationships are as hypothesized above, however, the

effect seems much too large, particularly in the absence of other, presumably more plausible

indirect pathways. Also, it is unclear why this causal pathway would not also manifest itself in a

negative adult drinking coefficient, unless alcohol and marijuana happen to be substitutes for

young adults despite being complements for 10th graders.




                                                  25
       Parallel to the employment results, holding constant 10th grade problem behaviors

increases the positive effect of teen drinking on the adult wage. Although the relative impact is

much smaller in the wage model, the teen drinking coefficient changes in the same direction as

in the employment model and by a similar magnitude for all problem behaviors except

suspension. When all four behaviors are included, the wage premium associated with drinking in

10th grade rises from 5.1 to 5.9 percent. Thus, rather than eliminating a spurious employment

penalty, holding constant teen problem behaviors, especially marijuana and cocaine use, brings

about a larger teen wage premium that is apparently unexplained.

       We argue that this wage premium must be symptomatic of unobserved heterogeneity. In

particular, the lagged nature of adolescent drinking eliminates other commonly offered

explanations for wage premiums from contemporaneous drinking. A higher wage at age 26

cannot directly increase drinking at age 16, nor can it respond to health or social capital benefits

of alcohol consumed ten years previously. This is particularly true because we also control for

adult binge drinking. Thus, the positive adolescent drinking coefficient cannot be spuriously

picking up contemporaneous income, health or social capital effects through an intertemporal

complementarity of alcohol use. Moreover, there is no evidence that binge drinking offers health

benefits, but ample evidence that it has deleterious health and cognitive effects.

       An obvious question, then, is: What is the source of the spurious future wage premium

from 10th grade binge drinking? Our suspicion is that, after controlling for the type of

“problematic” binge drinking in high school that is correlated with behaviors such as illegal drug

use, the kind of binge drinking that remains is strongly related to social skills that are relatively

constant over time and rewarded on the labor market. It is easy to imagine that teens who binge

drink do so largely at parties where socializing with friends is the other primary activity.




                                                  26
       Ideally, we would be able to test this hypothesis by adding variables that proxy for

popularity or social skills to the wage model and determining whether the teen binge drinking

coefficient decreased substantially in size. Unfortunately, the quantity “interpersonal skills” is

difficult to define, and we have been unable to identify a suitable proxy in NELS. However, our

argument is consistent with some evidence from other contexts. Marmaros and Sacerdote (2002)

find that Dartmouth fraternity members earn significantly higher starting salaries even after

controlling for networking aspects of fraternity membership, including help from fraternity

brothers/sisters and Dartmouth alumni. Also, Sacerdote (2004) estimates that adopted children

randomly assigned to higher income families are more likely to both drink and complete more

schooling than those assigned to other families.

       This is similar to the “social capital” explanation for the “adult/income puzzle,” in that

we hypothesize that 10th grade binge drinkers on average have better interpersonal skills than

10th graders who do not binge drink. An important distinction, however, is that in its literal

sense, the idea behind the social capital explanation is that drinking often occurs with work

colleagues, and this leads to higher paying jobs through increased visibility and networking

opportunities. Put differently, the usual social capital explanation lays out a causal relationship

that is unlikely to apply to drinking lagged by a decade. Our social capital-type story is purely

one of unobserved heterogeneity.

       An important implication is that unobserved heterogeneity could play a more prominent

role in the adult drinking wage premium than has been conceded by most researchers. The

importance of individual fixed effects in Peters (2004) points towards an unobserved

heterogeneity explanation, which she also attributes in part to social ability. However, most

other researchers assume that health improvement from drinking, social capital, or reverse




                                                   27
causation through income effects are the underlying mechanisms generating the positive wage

effect. The existence of a wage premium that is almost twice as large for drinking a decade

previously as for current drinking, and that pertains to binge rather than moderate drinking,

suggests that there is more to the adult relationship than health, networking or income effects.



6. Conclusions

        There is little evidence that adult alcohol use, particularly that does not meet diagnostic

criteria for disorder, detracts directly from labor market outcomes. Previous researchers,

however, have suggested that alcohol use may still negatively affect labor market outcomes

through indirect pathways, such as education and academic achievement. Because no prior

studies have attempted to link youth drinking to adult labor market outcomes, we address this

issue using NELS data, which are longitudinal and contain information on a wide array of

potentially confounding factors.

        Our findings indicate that 10th grade binge drinking is negatively associated with

employment ten years later. For males, this relationship persists even after all indirect pathways

are controlled for, but dissipates when 10th grade problem behaviors are inserted into the model.

This strongly suggests an unobserved heterogeneity explanation. Among females, a causal

pathway is possible, since academic achievement is the primary mediating factor in the

relationship between teen drinking and adult employment. However, ancillary evidence is

consistent with the possibility that this correlation is at least partially spurious as well.

        We find no evidence that adolescent binge drinking is associated with adult wages for

females. In contrast, male teens who binge drink earn a five percent wage premium relative to

their non-binge drinking peers. This association does not operate through any of the indirect




                                                   28
pathways we specify, is not related to 8th grade characteristics, and is strengthened when we

control for 10th grade problem behaviors. Our theory is that some difficult-to-measure trait, such

as having good social skills and being popular among peers, underlies this association.

       Several of our findings are puzzling. First, the wage premium for adult drinking, which

has many more plausible explanations, is only about half the size as that for adolescent drinking.

A possibility is that adult binge drinking does in fact reduce current wages, but is more than

offset by positive spurious correlation that is difficult to econometrically eliminate. By the same

token, the 10th grade problem behaviors that are evidently highly correlated with 10th grade

drinking appear unrelated with adult drinking, suggesting that different mechanisms underlie

binge drinking behavior at different points in the life cycle.

       Second, it is unclear why the teen drinking coefficient is positive in the male wage

equation, but negative (albeit ultimately insignificant) in the male employment equation. In light

of the impact that 10th grade problem behaviors have, it could be that there are two “types” of

male high school binge drinkers. For one type, binge drinking is accompanied by illegal drug

use and behaviors that result is school suspension. These binge drinkers are less likely to be

employed as adults. For the other type, binge drinking primarily occurs when socializing with

friends and largely does not involve other destructive behaviors. Compared with non-binge

drinking 10th graders, these students earn a wage premium as adults from social skills that are

associated with 10th grade binge drinking.

       Whatever the explanation, this result is consistent with evidence from Marmaros and

Sacerdote (2002) as well as Mullahy and Sindelar (2003). The former find that fraternity

members earn wage premiums relative to non-members, as documented above, but are no more

likely to be employed upon graduation. The latter find that negative effects of previous




                                                 29
alcoholism operate primarily through employment, with no significant wage differences among

the full-time employed.

       Third, in results not shown, adding a control for any 10th grade alcohol use, not

necessarily restricted to binge drinking, has no impact on the wage premium from 10th grade

binge drinking. The sociability trait, or other unobserved characteristic, that is rewarded on the

labor market therefore appears uniquely correlated with binge rather than non-binge drinking

during high school.

       Finally, we fail to find evidence to support our hypothesis regarding the source of the

teen binge drinking wage premium. All told, these unexpected and unexplained results call for

further research on the topic.




                                                30
References

Auld, M. Christopher, “Smoking, Drinking, and Income,” Journal of Human Resources, Spring
2005, 40(2), 505–518.

Baltagi, Badi H. and James M. Griffin, “Rational Addiction to Alcohol: Panel Data Analysis of
Liquor Consumption,” Health Economics, September 2002, 11(6), 485–491.

Barrett, Garry F., “The Effect of Alcohol Consumption on Earnings,” Economic Record, March
2002, 78(240), 79–96.

Bask, Mikael and Maria Melkersson, “Rationally Addicted to Drinking and Smoking?” Applied
Economics, March 2004, 36(4), 373–381.

Bentzen, Jan, Tor Eriksson and Valdemar Smith, “Rational Addiction and Alcohol Consumption:
Evidence from the Nordic Countries,” Journal of Consumer Policy, September 1999, 22(3), 257–
279.

Berger, Mark C. and Leigh, J. Paul, “The Effect of Alcohol Use on Wages,” Applied Economics,
October 1988, 20(10), 1343–1351.

Bray, Jeremy W., “Alcohol Use, Human Capital, and Wages,” Journal of Labor Economics,
April 2005, 23(2), 279–312.

Carpenter, Christopher, “Heavy Alcohol Use and Youth Suicide: Evidence from Tougher Drunk
Driving Laws,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Fall 2004, 23(4), 831–842.

Carpenter, Christopher, “Youth Alcohol Use and Risky Sexual Behavior: Evidence from
Underage Drunk Driving Laws,” Journal of Health Economics, May 2005, 24(3), 613–628.

Chatterji, Pinka, “Illicit Drug Use and Educational Attainment,” Health Economics, May 2006,
15(5), 489–511.

Chatterji, Pinka, Dave, Dhaval, Kaestner, Robert and Markowitz, Sara, “Alcohol Abuse and
Suicide Attempts among Youth,” Economics and Human Biology, June 2004, 2(2), 159–180.

Chatterji, Pinka, and DeSimone, Jeff, “Adolescent Drinking and High School Dropout,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11337, April 2005.

Cook, Philip J. and Moore, Michael J., “Drinking and Schooling,” Journal of Health Economics,
December 1993, 12(4), 411–429.

Cook, Philip J. and Peters, Bethany, “The Myth of the Drinker’s Bonus,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 11902, December 2005.




                                              31
Dave, Dhaval and Kaestner, Robert, “Alcohol Taxes and Labor Market Outcomes,” Journal of
Health Economics, May 2002, 21(3), 357–371.

Dee, Thomas S. and Evans, William N., “Teen Drinking and Educational Attainment: Evidence
from Two-Sample Instrumental Variables Estimates,” Journal of Labor Economics, January
2003, 21(1), 178–209.

DeSimone, Jeff and Wolaver, Amy M., “Drinking and Academic Performance in High School,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11035, January 2005.

Dufour MC. Risks and benefits of alcohol use over the life span. Alcohol Health and Research
World 1996; 20:145-51.

French, Michael T. and Zarkin, Gary A., “Is Moderate Alcohol Use Related to Wages? Evidence
from Four Worksites,” Journal of Health Economics, August 1995, 14(3), 319–344.

Grossman, Michael, Chaloupka, Frank J. and Sirtalan, Ismail, “An Empirical Analysis of
Alcohol Addiction: Results from the Monitoring the Future Panels,” Economic Inquiry, January
1998, 36(1), 39–48.

Grossman, Michael, Kaestner, Robert and Markowitz, Sara, “An Investigation of the Effects of
Alcohol Policies on Youth STDs,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
10949, December 2004.

Hamilton, Vivian and Hamilton, Barton H., “Alcohol and Earnings: Does Drinking Yield a
Wage Premium?” Canadian Journal of Economics, February 1997, 30(1), 135–151.

Heien, Dale M., “Do Drinkers Earn Less?” Southern Economic Journal, July 1996, 63(1), 60–68.

Johnston, O’Malley & Bachman, Monitoring the Future Study, The University of Michigan,
www.monitoringthefuture.org.

Jones, Ethel B. and Jackson, John D., “College Grades and Labor Market Rewards,” Journal of
Human Resources, Spring 1990, 25(2), 253–266.

Koch, Steven F. and McGeary, Kerry Anne, “The Effect of Youth Alcohol Initiation on High
School Completion,” Economic Inquiry, October 2005, 43(4), 750–765.

Koch, Steven F. and Ribar, David C., “A Siblings Analysis of the Effects of Alcohol
Consumption Onset on Educational Attainment,” Contemporary Economic Policy, April 2001,
19(2), 162–174.

MacDonald, Ziggy and Shields, Michael A., “Does Problem Drinking Affect Employment?
Evidence from England,” Health Economics, February 2004, 13(2), 139–155.




                                              32
MacDonald, Ziggy and Shields, Michael A., “The Impact of Alcohol Consumption on
Occupational Attainment in England,” Economica, August 2001, 68(271), 427–453.

Markowitz, Sara and Grossman, Michael, “Alcohol Regulation and Domestic Violence towards
Children,” Contemporary Economic Policy, July 1998, 16(3), 309–320.

Markowitz, Sara, Chatterji, Pinka and Kaestner, Robert, “Estimating the Impact of Alcohol
Policies on Youth Suicides,” Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, March 2003, 6(1),
37–46.

Markowitz, Sara, Kaestner, Robert and Grossman, Michael, “An Investigation of the Effects of
Alcohol Consumption and Alcohol Policies on Youth Risky Sexual Behaviors,” American
Economic Review, May 2005, 95(2), 263–266.

Marmaros, David and Sacerdote, Bruce, “Peer and Social Networks in Job Search,” European
Economic Review, April 2002, 46(4-5), 870–879.

Mullahy, John and Sindelar, Jody L., “Alcoholism, Work, and Income,” Journal of Labor
Economics, July 1993, 11(3), 494–520.

Mullahy, John and Sindelar, Jody, “Employment, Unemployment, and Problem Drinking,”
Journal of Health Economics, August 1996, 15(4), 409–434.

Mullahy, John and Sindelar, Jody, “Life-Cycle Effects of Alcoholism on Education, Earnings,
and Occupation,” Inquiry, Summer 1989, 26(2), 272–82.

National Center for Education Statistics (NCES), NELS base-year to fourth follow-up data file
user’s manual, June 2002.

Peters, Bethany, “Is There a Wage Bonus from Drinking? Unobserved Heterogeneity
Examined,” Applied Economics, November 2004, 36(20), 2299–2315.

SAMHSA, Office of Applied Studies, National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2004.

Sacerdote, Bruce, “What Happens When We Randomly Assign Children to Families?” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10894, November 2004.

Tekin, Erdal, “Employment, Wages, and Alcohol Consumption in Russia,” Southern Economic
Journal, October 2004, 71(2), 397–417.

Terza, Joseph V., “Alcohol Abuse and Employment: A Second Look,” Journal of Applied
Econometrics, July-August 2002, 17(4), 393–404.

U.S. DHHS, Tenth Special Report to Congress on Alcohol and Health, June 2000.




                                              33
Van Ours, Jan C., “A Pint a Day Raises a Man'
                                            s Pay; but Smoking Blows That Gain Away,”
Journal of Health Economics, September 2004, 23(5), 863–886.

Williams, Jenny, Powell, Lisa M. and Wechsler, Henry, “Does Alcohol Consumption Reduce
Human Capital Accumulation? Evidence from the College Alcohol Study,” Applied Economics,
July 2003, 35(10), 1227–39.

Wolaver, Amy M., “Effects of Heavy Drinking in College on Study Effort, Grade Point Average,
and Major Choice,” Contemporary Economic Policy, October 2002, 20(4), 415–428.

Yamada, Tetsuji, Kendix, Michael and Yamada, Tadashi, “The Impact of Alcohol Consumption
and Marijuana Use on High School Graduation,” Health Economics, January-February 1996,
5(1), 77–92.

Zarkin, Gary A., French, Michael T., Mroz, Thomas and Bray, Jeremy W., “Alcohol Use and
Wages: New Results from the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse,” Journal of Health
Economics, January 1998, 17(1), 53–68.

Zeigler, Donald W., Wang, Claire C., Yoast, Richard A., Dickinson, Barry D., McCaffree, Mary
Anne, Robinowitz, Carolyn B. and Sterling, Melvyn L., “The Neurocognitive Effects of Alcohol
on Adolescents and College Students,” Preventive Medicine, January 2005, 40(1), 23–32.




                                             34
                             Table 1: Sample Means and Standard Deviations
Variable                                                   Males (N = 4,139)       Females (N = 4,547)
                                                           Mean       Std. Dev.     Mean      Std. Dev.
                                Young Adult Labor Market Outcomes (Age 26)
Employed                                                    .952                     .930
Hourly wage (median)                                       14.53        13.29       12.00       8.40
                                                             th
                                        Binge Drinking in 10 Grade
Binge drinking in past 2 weeks                              .253                     .200
Number of binge drinking episodes past 2 weeks              .767         1.91        .477        1.37
                     Demographic, Family and Individual Characteristics in High School
African-American                                            .078                     .095
Hispanic                                                    .113                     .121
Asian                                                       .064                     .064
Native American                                             .034                     .034
Mother high school graduate                                 .340                     .325
Mother some college                                         .192                     .211
Mother college graduate                                     .251                     .213
Father high school graduate                                 .287                     .268
Father some college                                         .180                     .197
Father college graduate                                     .294                     .257
                                          th
Family structure other than 2 parents (10 grade)            .200                     .213
                           th
Step-family (2 parents, 10 grade)                           .121                     .122
                  th
Family income (8 grade)                                   37,500                   30,000
Number of siblings                                          2.17                     2.22
Year of birth (19--)                                        74.0         .572        73.7        .507
                      th
Not at grade level (10 grade)                               .035                     .026
Catholic                                                    .290                     .292
Baptist or Methodist                                        .253                     .280
Other Christian                                             .268                     .275
Other religion                                              .082                     .082
                                                                 th
                                    Academic Achievement in 10 Grade
GPA (math & English)                                        2.80         .765        2.97        .733
Math percentile test score                                 54.22        13.20       53.48       13.09
Reading percentile test score                              52.87        13.32       54.20       12.64
Homework hours in school                                    2.07         1.55        2.05        1.49
Homework hours at home                                      2.37         1.71        2.80       1.74
                                      Educational Attainment (Age 26)
Years of schooling completed                               13.93         2.04       13.97       2.07
                                    Young Adult Binge Drinking (Age 26)
Binge drinking in past 2 weeks                              .390                     .172
Number of binge drinking episodes in past 2 weeks           .936         1.71        .317        .881
                                 Young Adult Family Characteristics (Age 26)
Married                                                     .355                     .433
Number of dependents                                        .470                     .614        .936
                      Young Adult Job Characteristics (Among Employed Individuals)
Usual weekly hours worked                                  43.40        11.20       38.23        1.50
Weeks worked in past year                                  48.51         8.08       47.15        9.53
Employer is private, for-profit                            72.87                    69.69
Employer is non-profit                                      5.20                     1.73
Employer is local government                                4.21                     5.55
Employer is state government                                4.64                     8.61
Employer is federal government                              1.28                     1.74
Employer is military                                        3.70                     .950




                                                  35
                                           th
                                  Additional 8 grade Characteristics, Males
Smokes daily                                              .044
Number of sports teams                                    1.53           1.01
Number of music activities                                .609           .717
Number of clubs                                           1.42           1.93
Number of religious youth groups                          .458           .630
                                          th
No. stressful life events past 2 years (10 grade)         .913           1.15
Self-concept                                              .766           7.91
Locus of control                                          .746           8.21
Father is employed                                        .931
Mother is employed                                        .898
                                             th
                               Additional 10 grade Problem Behaviors, Males
Used marijuana in past month                              .067
Used cocaine in lifetime                                  .033
Suspended out-of-school (first half of year)              .076
Arrested (first half of year)                             .044




                                                   36
                   Table 2: Variable Means by High School Binge Drinking Status
                                                     Males (N = 4,139)         Females (N = 4,547)
                                                   Binged      Didn’t binge    Binged    Didn’t binge
                                                 N = 1,048        N = 3,091  N = 3,638     N = 909
                              Young Adult Labor Market Outcomes (Age 26)
Employed                                             .940            .956**      .920        .932**
Hourly wage among employed                          17.13            17.71      12.52       13.08*
                   Demographic, Family and Individual Characteristics in High School
African-American                                     .054           .086***     .055        .105***
Hispanic                                             .124              .111     .130           .119
Asian                                                .027           .077***     .032        .072***
Native American                                      .047           .030***     .040           .033
Mother high school graduate                          .391           .323***     .345           .320
Mother some college                                  .187              .194     .227        .207***
Mother college graduate                              .222           .261***     .171           .224
Father high school graduate                          .292              .285     .286           .263
Father some college                                  .196              .175     .189           .198
Father college graduate                              .260           .305***     .229        .264***
Family structure other than 2 parents                .228           .192***     .255        .202***
Step-family (2 parents)                              .135              .116     .152         .114**
Family income                                      41,832           41,798     40,212       40,435
Number of siblings                                   2.25              2.14     2.26           2.21
Not at grade level                                   .055           .028***     .043        .022***
Catholic                                             .316            .281**     .320         .285**
Baptist or Methodist                                 .246              .255     .258          .286*
Other Christian                                      .246             .276*     .271           .275
Other religion                                       .068             .086*     .059        .087***
                                                                th
                                   Academic Achievement in 10 Grade
GPA                                                  2.56           2.89***     2.70        3.04***
Math test score                                      5.51          55.48***     5.67       54.18***
Reading test score                                  49.22          54.10***    51.11       54.97***
Homework hours at school                             1.98           2.10***     2.01           2.06
Homework hours at home                               2.03           2.48***     2.33        2.92***
                                     Educational Attainment (Age 26)
Years of schooling                                  13.27          13.84***    13.42       14.10***
                                   Young Adult Binge Drinking (Age 26)
Any binge drinking past 2 weeks                      .541           .338***     .270       .148***
No. binge drinking episodes past 2 weeks             1.45           .761***     2.39           .268
                                Young Adult Family Characteristics (Age 26)
Married                                              .343              .360     .415       .438***
Number of dependents                                 .585           .431***     .769       .575***
                     Young Adult Job Characteristics (Among Employed Individuals)
Usual hours worked                                  44.35          43.07***    37.82         38.08
Weeks worked in past year                           48.36            48.56     46.73         46.96
Employer is private, for-profit                     .751               .727     .712       .664***
Employer is non-profit                              .044               .055     .091           .113
Employer is local government                        .042               .042     .046           .059
Employer is state government                        .026           .054***      .072           .091
Employer is federal government                      .011               .014     .014           .018
Employer is military                                .031               .039     .009           .010

*, **, and *** denote statistically significant difference at the .10, .05, and .01 levels, respectively.




                                                              37
             Table 3: High School Binge Drinking and Young Adult Labor Market Outcomes

                                              (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
                                                             Panel A: Employed, age 26 – Probit Model
                                                                     Marginal Effect (t statistic)
Females (N = 4,547)                         -.020      -.017    -.008     -.007     -.008        -.007 -.005
                                           (-2.38)    (-1.97) (-1.06) (-.880) (-1.10) (-.900) (-.610)
Males (N = 4,139)                           -.016      -.017       -.016      -.016      -.018      -.017      -.016
                                           (-2.08)    (-2.32)     (-2.18)    (-2.19)    (-2.44)    (-2.36)    (-2.17)

                                                         Panel B: Log of hourly wage, age 26 – OLS Model
                                                                       Coefficient (t statistic)
Females (N = 4,220)                         -.045      -.017     .024      .036       .026        .031   .036               .027
                                           (-1.57)    (-.680)   (.950)    (1.37)     (.950)      (1.14) (1.26)             (1.01)
Males (N = 3,941)                           .041       .053      .080      .083       .077        .075   .081               .051
                                           (1.67)     (2.35)    (3.69)    (3.75)     (3.36)      (3.25) (3.49)             (2.48)

Includes:
 th     th
8 & 10 grade characteristics                             X          X          X           X          X          X           X
                            th
Academic achievement, 10 grade                                      X          X           X          X          X           X
Years of education, age 26                                                     X           X          X          X           X
Binge drinking, age 26                                                                     X          X          X           X
Family characteristics, age 26                                                                        X          X           X
State fixed effects                                                                                              X           X
Job characteristics, age 26                                                                                                  X

Each cell shows the estimated marginal effect (employment) or coefficient (wage) of an indicator of past two week
                     th
binge drinking in 10 grade and is from a separate regression. Parentheses contain t statistics adjusted for clustering
                                 th    th
at age 26 state of residence. 8 & 10 grade characteristics include race/ethnicity, parents’ education, family income,
                                                             th                                                       th
number of siblings, year of birth and religion (measured in 8 grade), and family structure and not at grade level (10
                                        th
grade). Academic achievement in 10 grade includes GPA in math/English, % scores on math and reading
achievement tests, and weekly hours spent on homework. Binge drinking at age 26 is a binary indicator of binge
drinking in the past 2 weeks. Family characteristics at age 26 include marital status and the number of dependents.
State fixed effects correspond to state of residence at age 26. Job characteristics at age 26 include usual hours
worked, weeks worked in past year, occupation and type of employer.




                                                          38
                                  Table 4: Inclusion of additional controls, Males

                                                Employed at age 26 – Probit          Log (age 26 hourly wage) –
                                                 Marginal Effect (t statistic)       OLS Coefficient (t statistic)
                                                     (1)              (2)                 (3)             (4)
                                                           th                                   th
                                               Binged in 10       Binged at         Binged in 10     Binged at
                                                   grade            age 26              grade          age 26
Table 3:                                           -.016             .008                .051            .029
Model 7 (employment) or 8 (wage)                  (-2.17)           (1.29)              (2.48)          (1.74)
                                                        th
                                        Panel A: 8 grade characteristics
Model 7 or 8 plus:
Daily smoking                                       -.015              .008               .051               .029
                                                   (-2.08)            (1.30)             (2.49)             (1.75)
School and community activities                     -.016              .007               .049               .027
                                                   (-2.28)            (1.16)             (2.37)             (1.63)
Self-concept, Locus of control                      -.016              .008               .050               .029
                                                   (-2.15)            (1.29)             (2.47)             (1.77)
Stressful life events                               -.016              .008               .053               .028
                                                   (-2.19)            (1.29)             (2.61)             (1.69)
Parental employment                                 -.016              .008               .050               .030
                                                   (-2.21)            (1.29)             (2.45)             (1.76)
All of the above                                    -.015              .007               .050               .027
                                                   (-2.23)            (1.18)             (2.47)             (1.65)
                                                   th
                                     Panel B: 10 grade problem behaviors
Model 7 or 8 plus:
Marijuana use in past month                         -.009              .008               .059               .030
                                                   (-.980)            (1.31)             (2.89)             (1.72)
Cocaine use in lifetime                             -.012              .008               .057               .029
                                                   (-1.44)            (1.28)             (2.80)             (1.70)
Arrested in first half of school year               -.014              .008               .053               .030
                                                   (-1.94)            (1.27)             (2.52)             (1.75)
Suspended in first half of school year              -.011              .008               .047               .030
                                                   (-1.53)            (1.20)             (2.32)             (1.76)
All of the above                                    -.005              .007               .059               .030
                                                   (-.560)            (1.20)             (2.85)             (1.73)

Each cell shows the estimated marginal effect (employment) or coefficient (wage) an indicator of past two week binge
                th
drinking in 10 grade and is from a separate regression. Parentheses contain t statistics adjusted for clustering at
age 26 state of residence. Model 7 and 8 covariates are listed in the footnote to table 3. School and community
activities include self-reported numbers of sports teams, music activities, clubs and religious youth organizations.
Self-concept and locus of control are individual standardized composites of responses to multiple questions.
Stressful life events including family deaths and illness, family structure changes, parental job loss, transition into or
out of welfare, sibling dropped out of school or became pregnant, and became homeless. Parental employment
includes indicators that the mother and father are employed.




                                                             39
