                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   CLIMBING ATOP THE SHOULDERS OF GIANTS: THE
                 IMPACT OF INSTITUTIONS ON CUMULATIVE RESEARCH

                                            Jeffrey L. Furman
                                                Scott Stern

                                          Working Paper 12523
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12523


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2006




We thank each of the scientists who graciously offered their insights, the personnel of the American Type
Culture Collection, and especially Dr. Raymond Cypess and Robert Hay. We thank Andrew Bernard,
Bronwyn Hall, Shane Greenstein, Ben Jones, Michael Kremer, Robert Litan, Megan MacGarvie, Paul Romer,
Mathieu Trepanier and participants in numerous seminars for comments and suggestions. Jason Corradini,
Mercedes Delgado, Lorraine DeLeon, Chijoke Emineke, Jeremy Gagne, Anna Harrington, Martha Kam, Julia
Lo, Kinga Piekos, Courtney Mason, Tracy Myers, Michael Vitulli, and Naomi Wohl provided excellent
research assistance. All errors are our own. Financial support for this research was provided by the
Brookings Institution and by the Boston University School of Management Junior Faculty Research Fund.
Author contact information: Scott Stern, Kellogg Graduate School of Management, 2001 Sheridan Road,
Evanston, IL 60208 s-stern2@northwestern.edu, and Jeffrey L. Furman, Boston University School of
Management, 595 Commonwealth Ave -- #653a, Boston, MA 02215, furman@bu.edu. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2006 by Jeffrey L. Furman and Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Climbing Atop the Shoulders of Giants: The Impact of Institutions on Cumulative Research
Jeffrey L. Furman and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 12523
September 2006
JEL No. H4, L3, O3, O33

                                            ABSTRACT


While the cumulative nature of knowledge is recognized as central to economic growth, the
microeconomic foundations of cumulativeness are less understood. This paper investigates the
impact of a research-enhancing institution on cumulativeness, highlighting two effects. First, a
selection effect may result in a high correlation between “high-quality” institutions and knowledge
of high intrinsic quality. Second, an institution may have a marginal impact – an incremental
influence on cumulativeness, conditional on the type and quality of knowledge considered. This
paper distinguishes these effects in the context of a specific institution, biological resource centers
(BRCs). BRCs are “living libraries” that authenticate, preserve, and offer independent access to
biological materials, such as cells, cultures, and specimens. BRCs may enhance the cumulativeness
of knowledge by reducing the marginal cost to researchers of drawing on prior research efforts. We
exploit three key aspects of the environment in which BRCs operate to evaluate how they affect the
cumulativeness of knowledge: (a) the impact of scientific knowledge is reflected in future scientific
citations, (b) deposit into BRCs often occurs with a substantial lag after initial research is completed
and published, and (c) “lagged” deposits often result from shocks unrelated to the characteristics of
the materials themselves. Employing a difference-in-differences estimator linking specific materials
deposits to journal articles, we find evidence for both selection effects and the marginal impact of
BRCs on the cumulativeness of knowledge associated with deposited materials. Moreover, the
marginal impact increases with time and varies with the economic and institutional conditions in
which deposit occurs.

Jeffrey L. Furman
Boston University – SMG
595 Commonwealth Avenue – #653a
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
furman@bu.edu

Scott Stern
Management and Strategy Department
Kellogg School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
s-stern@northwestern.edu
“If I have been able to see further, it was only because I stood on the shoulder of giants.”
                                                      Isaac Newton, 1676

I.         INTRODUCTION

           At least since the development of scientific societies and related research institutions in
the 17th century, the centrality of cumulativeness in scientific and technical advance has been
recognized.1 However, from the perspective of economic theory, cumulativeness has only been
incorporated recently, in models of endogenous economic growth [Romer, 1990; Grossman and
Helpman, 1991; Jones, 1995] and step-by-step technical progress within industries [Scotchmer,
1991; Gallini and Scotchmer, 2003]. In order to serve as a foundation for long-term growth,
scientific research and technological progress must exert a positive intertemporal spillover; as
Jones [1995] emphasizes, to avoid diminishing returns to research investments, research itself
must “stand on the shoulders” of prior knowledge.
           Though extremely insightful in deriving the implications of cumulativeness for related
economic variables (such as the equilibrium growth rate or the incentives for innovation), these
models do not articulate the conditions that result in a cumulative research environment. For
example, as Mokyr [2002] elegantly and persuasively argues, the mere production of knowledge
does not guarantee that others will be able to exploit it. Effective diffusion of knowledge across
researchers and over time requires that individuals are aware of extant knowledge and pay the
costs of accessing that knowledge. Further, since any individual researcher only captures a small
share of the benefit from the process of certifying knowledge and making it accessible, there may
be a significant gap between the private and social returns associated with investments that
contribute to the diffusion of scientific knowledge. Overall, then, the ability of a society to stand
on the shoulders of giants depends not only on the amount of knowledge it generates, but on the



1
     Though certainly not the first example, Newton’s recognition of cumulativeness is (famously) recognized in his
     classic 1676 letter to scientific rival Robert Hooke in the context of a dispute over the nature of light: “What
     Des-Cartes did was a good step. You have added much several ways, & especially in taking ye colours of thin
     plates unto philosophical consideration. If I have seen further it is by standing on ye sholders of Giants.”
     Economic historians and economists of technical change, most notably Nathan Rosenberg (1963), highlighted the
     centrality of cumulativeness in economic growth long before this idea was incorporated into formal models. As
     well, the role of institutions in promoting the explosion of scientific research in 17th century England is the
     cornerstone of Merton’s seminal contributions to the sociology of science (Merton, 1957; 1973), which itself has
     served as a foundation for the “new” economics of science (Dasgupta and David, 1994).

                                                                                                                   1
quality of mechanisms for storing knowledge, the fidelity of knowledge, and the costs of
accessing knowledge.
       Institutions and public policy are often suggested as central to the cumulative process.
Social scientists face a considerable challenge, however, in assessing the extent to which any
particular institution influences the way in which the “knowledge stock” is created, maintained,
and extended. It is empirically difficult to isolate the impact of a particular piece of knowledge
from the impact of the particular institution in which it is embedded, although the two are
conceptually distinct.   Two forces may be at work: First, a selection effect may result from a
high correlation between “high-quality” institutions and knowledge of high intrinsic quality.
However, for policy analysis, we are often more interested in the marginal impact of an
institution – the incremental influence of an institution on cumulativeness, conditional on the
nature and quality of knowledge embodied in it. Without an identification strategy capable of
isolating selection and marginal effects, research examining the role of institutions on knowledge
diffusion will confound these two effects.
       The main contribution of this paper is to provide direct statistical evidence of the impact
of a specific institution – biological resource centers (BRCs) – on the cumulativeness of
knowledge, distinguishing the marginal impact of the institution from the effect of selection into
that institution. Biological resource centers play a central (but invisible) role in life sciences
research. BRCs collect, certify and distribute biological organisms for use in biological research
and in the development of commercial products in the pharmaceutical, agricultural and
biotechnology industries. BRCs maintain large and varied collections of biological materials,
including cell lines, microorganisms, and DNA material, and distribute tools that allow
researchers to access and exploit these materials. The ability to exploit prior research in the life
sciences depends on access to the cells, cultures, and specimens used in that research. BRCs are
a key institutional arrangements through which scientists can obtain materials for research
purposes. A key objective of our empirical analysis is to evaluate whether the ability to access
research materials through a BRC is associated with enhancing the impact of the scientific
research article that initially described those research materials.
       At a broad level, our analysis contributes to understanding the microfoundations of
knowledge accumulation, which plays an important role in leading to ideas-driven growth. More
specifically, our empirical approach extends recent studies using citation analysis to investigate

                                                                                                  2
the impact of institutions and technological communities on the cumulativeness of discovery and
innovation [Jaffe, et al, 1993; Griliches, 1998]. We exploit three aspects of our empirical setting
to develop and implement a differences-in-differences estimate of the impact of BRCs on
knowledge spillovers. First, in most cases, each material deposited in a BRC is associated with a
journal article that describes its initial characterization and application. Second, for specific
types of BRC deposits, there is a significant lag between that initial article and its deposit into a
BRC, and, in certain cases, the transfer of the materials was motivated by factors unrelated to the
extent of their use. Specifically, we examine the deposit of materials into BRCs that are
associated with “special collections” that are transferred in toto from smaller collections from
which they had previously circulated into a major BRC, as a result of either the departure of a
principal investigator or in response to institution-wide funding difficulties unrelated to the
culture collection itself. Third, we take advantage of the fact that each of the special collections
we analyze was a unified collection prior to deposit and was transferred as a group. Thus, the
institutional shock is consistent for every material within a collection, and any systematic
differences in the impact of that shock on future knowledge diffusion can be linked to the
characteristics of the materials themselves.
       In our empirical analysis, we focus on these “special collections” and evaluate whether
articles associated with BRC deposited materials receive a boost in citations after deposit has
occurred (after accounting for an article-specific fixed effect, and controlling for age and year
fixed effects). In so doing, we are able to separately identify the role of selection (the likelihood
that materials deposited into BRCs are associated with intrinsically important research) from the
marginal impact of BRCs (the impact of BRCs in enhancing diffusion, controlling for the
intrinsic importance of that knowledge). Our approach builds on the considerable advances that
have been made in recent years in evaluating differences-in-differences estimation [Bertrand,
Duflo, Mullainathan, 2004]. Beyond our main specifications, we are able to provide a series of
checks of our identification assumptions that reinforce our overall approach.
       Our results provide strong empirical support for both the selection effect and the marginal
impact of BRCs. Even in the period before their materials are accessible through a BRC, those
research articles that are ultimately linked to BRCs experience nearly double the citation rate
compared to a set of control articles drawn from the same journal and published in the same year.
Even if the marginal impact of BRCs were to be zero, this result is important, as it suggest that

                                                                                                   3
the particular institution we study identifies and preserves materials that are, themselves, of
greater than average importance in the life sciences. In fact, if the selection effect were not
positive and significant, we may worry that a potential ‘advertising’ effect of BRCs may lead
less important materials to be circulated. Conditional on materials becoming accessible through
a BRC, their associated articles then experience a significant citation boost. The size of this
boost ranges from just over 50% to more than 125% across the key specifications. In addition,
this citation boost persists and, indeed, grows over time. This finding is consistent with the role
of BRCs in helping to preserve the accessibility of knowledge for future research generations.
While most articles are swiftly forgotten, the “rate of forgetting” associated with BRC-affiliated
articles is substantially after accession. Taken together, these results suggest that BRCs play an
economically significant role in the intertermporal diffusion of knowledge in the life sciences.
       To understand the mechanisms that drive this result, we further investigate whether the
impact of BRC deposit depends on the economic or institutional conditions under which deposit
occurs. We provide suggestive evidence that the benefits to BRC deposit arise both from a
reduction in the “transactional” costs of accessing materials and an increase in the degree of
certification associated with deposited materials. Specifically, we take advantage of the fact that
different deposits in the same collection experience a similar “shock” in transaction costs, except
for the differences in the prices charged by the BRC for different materials, and differences in
the ex ante degree of perceived quality of those materials. Our results suggest that the impact of
BRC deposit on future citations is lower for materials that are made available at higher prices,
and the citation boost is higher for articles associated with non-US authors (where the returns to
certification may be higher).
       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II discusses the role of research-
enhancing institutions in knowledge diffusion. Section III describes BRCs, focusing on the
mechanisms by which these institutions lower the cost and increase the “tightness” of knowledge
over time. Section IV outlines a differences-in-differences framework for identifying the impact
of BRCs on knowledge diffusion. Sections V and VI review the data and present the empirical
results, respectively. A final section concludes.




                                                                                                   4
II.       THE IMPACT OF RESEARCH-ENHANCING INSTITUTIONS ON THE
          DIFFUSION OF KNOWLEDGE

          The dynamic accumulation of knowledge has become a central issue to many different
areas of economic research.               Institutions and public policy are often suggested as key
determinants of the ability of an economy to sustain cumulative knowledge production
[Rosenberg, 1963, 1979; Heller and Eisenberg, 1998; David, 2001; Mokyr, 2002]. The diffusion
of knowledge over time depends on institutions that facilitate low-cost knowledge transfer
among researchers and over research generations. Institutions may lower the costs of access to
useful knowledge by enhancing “the technology of access, the trustworthiness of the sources,
and the total size of the [stock of knowledge about the natural phenomena and regularities]”
[Mokyr, 2002, p. 8].2 We refer to economic institutions that promote the cumulativeness of the
research process (through one or more of these mechanisms) as research-enhancing institutions.
          Over the past two decades, a great deal of qualitative and quantitative economic research
has investigated specific research-enhancing institutions, often with the objective of
documenting the presence of knowledge spillovers.3 While the attempt to identify and measure
knowledge production and diffusion is inherently difficult [Griliches, 1990], a sophisticated
empirical literature has emerged recently that attempts to identify the impact of particular
institutions on the extent of knowledge spillovers. This research often employs citations to
academic papers or granted patents to estimate the influence of prior knowledge on current
advances.4 Perhaps no research-enhancing institution has been more intensively studied than the

2
    Put another way, “Progress in exploiting the existing stock of knowledge depends first and foremost on the
    efficiency and cost of access to knowledge” (Mokyr, 2002, p. 7). While we focus on the role of formal
    knowledge-sharing institutions, substantial (and ever-increasing) human capital investments in specialized
    scientific and engineering knowledge are perhaps the single most important barrier to discovery at the frontier (B.
    Jones, 2003).
3
    While systematic empirical evidence is more recent, the linkage between institutions and cumulativeness has
    been emphasized at least since Vannevar Bush’s 1945 policy manifesto, Science: The Endless Frontier. Nelson
    (1959) and Arrow (1963) built on Bush’s compelling articulation of the role of basic research in economy-wide
    prosperity to identify the public goods nature of basic research and the case for public investment. More recently,
    the national innovation systems literature (as pioneered by, among others, Nelson, 1993) emphasizes the role of
    research-enhancing institutions in mediating geographically-localized knowledge spillovers.
4
    While citations are certainly not the only means by which we can measure the cumulative impact of a given piece
    of scientific research, citations are a useful though noisy indicator of the exploitation of knowledge by subsequent
    researchers (and are likely more informative in the life sciences than in social science disciplines such as
    economics or sociology). Most research papers in the life sciences are short and focused, with few extraneous
    references to literatures beyond those directly impacting the specific results described. As a result, the principal
    rationale for the inclusion of a citation for a paper associated with a BRC deposit is when the material is
    explicitly used in a follow-on experiment, or the experiment is closely connected to the research findings and
    knowledge linked to that specific material.

                                                                                                                      5
university. For example, Jaffe et al [1993; 1998] examine whether university patents receive
citations at a significantly higher rate and with significantly greater geographical scope than a
group of “control” patents drawn from similar geographic and technological areas.                                   More
recently, Branstetter [2003] reviews patterns of patent citations to academic research papers, and
finds that spillovers from academic science to commercialized inventions occurs in a limited set
of technological fields and geographic areas. As well, prior studies have investigated the role of
specific policies, such as the Bayh-Dole Act or the strengthening of patent rights in Japan
[Mowery et al., 2001; Mowery and Ziedonis, 2002; Sakakibara and Branstetter, 2001]. The
“search for spillovers” has extended its reach beyond university and IP law, now including
studies of R&D consortia [Irwin and Klenouw, 1996; Branstetter and Sakakibara, 2002], the
national laboratories [Jaffe and Lerner, 2001), venture capital (Kortum and Lerner, 2000], and
patent pools [Lerner and Tirole, 2003], among others.5
          While this prior literature has established a close empirical association between research-
enhancing institutions and the impact of scientific and technical knowledge (as reflected in
higher rates of citations to papers and patents, respectively), prior research has not been able to
disentangle whether these institutions facilitate cumulativeness per se, or whether they are
simply linked to knowledge which has a higher intrinsic impact. In the terminology of the
program evaluation literature, prior research conflates the selection effect (high quality
institutions are simply associated with high quality knowledge) with the marginal impact of
those institutions on knowledge diffusion. For example, university patents may be more highly
cited (relative to a control group of patents generated by industrial-based laboratories) because
the research reflected in the patent is more fundamental or because the norms of disclosure and
openness associated with a university contribute to more effective diffusion of that knowledge.
In other words, the long-term impact of knowledge depends not only on its importance but on its
linkage to institutions that facilitate low-cost knowledge diffusion. The remainder of this paper
is devoted to disentangling these two effects in the context of a specific research-enhancing
institution, biological resource centers.



5
    It is useful to note that a sociological literature has also developed, focusing on whether the ability of a researcher
    to draw upon others’ knowledge is linked to their participation and position within specific social networks in
    which that knowledge is embedded (Powell, 1998; Rosenkopf and Tushman, 1998) and on the norms of use
    associated with that knowledge (Sorenson and Fleming, 2004).

                                                                                                                         6
III.     BIOLOGICAL RESOURCE CENTERS AND CUMULATIVE RESEARCH IN
         THE LIFE SCIENCES6

III.A. The Problem of Authenticated Biomaterials & the Advance of Life Sciences
         Compared with many other scientific and technological areas, research in the life
sciences has developed dramatically in the last several decades. While scientific opportunity has
likely played an important role in these advances, the life sciences have also benefited from their
ability to address a number of the constraints that may otherwise limit step-by-step progress.
One of the central constraints on the capacity of life science research to advance knowledge is its
ability to maintain the integrity of shared biomaterials. Because lines of inquiry in life sciences
require building on the advances of others, researchers often must rely on research materials
initially generated in other laboratories. Equally, follow-on research even within the same
laboratory or set of labs requires exact replication of research materials used in prior
experiments.      Without an effective system to ensure that the materials used in particular
experiments are exactly the materials that researchers believe they are using, advances in
microbiological research would be limited.
         Though seemingly simple, this straightforward problem has bedeviled the life sciences
research community since the advent of transportable biomaterials in the 1950s.                      Before
researchers grasped the importance of biomaterials fidelity (and before verification techniques
were developed and widely understood), it was the norm for researchers to exchange
biomaterials through peer-based networks. As a consequence, a surprisingly large share of the
materials exchanged between labs became contaminated with other cell lines or otherwise
misidentified. For example, a scientist using materials initially obtained from another laboratory
might believe that an experiment was being conducted on cells from the healthy embryonic lung
cells of a white male but was, in fact, unwittingly using cancerous cervix cells from a 31-year old
African-American woman. Indeed, exactly this problem cast doubt over thousands of individual
research findings, including the research of Nobel Prize-winning scientists and other researchers
around the world: In a series of revelations in the 1970s that became known as the “HeLa
scandals,” researcher Walter Nelson-Rees and his collaborators documented that dozens of
widely-used cell lines were not pure, as researchers thought, but were instead contaminated by


6
    Stern (2004) provides a more thorough description of the functions and history of BRCs. See, also, Cypess
    (2003) and OECD (2001) for an introduction to BRC functions and policy issues.

                                                                                                           7
the cervical cancer cells of a Baltimore woman named after Henrietta Lacks who died in 1951
[Gold, 1986]. Although the most well-known cases of misidentification were uncovered during
the 1970s, some researchers believe that contamination and misidentification of biological
materials remains a central problem. According to recent estimates, more than 20% of cell lines
may be misidentified [MacLeod, et al, 1999], and thousands of published articles each year use
cell lines that may be misidentified [Masters, 2002].
       In addition to concerns about the prospect that mischaracterized materials may yield
errors in research, uncertainty about the fidelity of biomaterials alone can result in considerable
research delays. In the absence of a means for ensuring that the materials with which they are
working are as expected (and are pure), scientists must undertake substantial efforts to verify
each of the materials they employ. Thus, the rate of advance in the life sciences depends
critically on researchers’ confidence in the authenticity and purity of their materials.
       It is important to emphasize that the problem of maintaining the fidelity of research
materials is not principally a technological or scientific problem but is driven by the economics
of research incentives.     Whereas individual scientists have few incentives to engage in
replication and validation activities, researchers who have published specific findings may find it
worthwhile to limit scrutiny of their results. Though a robust system for validating experimental
research is in the interest of all scientists, individual researchers have few incentives to
contribute to this outcome. Because the integrity of the scientific process is a public good, an
institutional response is crucial for addressing this problem.


III.B. Institutional Arrangements for Sharing Biomaterials
       Several alternative institutional arrangements exist for collecting, certifying, and
circulating biological materials, including peer-to-peer networks, for-profit culture collections,
private culture collections, and biological resource centers.
       Peer-to-peer networks consist of informal exchanges among researchers and are
dependent on research laboratories maintaining culture collections and fulfilling requests by
other researchers for distribution. In some cases, researchers may maintain small personal
collections of materials used in current work; in other cases, researchers maintain modest-sized
collections of materials that they store and exchange regularly with colleagues within and across
their institution. In a “pure” peer-to-peer network, it is impossible to require researchers to


                                                                                                 8
exchange materials and initial discoverers may be reluctant to offer access to researchers whose
experiments could undermine the value of the initial work. At the very least, peer-to-peer
transactions require that researchers who want to use particular research materials contact, and,
occasionally, negotiate with the initial developer of the material. In some cases, negotiations
over access to materials, such as lab data, or cell lines may be conditional on the recipient
extending an offer of co-authorship or some other incentive. In other cases, the transfer of
materials may be dependent upon the recipient agreeing to the terms of a Materials Transfer
Agreement. The problem of verification may also be substantial in peer-to-peer networks, as the
scientists making and agreeing to exchanges often rely on layers of assistants to prepare, send,
receive, and employ research materials.7
          Some laboratories maintain culture collections than are larger than those usually
maintained for personal use by individual researchers. These collections circulate materials on a
fairly regular basis, generally without formal restrictions such as those imposed by Materials
Transfer Agreements. Although they circulate their materials fairly regularly, these collections
have limited resources to dedicate to preservation and certification functions. Although they face
fewer restrictions on materials circulation, these larger academic collections are subject to some
of the same difficulties in verification as are individual collections in the peer-to-peer network.
          For-profit biomaterials distribution firms and private collections, such as those
maintained by major pharmaceutical companies, constitute alternative institutions for circulating
biomaterials. Not surprisingly, for-profit firms tend to “cherry-pick,” focusing on a narrow range
of materials that offer high margins and low storage costs. Reputation-based mechanisms and
the relationship between quality and sales may lead their materials to be relatively trustworthy.
Proprietary collections, such as those maintained by companies such Merck and Lilly, are
designed to benefit individual firms. However, since circulating catalogs of their materials
would communicate competitive intelligence to rivals, these organizations rarely circulate their
materials externally and require extensive Materials Transfer Agreements when they do.

7
    It is possible that informal “brokers” will emerge in a peer-to-peer network, facilitating transactions in the
    “market for ideas” (Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, 1999; Gans and Stern, 2002). However, brokers are limited by
    their incentives and the extent of their personal networks. As well, the connections enabled by a broker are
    subject to termination if the broker discontinues her role (because of retirement or changing interests). The fact
    that it is difficult to identify precisely who is responsible when shared materials become contaminated also
    complicates the prospect that reputation-based mechanisms will ensure that researchers share their “best”
    materials even when asked.


                                                                                                                    9
III.C. What are Biological Resource Centers?
          Biological Resource Centers constitute an additional alternative to peer-to-peer networks
private collections, and for-profit biomaterials distribution firms. BRCs are institutions that
collect, certify, and distribute biological organisms for use in life science research and in the
development of commercial products in the pharmaceutical, agricultural and biotechnology
industries – in a sense, they serve as “living libraries” preserving and circulating research
materials. As a key element of the life sciences research infrastructure, BRCs maintain a large
and varied collection of biological materials, including cell lines, micro-organisms, recombinant
DNA material, biological media and reagents, and the information technology tools that allow
researchers to access biological materials. Over the past quarter century, they have come to play
an increasingly important role in scientific and commercial research. The definition and scope of
BRCs have evolved over time. Initially referred to as culture collections or cell banks, experts
described their functions as “acquiring, preserving, authenticating, and distributing
microorganisms or in vitro cultured cells to qualified scientists” [Stevenson and Hatt, 1992].
BRCs are therefore related to but distinct from mammalian research supply institutions, such as
Bar Harbor’s Jackson Laboratory, which provides JAX knock-out mice to researchers throughout
the world [Murray, 2005]. Over the past few decades, the scope of traditional culture collections
have expanded, leading most centers to reclassify themselves as biological resource centers. 8
          Since the 1980s, select BRCs have been critical to the extension of intellectual property
rights, by serving as international patent depositories for all patented living organisms. Indeed,
according to the terms of the Budapest Treaty for the Deposit of Cultures that are the Subject of
Patent Procedures, which was introduced in 1977 and implemented beginning in 1981, all
patented biological materials must be deposited in a certified BRC in order for that material to
receive patent protection.9



8
    In a recent report, the OECD describes BRCs’ as, “service providers and repositories of living cells, genomes of
     organisms, and information relating to heredity and the function of biological systems. BRCs contain collections
     of culturable organisms (e.g. micro-organisms, plant, animal and human cells), replicable parts of these (e.g.
     genomes, plasmids, viruses, cDNAs), viable but not yet culturable organisms, cells and tissues, as well as
     databases containing molecular, physiological and structural information relevant to these collections and related
     bioinformatics” (OECD, 2001).
9
     See Stern (2004, p. 52-53) for an overview of the Budapest Treaty.


                                                                                                                    10
       BRCs can differ in their functioning and governance. As of 2002, the World Federation
of Culture Collections lists more than 450 distinct BRCs around the world. Collections vary
dramatically in the size of their holdings, ranging from less than 100 to more than 100,000
cultures. Overall, more than one million cultures are maintained by BRCs throughout the world,
and millions of cultures are distributed each year by BRCs to scientists throughout the world.
Large national collections, such as the ATCC in the United States or DSMZ in Germany,
manage a broad range of materials, while specialized collections, such as Yale University’s E.
Coli collection, provide a niche resources for particular scientific areas.    Although all collect,
identify and distribute materials, BRCs vary in how exhaustively they authenticate and certify
the materials that constitute their collections. For example, while leading BRCs in the United
States such as ATCC and the Coriell Institute are both recognized for their international
leadership in cell culture technique, newer and smaller collections have tended to adopt
techniques and protocols developed elsewhere. Finally, while the plurality of BRCs around the
world rely principally on government financing, some large national collections, especially those
in the United States, rely on a mixture of public and private support. For example, the ATCC is
organized as a private not-for-profit institution, which derives the majority its income from
activities such as its patent depository distribution services, although it also receives
governmental support. (Appendix Table I lists examples of various types of Biological Resource
Centers.)
       Despite some differences in form, BRCs share a common purpose: they serve as
repositories that make materials and research results developed by one generation of researchers
available for future research endeavors. In so doing, prototypical BRCs exhibit characteristics of
the type of institutions that Mokyr [2002] describes as potential contributors to cumulative
knowledge growth.      In contrast to alternative institutional arrangements, archetypal BRCs
engage in the preservation and certification of biomaterials, offer independent access to those
materials, and take advantage of economics of scale and scope in the process. While some
alternative institutional arrangements support some of these activities – for-profit collections also
invest substantially in in-house certification, for example – only BRCs are dedicated to the full
range of these activities. As a result, well-functioning BRCs may be able to lower the cost of
follow-on research substantially in comparison to alternative institutional arrangements.




                                                                                                  11
III.D. Features of Biological Resource Centers
        III.D.1 Preservation of Biological Materials
        The preservation of biological materials is a primary function of BRCs. BRCs collect,
characterize, and maintain an exceptionally broad collection of biological materials, including
materials whose value is not initially understood.     For example, the largest collection in the
United States, maintained at the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), includes more than
92,000 strains of micro-organisms and cell isolates, and more than 5,000,000 DNA sequences.
In Europe, the large German collection, the DSMZ, maintains more than 16,000 cell cultures,
representing more than 5,000 distinct microorganism species. BRCs retain these collections over
extremely long periods of time, even when specific applications are not immediately apparent.
        The potential windfall associated with long-term preservation can be seen through
illustration.   Consider the case of Thermus aquaticus.       In the late 1960s, Thomas Brock
discovered a new type of micro-organism – an extremophile – which lived in the rather severe
climate of the hot springs of Yellowstone National Park. Though no practical benefit was
foreseen at the time, extremophiles exhibited a number of distinctive properties, including the
ability to sustain enzymatic reactions during rapid heating and cooling (a property which was
critical for sustaining life in a geyser). At the time of its discovery, the ATCC then established
and maintained an extremophile collection for use by both academic and industrial researchers.
More than 15 years later, Kary Mullis, a researcher at Cetus Corporation, experienced a
fundamental insight when he conceived of polymerase chain reaction (known as PCR), the basic
technique that allows for rapid replication of DNA (at the time, this was arguably the single
largest bottleneck in biotechnology research).    Mullis’ insight required a material that could
withstand extreme temperature variation during the replication process. While the effort to
develop such a material synthetically might have taken years, Cetus researchers were able to
identify and draw upon the extremophile collection at the ATCC to rapidly implement a practical
approach to PCR, revolutionizing the modern life sciences. Not only did PCR dramatically
improve research productivity in the life sciences (e.g., resulting in the core techniques behind
the Human Genome Project), but Mullis shared the Nobel Prize in 1993, and Thermus aquaticus
itself was named “Molecule of the Year” by Science in 1989.
        BRCs offer particular advantages in preservation relative to alternative institutional
arrangements. For example, because the IP rights held by for-profit laboratories exists for only a


                                                                                                12
modest time (often less than the time between initial characterization and greatest potential use),
the for-profit community has few incentives to maintain the widest range of materials
indefinitely. Indeed, for-profit distributors of biological materials tend to “cherry-pick” a narrow
range of materials offering high margins and low storage costs. As well, private life science
firms, such as pharmaceutical companies, often maintain their own in-house facilities. These
facilities are likely to preserve a narrow range of materials relevant to their own research efforts,
and only for periods corresponding to their expected in-house use. Compared to traditional
laboratories that maintain most materials for less than a decade, BRCs have established
procedures and technologies to allow materials to be preserved for many decades (and even
perhaps for centuries). While private not-for-profit collections exist in large numbers within the
peer-to-peer scientific network (most of which are highly duplicative of each other), most
collections are narrow, and depend on the idiosyncratic interest (and unpaid effort) of individual
researchers, raising the possibility that materials will be lost due to retirement or inattention by
culture curators.10 Whereas BRCs explicitly focus on preservation, there are few incentives
within for-profit entities or the peer-to-peer network to maintain a full range of materials for an
indefinite period of time. By serving to facilitate large scale retention and maintenance of
biological materials, BRCs both aid knowledge diffusion in the short term and limit costly
duplication effort over time.


           III.D.2 Certification in Biological Resource Centers
           BRCs also certify research materials. While BRCs do not fully replicate published
experiments, materials incorporated into BRC collections undergo a series of reviews and tests to
establish their identity and biological viability. BRCs therefore provide the means for scientific
replication. Some BRCs, such as the ATCC, offer a classification system that allows researchers
to evaluate the degree of confidence associated with specific deposits. The ATCC and DSMZ,
for example, regularly issue notices identifying materials errors and misclassifications.
           As illustrated in the case of massive HeLa contaminations, the consequences of




10
     For example, in January, 2002, three private university collections were identified as “orphans” available for new
     storage site; two of these three were classified as “defunct” by July, 2002 (methanogens.pdx.edu/usfcc).

                                                                                                                    13
misidentification are far-reaching.11           Not only does misidentification cast a cloud over the
findings of current researchers (with career implications for those whose results are under
suspicion), but confusion and uncertainty places a longer-term cost on progress. In addition to
minimizing the likelihood of contamination and spurious findings, effective certification enables
researchers to avoid needless and costly duplication, and thus increase research productivity over
time. In the absence of effective certification procedures, researchers must painstakingly re-
establish the validity of specific findings in order to design and implement new research: they
must literally re-invent the wheel.              As highlighted by Mokyr [2002], the “tightness” of
knowledge is crucial for the effective use of knowledge; certification by an “invisible” institution
such as BRC enhances the tightness of knowledge and so allows researchers to increase their
productivity by avoiding costly verification procedures.
           Relative to peer-to-peer materials distribution systems, BRCs possess significant
advantages in certifying biomaterials. First, the repeated nature of BRC-scientist transactions
enhances the incentives that BRCs face to ensure the fidelity of all materials. As well, larger
institutions are more capable of bearing the fixed costs associated with materials certification,
which include the costs of substantial laboratory equipment, information technology, and skills
development.


           III.D.3 Independent and Open Access to Biological Materials
           Third, BRCs advertise the availability of materials in their collections and ensure that
these are equally accessible to all members of the scientific and technological community, thus
encouraging independent and open access to the results of prior scientific research. In non-BRC
networks, access to source materials is dependent on the “goodwill” of researchers who maintain
active cell cultures within their laboratory; such goodwill is difficult to maintain when


11
     Unfortunately, the HeLa case is not simply an isolated, historical mistake. Misidentification of biological
     materials plagues published (and patented) research findings to this day (Masters et al, 2001). The story of the
     KB cell line is a recent example. Originally derived from oral cancer cells, KB became contaminated with HeLa
     cells. In other words, it is well documented that researchers using the KB line are actually performing
     experiments with the HeLa line. Despite this, more than 300 published articles based on the KB line were
     published between 1998 and 2000, many of which claimed to provide new findings specific to oral cancer
     (Masters, 2002). Moreover, many of these articles have themselves been extensively cited by subsequent
     researchers. The persistence of misidentification is a consequence of the incentive system in scientific and
     commercial research: high-powered incentives to claim priority over a novel discovery, and few if any incentives
     for individuals to validate research claims made by others.


                                                                                                                  14
researchers are simultaneously competing with each other to establish new research findings or
when follow-on research may cast prior findings in an unfavorable light. Alternatively, for-
profit characterization and distribution companies will often find it in their private interest
(though not in the social interest) to arrange for exclusive access to their databases and materials;
recent controversies, such as that over the ownership and use of the Harvard Oncomouse,
licensed to DuPont, reflects an ongoing and recently pitched battle over access to biological
materials and data [Murray, 2005].
       Building on earlier research in the peer-to-peer system may involve protracted
negotiations with the initial scientists (e.g., about coauthorships or intellectual property claims).
Independent access to research materials is required for replication and so is at the heart of the
scientific method in biological and medical research. However, the incentive for individual
scientists to grant access is limited within the modern university and private life sciences
research environment. Even after results are published (and perhaps because they are published),
researchers may hold up efforts by others to gain access to materials, both in order to further
their research lead and to avoid detailed investigation of their research conclusions.
       Consider the costly controversy over the discovery of the AIDS retrovirus. The race to
discover the cause of AIDS involved an intense and competitive battle between French
researchers at the Institut Pasteur and Dr. Robert Gallo’s lab at the National Cancer Institute.
Though the French team first isolated the correct virus, laboratory-to-laboratory material
exchanges resulted in nearly a decade of confusion about the precise nature of the virus and the
allocation of credit for its initial discovery. These incidents damaged Gallo’s reputation and
delayed critical AIDS discoveries. At least in part, delays in discovery resulted from insufficient
incentives for individual laboratories to provide low-cost, independent access to their own
research materials.
       In contrast, BRCs sever the direct tie between the researcher associated with an initial
discovery and those want to build upon the research. Materials available in BRC collections are
listed either on public websites or in catalogs. Relative to a private collection or the peer-to-peer
network, BRCs lower the costs of accessing research materials. The importance of this is non-
trivial: a great deal of knowledge consists of “knowing that something is known and knowing
how to find it” [Mokyr, 2002, p. 9].




                                                                                                  15
       III.D.4 Scale and Scope Economies
       Finally, as “living libraries” that continuously collect material developed by the scientific
community, BRCs are able to achieve substantial scale and scope economies. Relative to other
organizational forms that preserve life science materials, BRCs maintain larger, more varied, and
more balanced collections. As a result, BRCs are more likely to undertake the investments that
are necessary to increase the quality and reduce the cost of accessing biological materials. For
example, institutions such as the ATCC, the Coriell Institute, and the Jackson Laboratory have
each established a position of global leadership in specific materials and collection areas. This
scale has coincided with a substantial commitment to high quality levels for each activity under
its domain. These scale and scope economies are reflected in the use of non-profit BRCs by
private collections (e.g., by private pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies) and in the
successful implementation of BRCs as official international patent depositories. In contrast, in
the more dispersed peer-to-peer network, duplication abounds across laboratories and there are
few incentives to maintain the high quality levels or the broadest portfolio. By achieving
economies of scale and scope, BRCs can lower the transaction cost of access to the existing
stock of knowledge.


IV.    THE IMPACT OF INSTITUTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE DIFFUSION:                                       AN
       EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK

       By ensuring the fidelity of and lowering the costs of access to knowledge, institutions
such as BRCs may influence the equilibrium rate and impact of a given discovery on subsequent
research.   Three central predictions stand out.     First, conditional on its intrinsic scientific
importance and quality, a discovery linked to a research-enhancing institution will have a higher
diffusion rate, relative to the case where such knowledge was produced and diffused
independently of such an institution. Second, the marginal impact of association with a research-
enhancing institution will increase over time. Research-enhancing institutions preserve access to
discoveries and knowledge for a much longer period of time than is feasible under alternative
institutional arrangements. Third, the selection effect suggests that knowledge associated with
BRC materials may tend to have a higher (or lower) intrinsic scientific value than knowledge
associated with materials diffused through the peer-to-peer network.


                                                                                                 16
        The presence of a selection effect results in a fundamental inference problem.
Specifically, for a given piece of knowledge produced or diffused within a given institutional
environment, one cannot directly observe the counterfactual impact that knowledge would have
had if the knowledge had been produced and diffused in an alternative institutional setting. For
example, if researchers and BRCs endogenously acquire biological materials tending to have
high fundamental scientific interest, a simple comparison of the impact of knowledge linked to a
BRC versus knowledge with no BRC linkage will be biased. From an experimental perspective,
the econometrician would ideally observe a given piece of knowledge in distinct institutional
environments and compare the impact of that knowledge across regimes.
        While one cannot replicate this ideal experimental design, this paper develops and
implements an econometric strategy that takes advantages of the institutional environment to
estimate the role of selection and marginal effects in the diffusion of scientific knowledge. Our
approach exploits two key elements of the system by which scientific research is diffused. First,
individual materials made available through BRCs are linked to specific scientific publications.
We can therefore assess the impact of BRCs by examining the pattern of citations to articles
associated with BRC deposits. Though imperfect, citations by future scientific research articles
provide a useful (though noisy) index of the “impact” of a discovery on subsequent research.
        Second, many BRC material deposits occur long after the publication date of the
associated scientific research article; moreover, in a number of instances discussed in the next
section, the act of deposit and its precise timing are arguably econometrically exogenous (and we
can apply differences-in-differences techniques to test whether, indeed, these deposits are
exogenous). We therefore exploit the timing of transfer for some collections that had been
maintained in academic laboratories that get shifted into a public BRC (e.g., when the principal
investigator retires or switches university affiliation). In other words, while initial publication
often occurs within six months (or fewer) after initial journal submission, there are often
substantial delays between initial publication and BRC deposit. For scientific research articles
linked to BRC deposits that occur with a lag, we thus observe both a pre-deposit and post-deposit
period. This allows us to estimate the impact of deposit on knowledge diffusion, measured as the
change in the rate of citation to the initial article by follow-on scientific research articles.




                                                                                                   17
         By linking BRC deposits to potentially citable scientific research articles, we implement
a differences-in-differences estimator of the marginal impact of BRC deposit.12 Specifically, we
construct a dataset composed of scientific publications linked to (delayed) BRC deposits and two
separate groups of control articles, each of which is comparable to our treatment articles in terms
of ex ante expectations of scientific impact. (We describe these in greater detail in Section IV.)
Because we observe citations to a scientific publication both before and after BRC deposit (and
because we observe control publications never linked to BRC deposits) we are able to identify
how the pattern of citations to a scientific publication changes as the result of BRC deposit. This
test goes beyond the potentially biased test of whether BRC-linked articles are more or less
highly cited than those that are not associated with BRC deposits.
         More precisely, if the availability of research materials through a BRC lowers the cost
and raises the expected value of building on a specific research contribution, then the citation
rate to BRC-linked scientific publications should increase after deposit has occurred. Of course,
measuring the impact of scientific research using citations implies that we must account for its
form as count data that are skewed to the right (and likely over-dispersed relative to Poisson).
Therefore, except where noted, we employ a negative binomial model of the citations produced
per year for each scientific article in our dataset. As well, the rate of citation to a given piece of
research will vary with the calendar year, with the time elapsed since initial publication and
across different article “families” (where a family is composed of a BRC-linked article and the
two control articles). Except where noted, the empirical specifications account for these effects
through the use of age, year and family (or article) fixed effects.13,14


12
   We discuss our identification argument in more detail in Section V. It is useful to note that we also check whether
   the timing of deposit is exogenous by testing for the presence of a pre-BRC deposit trend that “predicts” the act
   of BRC deposit. As discussed in Section VI (Figure E), our results are robust to the inclusion of such a trend, and
   we do not find statistically significant evidence of such a trend.
13
   Several subtle issues, including the incidental parameters problem, arise in incorporating multiple fixed effect
   vectors into a negative binomial specification. We have experimented with a range of alternative procedures and
   approaches, including the conditional negative binomial estimator suggested by Hausman, Hall, and Griliches
   (1984) and the fixed effects estimator suggested by Allison and Waterman (2002). Our core results are based on
   the traditional conditional fixed effects estimator with bootstrapped standard errors; however, our qualitative
   findings are consistent across these different procedures.
14
   When using a conditional fixed effects estimator, one citation year and one age fixed effect are not separately
   identified (Hall et al, 2005). Since the main effect that we are interested in is separable from these effects, the
   precise specification we employ to overcome this identification issue does not at all affect our estimate of the
   impact of BRC deposit on citations. In our estimation, we identify differences relative to age = 0, and relative to
   publication in years after 1975 (though, due to data limitations, we actually impose a single regressor on the years
   1975-1979).

                                                                                                                    18
            To disentangle the relative role played by selection versus the marginal impact of BRC
deposit, our analysis first considers an estimator that identifies the average difference across the
treatment and control groups, and estimates the change in citations resulting from BRC deposit
itself. Specifically, this baseline estimator is simply:

(1) CITESi , j , pubyear ( j ),t = f (ε i , j ,t ; α j + β t + δ t − pubyear + φ BRCi + ψ POST − DEPOSITi ,t )

where αj is a fixed effect for each article family, βt is a year effect, δ t - pubyear captures the age of
the article, BRC is a dummy variable equal to one for those article linked at some point to a
BRC, and POST-DEPOSIT is a dummy variable equal to one only for years after the material
linked to the article is accessioned and available from a BRC.15                                                    While this specification
provides an estimate of relative importance of the selection effect and the marginal impact of
BRC deposit, the potential for substantial heterogeneity among articles (even within article
families) may lead to an upward estimate of the impact of BRC deposit on subsequent citation.
We therefore examine (and base our core findings on) a series of estimates including article-
specific fixed effects (γi), as in the following specification:

(2) CITESi , j , pubyear ( j ),t = f (ε i , j ,t ; γ i + β t + δ t − pubyear + ψ POST − DEPOSITi ,t )

Overall, we test for the impact of research-enhancing institutions by calculating how the citation
rate for a scientific publication changes after BRC deposit, accounting for fixed differences in
the citation rate across articles and relative to the non-parametric trend in citation rates for
articles with similar characteristics.
            To test the preservation hypothesis, we can estimate whether the impact of BRC deposit
changes with the time elapsed since BRC deposit itself. As well, we can check for the presence
of a pre-deposit time trend (which might argue against the exogeneity of the deposit event itself).
We simply modify (2) to allow for pre-deposit and post-deposit dynamics:

      CITESi , j , pubyear ( j ),t = f (ε i , j ,t ; γ i + β t + δ t − pubyear +
(3)
                                   ψ PRE _ k PRE − DEPOSIT (k )i ,t +                           ψ POST _ l POST − DEPOSIT (l )i ,t )
                      k =1....10                                                   l =1....10




15
     Our empirical specifications also incorporate a “window” including the year prior to and year after the accession
     of a material into the BRC to account for “announcement effects” and for potential lags in availability of
     materials.


                                                                                                                                         19
where PRE-DEPOSIT(k) and POST-DEPOSIT(l) are dummy variables equal to one in the year
when a BRC-linked article is a given number of years prior to or after the deposit event.
Concerns about endogeneity can be tested by examining whether the coefficients on ψPRE_k
increase in the few years prior to the initial announcement of BRC involvement, and the
preservation hypothesis can be tested by whether ψPOST_l is increasing over time.
       Finally, we can use interaction effects to investigate whether the impact of BRC deposit
depends on the economic or institutional conditions under which deposit occurs. For example,
our identification strategy focuses on the transfer of three distinct biological materials collections
that were shifted from the peer-to-peer network to the ATCC, the leading BRC in the United
States. By interacting POST-DEPOSIT with a dummy variable for each of these collections, we
can separately identify whether the impact of BRC deposit varies across different deposit
“events.” This same strategy can also be used to evaluate the mechanism underlying the impact
of BRC deposit. Conditional on being associated with one of the deposit “events,” the impact of
the transfer from the private collection to the BRC differs only in terms of (a) the price charged
by the BRC for access to the material and (b) the ex ante degree of perceived quality of those
materials. By interacting a price variable and measures of the “reputation” of the article or
author prior to deposit with the POST-DEPOSIT measure, we are able to evaluate how the
returns to BRC deposit vary with changes in the transactional costs of access and the returns to
research validation.


V.     DATA

V.A.   Data Construction and Sources
       To conduct this empirical analysis, we focus on a single institution, the American Type
Culture Collection (ATCC). Located in Manassas, Virginia, and founded in 1925, the ATCC
maintains the largest culture collection in the world. Although the ATCC is of unusually large
size, its preservation, certification, and distribution functions are similar to those of other
national and specialized public culture collections, such as the DSMZ in Germany and the Japan
Collection of Microorganisms, and the Coriell Medical Research Institute and the Agricultural
Research Service Culture Collection (NRRL) in the United States.
       In addition to being representative of major culture collections, we are able to take
advantage of the characteristics of ATCC in order to address four key empirical challenges

                                                                                                   20
associated with implementing the differences-in-differences strategy we describe above: (a)
linking BRC deposits to research publications, (b) identifying a sample of publications that can
be used to disentangle the impact of selection versus the marginal impact of BRCs, (c)
constructing a sample of control articles, and (d) accounting for ambiguity in the date at which
BRC deposits are available for access by other researchers.
           We address the first challenge by taking advantage of the reference information
maintained by the ATCC on all materials deposited in its collections. For each material, ATCC
documents the name of the original depositor, the date of deposit, and key scientific information
associated with the deposit. Specifically, ATCC lists the original research reference linked to
deposited materials. Often, the original article associated with a material is written by the
depositor herself, although, in some cases, materials are deposited by researchers engaged in
related work. In its catalog of available cell cultures, ATCC lists both an originating article, as
well as additional publications associated with each material.16
           To overcome the second challenge, we take advantage of shocks that lead to the bulk
transfer of materials into ATCC from other collections. Specifically, we investigate the impact
of the transfer of three special collections that were transferred from collections in the peer-to-
peer network to ATCC at specific points in time. These materials transfers occurred when
scientists who maintained collections within the peer-to-peer network moved or faced an
institutional funding limitation (unrelated to the specific collection) that spurred transfer to a
BRC. The first set of materials is drawn from the Tumor Immunology Bank (TIB), which was
transferred from the Salk Institute in 1981 due to Institute-wide funding pressures and was
accessioned beginning in 1982.               Seventy-seven articles associated with the TIB collection
deposits appear in the dataset. The second set of articles is associated with materials in the
Human Tumor Bank (HTB). Researchers at Sloan-Kettering had maintained the HTB until
institution-wide funding considerations led to its being transferred into ATCC beginning in 1981.
Forty-four articles associated with HTB deposits appear in the dataset. Finally, the third special
collection is a set of articles associated with the Gazdar Collection.                        This collection was
transferred into the ATCC when Dr. Adi Gazdar left his position as Head of Tumor Cell Biology


16
     The ATCC scientific and information technology staff report that the first reference article is typically the one
     most closely associated with the initial use of the biological material. Historically, ATCC published its catalogs
     in print form. Currently, ATCC maintains its catalog online at www.ATCC.org.


                                                                                                                    21
Section at the National Cancer Institutes, along with his collaborator, Dr. John Minna, to accept a
position at UT-Southwestern.             The materials in the Gazdar collection were accessioned
beginning in 1994 and are linked to six research articles.
          It is important to note two characteristics of these special collections prior to their
accession by ATCC. First, each of these special collections was publicly available and was
maintained by researchers who actively exchanged the materials with colleagues. Second, the
inclusion of these materials in the special collections was tantamount to a commitment not to
commercialize innovations derived from these materials. If scientists had intended to assert
intellectual property rights over these materials, the materials would not have been freely
circulated prior to their transfer into ATCC.
          It is also important to note that we choose to study these collections specifically because
our interviews with researchers at ATCC suggested that their accession occurred for reasons that
were unrelated to changes in the diffusion of knowledge associated with their materials.17
Specifically, our interviewees suggested that the funding constraints that precipitated the
accession of the TIB and HTB collections were institution-wide and were not related to
particular characteristics of these collections or their increasing use by scientists in the few years
directly prior to accession. As well, the moves of Dr. Gazdar and Dr. Minna from the NCI to
UT-Southwestern appear to have been motivated by professional considerations unrelated to
changes in the perceived importance and use of the materials in the special collection they had
maintained.
          That said, we are also able to take advantage of difference-in-differences techniques to
evaluate whether the data suggest that, indeed, the accession of these materials was not preceded
by a significant boost in their use. In particular, since the materials included in each collection
are associated with articles which are published at different points in time, and each of the
special collections is moved at a given point in time, the articles associated with each collection
vary in terms of how much time has elapsed between initial publication and BRC deposit. This
allows us to estimate the impact of BRC deposit separately from the impact of article age. By
examining the trend in citations to special collections’ articles in the years preceding deposit (and


17
     We are grateful to Dr. Raymond Cypess, President and CEO of the ATCC, and Dr. Robert Hay, Director of the
     Department of Cell Biology at ATCC, as well as other ATCC staff members, in particular for discussions on the
     special collections and the history of ATCC.


                                                                                                               22
finding these to be insignificant, although the post-deposit trends are significant), we are able to
conclude with some degree of confidence that the “trigger events” leading to the accession of
three collections we study were unrelated to pre-deposit changes in intrinsic value of the
knowledge associated with their materials.
          To address the third challenge, we match each BRC-affiliated article with two types of
control articles. We choose these with the aim of ensuring that the control articles are as similar
to the BRC-associated article on as many observable dimensions as possible in order to ensure
that differences in citation rates will reflect the impact of article-specific differences on
knowledge diffusion. The first set of controls is composed of the set of research articles that
immediately precedes the article associated with each ATCC deposit in the journal in which the
ATCC-linked article was published (we refer to these as the Nearest Neighbor controls).18 For
example, if an ATCC-associated publication were the third article in the June 14, 1986 issue of
Cell, our control article would be the second article within that same issue.19 By matching
control articles to treatment articles in this way, we attempt to minimize heterogeneity associated
with the publication process. Specifically, this method ensures that both the BRC-affiliated
article and the control article have undergone the same type of scientific review process and have
been published at the same moment in time. Comparing the citations by future researchers to
these articles provides an indication of their relative impact, conditional on these ex ante
similarities. Our second set of control articles is based on identifying the most-related article in
the same volume of the journal that the BRC-linked article was published (we refer to this set as
the Most-Related Article controls). To accomplish this, we take advantage of an online search
algorithm developed by the National Library of Medicine (NLM) that allows PUBMED to
identify a set of articles that mostly closely resembles a selected article and rank them according
to similarity. This algorithm determines similarity rankings based on the extent to which articles
share terms in their title, abstract, and Medical Subject Headings (MeSH).20 From the set of


18
   We identify Nearest Neighbor controls for each BRC-affiliated by using the PUBMED database of scientific
   journals. PUBMED is a database and search engine constructed and maintained by the National Library of
   Medicine that provides access to article information contained in the MEDLINE database of journal citations and
   abstracts. A complete description of PUBMED and MEDLINE can be found at www.pubmed.com.
19
   When the ATCC-associated article is the lead article, we use the second article in that issue as the control.
20
   Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) headings are subject headings developed by the National Library of Medicine
   to help index articles in the life sciences. They are similar in function to Journal of Economic Literature
   classifications. A more complete description of the NLM matching algorithm appears at:
     http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query/static/computation.html.

                                                                                                               23
articles identified by NLM as related to the focal article, we select the most related article
published in the same publication year.21
           Each of the two control groups provides a useful comparison to the BRC-linked articles.
The Nearest Neighbor method minimizes the heterogeneity associated with the publication
process and eliminates heterogeneity associated with publication timing; the Most-Related
Article accounts for field-specific within-journal heterogeneity. This second type of control will
be particularly important for more general-interest journals (e.g., Nature versus the Journal of
Cell Biology). By including this second control group, we can account for differences in citation
patterns in a way that is independent of field-specific norms.
           To address the fourth challenge (accounting for ambiguity in the date at which BRC
deposits are available for access by other researchers), our dataset accommodates institutional
aspects of the accession process. On the one hand, prior to the date of formal accession, the
research community becomes informed about collections transfer through formal announcements
and informal communications. As a result, materials that are deposited are often known to be
part of the transfer prior to the official accession date. On the other hand, because of the rigorous
procedures used to accession materials (and short-term limitations on the supply of some
materials), accessioned materials are sometimes not made fully available to the research
community until many months after the official accession date. In some cases, materials in the
HTB and TIB collections took up to 24 months to be declared officially available from ATCC.
We explicitly account for the impact of this in our empirical analysis by incorporating a “transfer
window,” including the year before, the year of, and the year following the official accession
date. By including this window, our analysis focuses on how the pattern of citation changes
from a period prior to the deposit announcement and subsequent to its availability through a
BRC.
           Having assembled this dataset of treatment and control articles, we compile additional
article-specific data and tabulate annual citation counts from the Science Citation Index
Expanded (SCI). The Science Citation Index is a database maintained by the Institute for
Scientific Information (ISI) that records reference information for nearly six thousand scientific
and technical journals in approximately 150 disciplines. The SCI has been widely used in


21
     In some cases, no article in the same volume of the journal qualifies as sufficiently related according to the NLM
      algorithm. In these instances, we rely on the “Nearest Article” control.

                                                                                                                    24
economics, sociology, and management research, as well as in bibliometric studies, to quantify
scientists’ research output, measure research collaboration, and track the diffusion of scientific
knowledge – prominent examples in economics include Levin and Stephan [1991]; Adams and
Griliches [1998]; Henderson and Cockburn [1998]; and Zucker and Darby [1998].


V.B.    Summary Statistics
        Table I provides variable names and definitions and Table II reports summary statistics.
The complete dataset contains the special collections sub-samples and the two sets of associated
control articles. For each article in the dataset, we track citations beginning in the year in which
the article was published and continuing until 2001. The total number of articles in the dataset is
289, and the total number of article-year observations is 6475. The overall distribution of ages of
articles in the sample is reflected in Figure I. This distribution is centered around 1981-1982,
which are the years in which the TIB and HTB collections, respectively, entered into the ATCC.
        The key dependent variable in our analysis is FORWARD CITATIONS, the number of
articles that reference the focal article in a given year. The average level of citations received by
articles in this dataset is 6.23, which is quite high relative to the average among all academic
articles. In part, this occurs because the publications associated with BRC deposits (and their
associated control articles) tend to appear in top-tier journals, such as Science, Nature, and Cell.
Consistent with most citation analysis, the distribution of citation counts is quite skewed (Figure
II). By the end of 2001, the average article in our sample has received more than 79 total
citations.
        Key control variables in the analysis are the calendar YEAR, which ranges from 1970 to
2001, and AGE, which equals the number of years since the article’s initial publication. For
each article, we also record a PUBLICATION YEAR. For articles in the special collections we
also include a DEPOSIT YEAR, which reflects the year in which the material associated with
that article was accessioned into the ATCC collection. We also track PRICE for each of the
materials in the special collections; this averages approximately $233 per material.
        While our analysis focuses mostly on specifications that address article heterogeneity by
including article fixed effects, we have collected characteristics about each of the articles in our
sample. Specifically, we have assembled information on the number of pages for each article
(# PAGES), the number of authors (# AUTHORS), and the number of backward citations


                                                                                                  25
(BACKWARD CITATIONS). Although SCI data do not make it possible for all articles, we
record whenever possible whether the lead author is associated with a university
(UNIVERSITY) or government institution (GOVERNMENT) and whether their institution is
located in the United States or another country (NON-US). University researchers comprise the
majority of lead authors in the sample (51%); authors affiliated with a government agency
comprise 18% of lead authors. The vast majority of lead authors are from U.S. institutions; 29%
of authors are from institutions outside of the United States. For our extended analyses, we also
compute the fraction of papers associated with lead authors from a set of top university biology
departments (TOP UNIVERSITY).


V.C.    Comparing citations to BRC-associated articles versus control group articles.
        Table III compares the BRC-linked articles to the control groups. Strikingly, articles
associated with BRC deposits receive significantly more citations than matched control articles.
BRC-associated articles receive, on average, more than four times as many citations as Nearest
Neighbor controls, and more than 260% more citations than Most-Related Article controls.
These substantial differences in overall citation exist, even though both control groups appear in
the same journal, went through the same review process, and (particularly in the case of the
Most-Related Article controls) are matched closely in terms of subject area.
        Figures III-1 and III-2 portray the disparity between these groups over time, comparing
average citations by article age for each control group. Figure III-1 compares citation levels.
For each control group, the number of citations increases over the first few years, peaking around
the third or fourth year after publication, and deteriorating at various rates over time. In each of
the first twenty years after publication (excepting for the publication year, in which all articles
receive few citations), the average BRC-associated article receives substantially more citations
than control group articles. Moreover, Figure III-2 demonstrates that the “citation premium”
received by BRC-associated articles persists or increases, as a percentage of citations, over the
first twenty years after an article’s publication.
        These conditional means suggest that strong differences exist between BRC-linked
articles and those in the control groups. While the differences in the citation rates for BRC vs.
control articles are substantial and are of primary interest in the study, it is interesting to note that
important differences exist between the citation counts of most-related article vs. nearest


                                                                                                      26
neighbor controls. The citation pattern for BRC articles is more similar to the most-related
article controls than those of nearest neighbor controls. In our analysis, we check the robustness
of our results to including each control group separately.


VI.     EMPIRICAL RESULTS
        Our empirical approach relies on a differences-in-differences analysis that separately
identifies selection effects from the marginal impact of ATCC deposit. This strategy relies on
observing BRC-linked articles in two distinct institutional environments, associated with a pre-
deposit and post-deposit period. By comparing citation patterns across article families (i.e.,
comparing articles eventually deposited in BRCs with those that are not) and across deposit-
status within article (i.e., whether a particular article has yet been deposited), we can precisely
identify the marginal impact of BRC deposit on the rate of knowledge diffusion. Specifically,
after controlling for other factors, a positive and significant effect on BRC ARTICLE implies a
selection effect (this coefficient reflects the additional citations received by the set of articles that
are ultimately accessioned into the BRC), while a positive and significant effect on BRC
ARTICLE, POST-DEPOSIT indicates the estimated marginal impact of BRCs (this coefficient
measures the “boost” in citations received by BRC-accessioned articles in the period following
their deposit, controlling for the fact that they were articles that were, ultimately, accessioned).
It is useful to recall that we incorporate a three-year “window” for the period of time between the
announcement that materials will be accessioned by ATCC and the time when they are readily
available (and we also check the robustness of our results to the inclusion or exclusion of data
within the window period). Over the specifications, the results are consistent with statistically
and economically significant evidence for selection into and the marginal impact of BRC
deposit.


VI.A. Baseline Analysis
        Our analysis begins in Table IV, where we begin to distinguish the selection effect from
the institutional impact of BRCs.      Recall that specifications that include article family effects
allow us to separately identify both the selection and marginal effects. Equations (4-1) and (4-2)
present OLS specifications with ln(FORWARD CITATIONS) as the dependent variable. The
specifications differ in that (4-1) includes AGE fixed effects, while (4-2) also includes Article


                                                                                                      27
Family fixed effects as well as Year fixed effects.        The results are similar. In (4-1), the
coefficients on both BRC-ARTICLE and BRC-ARTICLE, POST-DEPOSIT suggest a
significant impact of BRC association. On average, articles that are ultimately linked to BRC
deposits have a 46.5% higher citation rate (relative to the control articles in their “article
families”), and receive an additional 61.0% increase in their citation rate after BRC deposit.
BRC-linked articles also experience a citation boost during the WINDOW PERIOD, although
the boost associated with the window period (35.1%) is significantly smaller than that
experienced in the years after accession. These results suggest that both selection and accession
effects impact citation rates in a statistically significant and economically important way: BRC-
linked articles are cited more frequently and receive an additional “boost” in the years following
BRC deposit. In these and in all subsequent specifications, year and article age fixed effects are
each jointly significant (though the interpretation of year and age fixed effect coefficients in this
context is subtle [Hall et al, 2005]).
        Though useful as a preliminary exercise, OLS is inappropriate for inference as citation
data are composed of highly skewed count data. We therefore employ a conditional fixed effects
negative binomial specification in the remainder of the analysis. We report in brackets the
coefficients for these models as incidence-rate ratios (a coefficient equal to one implies no effect
on FORWARD CITATIONS, whereas a coefficient equal to 1.50 implies a 50% boost to
FORWARD CITATIONS). For each of these models, we compute bootstrapped standard errors,
clustered either by article families or article dummies, depending on the set of fixed effects
included in the specification [MacKinnon, 2002]. (Underneath the bracketed IRRs, we report the
non-exponentiated regression coefficients, along with their associated bootstrapped standard
errors in parentheses.) We do not report the significance of tests of joint restrictions on the
article family or article fixed effects, as these are not computed in conditional fixed effects
models.
        The first of these specifications (4-3) presents a useful comparison to (4-2), insofar as it
includes an identical set of regressors. After accounting for citations as skewed count data, we
easily reject the null of no selection and no marginal effect. Indeed, the estimated coefficients
are larger than those associated with the OLS specifications (e.g., citation rates are estimated to
increase more than 90% after BRC deposit). In (4-4), the second of these specifications, we
disaggregate the selection effect by special collection, replacing BRC-ARTICLE with dummy


                                                                                                  28
variables for each of the three special collections, while retaining the common BRC-ARTICLE,
POST-DEPOSIT dummy. The results demonstrate that the selection effect is significant and
economically substantial for each collection and suggest that the selection effect is greatest for
the Gazdar collection.
           Overall, the findings in (4-1) through (4-4) provide evidence of both a selection effect
and a marginal impact of BRCs on the diffusion of scientific knowledge.                                While these
specifications separately identify the selection and the marginal impact of BRCs, we have so far
ignored the substantial variability among articles, even within article families.                               As a
consequence, we introduce a number of specifications that include article fixed effects.
Although these do not identify the average selection effect, they do implement a more precise
control structure for the impact of individual articles. In these specifications, the coefficient on
BRC-ARTICLE, POST-DEPOSIT reflects the “boost” in citation rate that an article receives
after its key material is accessioned (and after the deposit window has elapsed).22                                As
demonstrated in (4-5), the average article is estimated to experience a 135.0% citation boost after
BRC accession (and a 61.2% boost in citations during the WINDOW PERIOD), even after
controlling for all article, age and year-specific effects. This suggests that, even controlling for
the overall impact of an article over time, BRC-associated articles experience an economically
substantial increase in knowledge diffusion (controlling for year and article age). We view this
as one of the core findings in our analysis.

VI.B. Robustness to Alternative Control Groups and Specifications
           Table V explores the robustness of the analysis in Table IV to alternative control groups
and specifications. Employing the same article fixed effects approach as in (4-5), (5-1) finds that
the impact of deposit varies by collection. Articles associated with the HTB and TIB collections
experience post-deposit citations boosts of 182% and 128%, respectively, while the articles
associated with the Gazdar collection experience only a 55% post-deposit citations boost. The
lower impact of deposit on citations experienced by the Gazdar articles may be an artifact of
their being accessioned later (and, thus, having a smaller number of years over which a post-
deposit effect could be observed). Equations (5-2) and (5-3) following the basic specification

22
     In these specifications, the pre-deposit period for BRC-accessioned articles effectively serves as the control for
     identifying the post-deposit impact on FORWARD CITATIONS. The Most-Related Article and Nearest
     Neighbor Articles are useful in these specifications for helping to establish year and article age effects.

                                                                                                                    29
implemented in (4-3), but include only the nearest neighbor and most-related article controls,
respectively.    The overall post-deposit effect remains positive in both cases, though the
magnitude of the effect is significantly higher when compared to the “most related” control. In
(5-4), we simply drop the data associated with the window period. The results are similar to our
core model.

VI.C. Exploring Persistence and Timing
        Our analysis so far has assumed that BRC-linked articles and the control articles follow a
similar time trend. We relax this assumption in Table VI, and explore the impact of a BRC-
linked time trend in several ways. In (6-1), we introduce a separate BRC-article time trend to
account for the possibility that articles associated with BRC deposits may follow a different
trajectory with respect to the timing of their citations. BRC-ARTICLE*TIME TREND does
enter positively and significantly, suggesting that the citation rate to BRC-associated articles
increases over time.        Nonetheless, BRC-ARTICLE, POST-DEPOSIT remains positive,
significant, and of an important economic magnitude (46.0%). This suggests that, although
BRC-affiliated articles are characterized by an additional upward citation trend, these articles
also experience a post-deposit citation boost even when controlling for this trend (and year,
article age, and article fixed effects).
        Simply allowing a BRC-linked time trend is inadequate, however, for two reasons. First,
if the time trend is statistically significant in the years prior to deposit, this would cast doubt on
the exogeneity of the timing of deposit (e.g., a third factor was driving both the deposit decision
and the increased citation rate). Second, according to the preservation hypothesis, the impact of
BRC deposit should increase over time, and so the presence of a post-deposit positive time trend
actually provides additional evidence of the marginal impact of BRCs on knowledge diffusion.
In other words, rather than simply needing to demonstrate robustness to a BRC-linked time
trend, we need to evaluate the pre-deposit and post-deposit trend separately.
        We implement this idea in (6-2) and Figure IV. Though positive, the pre-deposit time
trend is insignificant. In contrast, the post-deposit time trend is positive and significant (and the
coefficient on BRC-ARTICLE, POST-DEPOSIT is statistically and quantitatively significant).
According to (6-2), the post-deposit citation boost increases by 3.7% in each year that elapses
after the deposit date. To explore these ideas in greater detail, Figure IV presents a specification


                                                                                                   30
similar to Equation (3), but with separate dummy variables for each year preceding and
following BRC-deposit (along with the complete set of article, age, and calendar year fixed
effects). Figure IV plots each coefficient (in terms of the incidence-rate ratio minus one),
excluding the years associated with the accession window (all effects are computed relative to
the window period). Two findings stand out. First, the pre-deposit citation pattern does not
suggest a clear upward trend in the nine years prior to accession; however, the third and second
years prior to the window period do appear to show a slight uptick in forward citations. This
uptick is, however, sensitive to the estimation technique and we cannot reject the hypothesis that
the pre-deposit effect in the second year prior to deposit is statistically greater than the effect in
the fourth year prior to deposit.23 Nonetheless, the result suggests some degree of caution in
concluding that the special collections deposits are econometrically exogenous. The second
finding does, however, breed substantial confidence BRC-accession has a significant marginal
impact on FORWARD CITATIONS relative to the pre-deposit period. There is a sizeable and
near continuous increase in the citation boost in the years following deposit. While BRC-
affiliated articles experience only a 20% citation boost in the years immediately after accession,
this effect increases to over 100% by ten years after deposit (and continues to increase from
there). In other words, while the immediate impact is positive but modest, the influence of BRC
deposit over time becomes larger, consistent with the preservation hypothesis. Whereas most
research is relevant and used as an input in follow-on research for only a few years following
publication, BRC-accession leads research to be “forgotten” at a significantly lower rate.
           Overall, the citation evidence is principally consistent with the hypothesis that the Special
Collections were not accessioned because the scientific community recognized these materials as
increasingly important prior to their deposit and is quite consistent with the hypothesis that BRC-
accession accelerated the use of knowledge associated with those materials.

VI.D. Exploring the Drivers of Marginal Impact – Transactions Costs vs. Certification
           The results in Tables V through VI document a significant and long-lived marginal
impact of BRCs on FORWARD CITATIONS. Our analysis so far, however, has not attempted
to identify the characteristics of BRCs that drive these results. At least two sets of factors


23
     In particular, this uptick does not appear in models using the fixed effects estimator with robust standard errors, whose use is
     recommended by recent results about the relative size and importance of the small sample versus asymptotic bias arising in
     count data models (Allison and Waterman, 2002; Greene, 2004).

                                                                                                                                  31
consistent with Mokyr’s framework [2002] could be at work. First, BRC-accession could drive
down the costs of obtaining research materials in comparison to prior institutional arrangements
(i.e., which could be described as a reduction in transaction costs). Second, BRC-accession
could also yield a certification effect, which increases the scientific community’s belief in the
fidelity of materials associated with BRCs and result in increased use of knowledge associated
with deposited materials.                   Our interviews with biologists suggest that both factors are
important.24
            Decomposing the marginal impact of BRCs into separate cost-based and certification-
based components is difficult in the context of a single institution or in the absence of an
experiment that affects these factors in different ways. Although our analysis is limited to one
institution, we can take advantage of the characteristics of our experiment and data to obtain
suggestive evidence regarding the presence of cost-reduction and certification effects. The key
aspect of the experiment that we can exploit is that the movement of the special collections from
their prior host institutions into ATCC involves a shift in the costs of accessing those materials
and in the level of certification associated with each material. Focusing on changes in access
costs, two pieces of evidence can suggest the presence of cost-reduction effects. First, we know
the PRICE at which each of the materials in the special collections is available from ATCC. If
access costs decrease when materials are shifted into ATCC, we would expect the impact of
these cost reductions to be less for materials with a higher PRICE. Thus, we would anticipate
that the incidence rate ratio for PRICE would be below unity. Second, we can take advantage of
the fact that, while the changes in access costs should be the same within collections (controlling
for PRICE), they will likely differ systematically across collections, as each of the special
collections had different access costs prior to deposit but end up with equal access costs after
BRC-deposit.
            This fact also helps us identify certification effects: Because the changes in access costs
are constant within collection (when controlling for PRICE), systematic within-collection
differences in the way in which deposit impacts follow-on research will reflect certification
effects rather than changes in access costs. In particular, we hypothesize that the certification

24
     For example, Arnold Demain of MIT’s Department of Biology, explained that “it would probably be better if all (or, at least, very many)
     collections were moved to ATCC, because people don’t have the time or training to properly maintain their own collections.” Thus, he
     continued, scientists can place greater trust in materials they obtain from ATCC than from scientists directly. He also noted in our
     conversation, however, that obtaining materials through ATCC was often easier than dealing with scientists directly, particularly as
     universities become increasingly concerned with intellectual property rights.


                                                                                                                                        32
boost will be greater for individuals that were less prominent prior to deposit and for articles that
were less prominent prior to deposit.
         We investigate these mechanisms in Table VII.25 Equation (7-1) provides evidence that,
indeed, access costs affect the extent of follow-on research. PRICE * POST-DEPOSIT is
negative, statistically significant, and of an economically significant magnitude for each
collection, suggesting that materials for which access costs are relatively higher (i.e., those
materials available at a PRICE greater than their collection average) are associated with a lower
impact of BRC deposit.26
         We investigate certification effects by evaluating whether variations in article and author
prominence before deposit have an impact on post-deposit citations. To do so, we must control
for factors that affect the cost of access to materials, including PRICE and the identity of the
special collection with which the deposit is associated.                   Controlling for these factors, the
estimates in (7-2) suggests that NON-US articles do receive an additional boost in citations
relative to articles with US-based authors. (NON-US * HTB-ARTICLE * POST-DEPOSIT
enters positively and significantly in each equation, and a test of joint restrictions finds NON-US
* HTB-ARTICLE * POST-DEPOSIT and NON-US * TIB-ARTICLE * POST-DEPOSIT to be
jointly significant at the 1% level.)27 We also test whether a articles in a collection that were less
prominent prior to deposit (greater than collection median citations) or that were authored by
researchers from less prominent institutions (not TOP UNIVERSITY) experienced a greater
citation boost after accession than other articles in their collection. The coefficients on these
variables are not significant, however, and are not reported in Table VII. The result described
above that the within-collection citation boost is higher for NON-US authors is, however, robust
across specifications. Overall, we interpret these results as providing suggestive evidence that
both access costs and certification effects contribute to the impact of BRC deposit on the
exploitation of scientific knowledge and that these can be identified separately.




25
   Note that the analysis in Table 7 does not include the Gazdar collection, because we were unable to determine a
   sufficiently large number of Gazdar article characteristics with sufficient certainty (though the results are robust
   to the inclusion of Gazdar data of which we are confident).
26
   PRICE has been demeaned in the analysis at the level of the Special Collection, so that values of PRICE reflect
   variation from the average price of all materials in its collection.
27
   Note that we cannot conduct this test for the Gazdar collection, since each of its depositors is US-based.


                                                                                                                    33
VII.   DISCUSSION
       While growth theorists, industrial organization economists, and economic historians have
each come to place increasing importance on the role of cumulativeness in sustaining innovation,
little research has directly addressed the microeconomic conditions supporting cumulativeness,
or provided direct statistical evidence about the impact of institutions in enhancing the
cumulative knowledge production process. In this paper, we investigate the role of institutions in
this process directly. Specifically, we consider research-enhancing institutions, which facilitate
step-by-step scientific and technical progress by leveraging the potential of research from one
generation to serve as “seed corn” for future generations.
       Our principal contribution has been to provide evidence about the role of BRCs as a quite
specific (and somewhat “invisible”) institution within the life sciences that impact the
cumulativeness of research in that field. We separated out a selection effect (which turned out to
be quite important) from the marginal impact of the institution in enhancing knowledge
diffusion, and identified suggestive evidence that both reduced access costs and certification
benefits play a role in driving the marginal impact of BRCs on follow-on research. Each of these
effects is significant for understanding the role of this institution. On one hand, the BRC we
study plays an important role in the process of knowledge cumulation in life sciences by
identifying and preserve research materials that are, themselves, important to biological research.
At the same time, BRCs enhance the value of the materials they collect, thus facilitating the
process of standing on the shoulders of prior research. Our evidence suggests that this occurs
both because BRCs lower the transactions costs associated with obtaining important research
materials and because accessioned materials, especially those of non-US-based researchers,
appear certified for potential follow-on researchers. Our results are certainly subject to the
caveats associated with any research premised on the use of citation data; however, our estimates
do suggest that BRCs provide precisely the type of boost that is at the cornerstone of the
economics of cumulative knowledge production.
       Our framework and results point to several areas for future research. First, while we
present suggestive evidence about the mechanisms underlying the citations boost associated with
BRC-deposit, future research could exploit differences between materials in their level of
certification and differences in the level of certification across different BRCs as sources of
variation to further disentangle these two different functions of BRCs. Second, whereas our


                                                                                                34
econometric exercise exploits specific instances associated with plausibly exogenous deposits,
the economics of research-enhancing institutions depends, by and large, on the endogenous
decision by individual researchers to allow their knowledge to become accessible through
research-enhancing institutions. Mukherjee and Stern [2004], for example, address this issue in
the context of a simple overlapping generations model that identifies the key factors underlying
this endogenous choice, deriving conditions under which investments in institutions that support
disclosure and cumulativeness provide a social welfare benefit. Additional research in this vein
may focus in a useful way on the incentives for individual scientists and scientific fields to
develop research-enhancing institutions as well as study additional such institutions.
         In addition, it is important to emphasize that the choice to deposit materials in BRCs (or
disclose knowledge through other research-enhancing institutions) is sensitive to parameters that
are themselves influenced by public policy. Stern (2004) undertakes a thorough policy analysis
of the specific issues relating to BRCs per se. However, the insights associated with this study
are more general. For example, most policy debates regarding federal research investments
focus on expanding the level of research conducted; in contrast, this line of research raises the
point that it may be optimal to shift funds towards institutions and other mechanisms to ensure
that knowledge, once produced with public funds, is made accessible to future research efforts.
         Finally, our empirical approach highlights an important but often overlooked problem in
the measurement of knowledge spillovers. Simply put, it is difficult to disentangle the impact of
institutions from the knowledge that is accessible from those institutions. While sharp insights
have been developed over the past decade about the relationship between university research and
follow-on commercialization, these prior studies have not been able to clarify whether the
“boost” associated with university research is the result of differences in the type of research
conducted or the rules and policies governing the disclosure and dissemination of university
research results. However, these rules are precisely what is at issue in terms of contemporary
policy discussions [Heller and Eisenberg, 1998; Argyres and Liebeskind, 1998; David, 2001;
Murray, 2002]. Murray and Stern [2005] appears to be a useful effort at applying the techniques
we develop here to address that particular question. More broadly, however, we believe the
careful exploitation of experiments and difference-in-differences techniques constitutes a fruitful
and as yet underexploited methodology for investigating the impact of institutions on knowledge
flows.


                                                                                                  35
REFERENCES
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J.A. Robinson (2002) “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions
      in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117:
      1231-1294.

Adams, J. D. and Z. Griliches (1998) "Research Productivity in a System of Universities," Annals of
       INSEE, pp. 127-162.

Allison, P. D. and R. Waterman (2002) “Fixed effects negative binomial regression models." Ross
        Stolzenberg (ed.), Sociological Methodology 2002. Boston: Basil Blackwell.

Argyres, N. and J. Liebeskind (1998) “Privatizing the Intellectual Commons: Universities and the
       Commercialization of Biotechnology Research," Journal of Economic Behavior and
       Organization.

Arrow, K. (1962) “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention.” In The Rate and
       Direction of Inventive Activity, edited by Richard R. Nelson, 609-25.

Bertrand, M, E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2004) “How Much Should We Trust Difference in
        Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1): 249-275.

Branstetter, L. (2003) “Exploring the Link Between Academic Science and Industrial Innovation: The
        Case of California’s Research Universities,” mimeo, Columbia University.

Branstetter, L. and M. Sakakibara (2002) “When Do Research Consortia Work Well and Why? Evidence
        from Japanese Panel Data,” American Economic Review, 92(1): 143–159.

Bush, V. (1945) Science: The Endless Frontier. Washington (DC): United States GPO.

Cypess, R. (2003) Biological Resource Centers: From Concept to Reality, American Type Culture
        Collection.

David, P. (2001) “From Keeping ‘Nature'
                                      s Secrets’ to the Institutionalization of ‘Open Science’” Stanford
        Working Paper #01-006.

Dasgupta, P. and P. David (1994) “Towards a new economics of science,” Research Policy, 23: 487-521.

Gallini, N. and S. Scotchmer, (2002) “Intellectual Property: When is it the Best Incentive Mechanism?,”
         Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol 2, Adam Jaffe, Joshua Lerner and Scott Stern, eds., MIT
         Press, pp. 51-78.

Glaeser, E.L., S. Johnson and A. Shleifer (2001) “Coase Versus the Coasians,” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 116: 853-899.

Gold., M. (1986) A Conspiracy of Cells, State University of New York Press.

Greene, William. 2004. “Fixed Effects and the Incidental Parameters Problem in the Tobit Model,”
       Econometric Reviews.
Griliches, Z. (1990) “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of Economic
        Literature, 92: 630-653.

Griliches, Z. (1998) R&D and Productivity: The Econometric Evidence, University of Chicago Press.


                                                                                                      36
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1991) Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy. Cambridge (MA):
      MIT Press.

Hausman, J, B. Hall, and Z. Griliches (1984) "Econometric Models for Count Data with an Application
      to the Patents R&D Relationship," Econometrica, 52: 909-938.

Hall, B., J. Mairesse, and L. Turner (2006) “Identifying Age, Cohort and Period Effects in Scientific
        Research Productivity: Discussion and Illustration Using Simulated and Actual Data on French
        Physicists,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, forthcoming.

Heller, M. and R. Eisenberg. (1998) "Can patents deter innovation? The anticommons in biomedical
        research," Science, vol. 280.

Henderson, R.M. and I.M. Cockburn (1998) “Absorptive Capacity, Coauthoring Behavior, and the
       Organization of Research in Drug Discovery,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(2): 157-182.

Irwin, D. and P. Klenouw (1996) “High-tech R&D subsidies: Estimating the effects of Sematech,”
        Journal of International Economics, 40: 323-344.

Jaffe, A. and J. Lerner (2001) “Reinventing Public R&D: Patent Law and Technology Transfer from
        Federal Laboratories,” Rand Journal of Economics, 32: 167-198.

Jaffe, A., M. Trajtenberg, and R. Henderson (1993), Geographic Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as
        Evidenced by Patent Citations, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 577-598.

Jones, B. (2003) “The Burden of Knowledge and the Death of the Renaissance Man: Is Innovation
        Getting Harder?” mimeo, MIT.

Jones, C. (1995) “R&D Based Models of Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 103: 739-
        784.

Kortum, S. and J. Lerner (2000) “Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to Innovation,” Rand
       Journal of Economics, 31: 674-692.

Lerner, J. and J. Tirole (2003) “Efficient Patent Pools” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Levin, S. G. and P. E. Stephan (1991) “Research Productivity over the life cycle: Evidence for academic
        scientists,” American Economic Review, 81(1): 114-132.

MacKinnon, J. G. (2002) “Bootstrap inference in econometrics,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 35(4):
      615-645.

Masters, J. R. et al (2001) “Short tandem repeat profiling provides an international reference standard for
       human cell lines,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Science. 98(14): 8012-8017.

Masters, J. R. (2002) “HeLa cells 50 years on: the good, the bad and the ugly,” Nature Reviews Cancer
       2: 315-319.

Merton, R. (1973) The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. Edited by Norman
       Storer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Mokyr, J. (2002) The Gifts of Athena. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Mowery, D., R. Nelson, B. Sampat, and A. Ziedonis (2001) “The Growth of Patenting and Licensing by
      U.S. Universities: An Assessment of the Effects of the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980,” Research
      Policy, 30: 99-119.
                                                                                                         37
Mowery D. and A. Ziedonis (2002) “Academic Patent Quality and Quantity Before and After the Bayh-
      Dole Act in the United States,” Research Policy, 31: 399-418.

Mukherjee, A. and S. Stern (2004) "Open Science: Disclosure, Research Investment and Cumulative
      Knowledge Production," mimeo, Kellogg School of Management.

Murray, F. (2002) "Innovation as co-evolution of scientific and technological networks: Exploring tissue
       engineering," Research Policy, 31(8): 1389-1403.

Murray, F. (2005) “Exchange Relationships & Cumulative Innovation: Standing on the Shoulders of the
       Oncomouse,” Working Paper.

Murray, F. and S. Stern (2005) “Do formal Intellectual Property Rights Hinder the Free Flow of Scientific
       Knowledge? An Empirical Test of the anti-Commons Hypothesis,” NBER Working Paper
       #11465.

Nelson, R.R. (1959) “The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research,” Journal of Political Economy
        67(3): 297-306.

Nelson, R. R., ed. (1993) National Innovation Systems: A Comparative Analysis. New York (NY):
        Oxford University Press.

OECD (2001) Biological Resource Centers: Underpinning the Future of Life Sciences and
      Biotechnology, Paris (FR): Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development,
      Directorate for Science, Technology, and Industry,

Powell, W. (1998) “Learning from collaboration: Knowledge and networks in the biotechnology and
        pharmaceutical industries,” California Management Review, 40(3): 228-240.

Romer, P. (1990) “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 98: S71-S102.

Rosenberg, N. (1963) “Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry, 1840-1910,” Journal of
       Economic History, 23: 414-443.

Rosenberg, N. (1979) “Technological interdependence in the American Economy,” Technology and
       Culture, 20: 25-50.

Rosenkopf, L. and M. Tushman (1998) “The Coevolution of Community Networks and Technology:
       Lessons from the Flight Simulation Industry,” Industrial and Corporate Change. 7(2): 311-346.

Sakakibara, M. and L. Branstetter, (2001) “Do Stronger Patents Induce More Innovation? Evidence from
       the 1988 Japanese Patent Law Reforms,” Rand Journal of Economics, 32(1): 77-100.

Scotchmer, S. (1991) “Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative Research and the Patent Law,”
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5(1): 29-41.

Sorenson, O. and L. Fleming (2004) "Science and the diffusion of knowledge," Research Policy 33, 1615-
       1634.

Stern, S. (2004) Biological Resource Centers: Knowledge Hubs for the Life Sciences, Washington (DC):
        Brookings Institution Press.

Zucker, L. G., M. R. Darby, and M. B. Brewer, (1998) “Intellectual Human Capital and the Birth of U.S.
        Biotechnology Enterprises,” American Economic Review, 88(1): 290-306.


                                                                                                       38
                                       TABLE I
                                VARIABLES & DEFINITIONS
   VARIABLE                                          DEFINITION                                          SOURCE
CITATION CHARACTERISTICS
FORWARD               # of Forward Citations to Article j in Year t                                     Science Citation
CITATIONSjt                                                                                               Index (SCI)
CUMULATIVE            # of FORWARD CITATIONS from publication date to YEARt-1                                 SCI
CITATIONSjt
YEAR                  Year                                                                                    SCI
AGE                   Year –Article Publication Year                                                          SCI
ARTICLE CHARACTERISTICS
BRC ARTICLE           Dummy variable equal to 1 if Article is associated with a material deposited in       ATCC
                      the biological resource center ATCC (the American Type Culture Collection)
BRC ARTICLE,          Dummy variable equal to 1 if Article is referenced by BRC deposit and YEAR            ATCC
WINDOW PERIOD         = DEPOSIT YEAR or DEPOSIT YEAR plus or minus + 1
BRC ARTICLE,          Dummy variable equal to 1 if Article is referenced by BRC deposit and YEAR            ATCC
POST DEPOSIT          > DEPOSIT YEAR + 1 (i.e., deposit has already occurred and DEPOSIT
                      WINDOW PERIOD already passed)
COLLECTION            Dummy variable indicating the collection with which the article is associated         ATCC
                      (1 = Gazdar Collection; 2 = Tumor Immunology Bank (TIB); 3 = Human
                      Tumor Bank (HTB))
                      Gazdar Collection: This collection was transferred into the ATCC when Dr.
                      Adi Gazdar left his position as Head of Tumor Cell Biology Section at the
                      National Cancer Institutes, along with his collaborator, Dr. John Minna, to
                      become Professor of Pathology at the Hamon center for Therapeutic Oncology
                      at UT Southwestern. The Gazdar collection was incorporated into ATCC over
                      a number of years; the materials examined in this paper were accessioned into
                      in 1994.
                      TIB Collection: The Tumor Immunology Bank (TIB) was created at ATCC
                      when a collection was transferred from the Salk Institute in 1981, and
                      accessioned into the ATCC over the next few years.
                 HTB Collection: The Human Tumor Bank was maintained at Sloan-Kettering
                 until 1981; it was accessioned into the ATCC collection over the next few
                 years.
DEPOSIT YEAR     Year in which the material associated with Article j is “accessioned” and                  ATCC
                 available for purchase through the ATCC
PUBLICATION YEAR Year in which Article j is published                                                         SCI
BACKWARD         Number of articles cited by Article j                                                        SCI
CITATIONS
# PAGES          Count of the number of pages in Article j                                                    SCI
# AUTHORS        Count of the number of authors of Article j                                                  SCI
UNIVERSITY LEAD Dummy variable equal to 1 if lead author is associated with a university; 0               SCI; author
AUTHOR           otherwise                                                                                verification
GOVERNMENT       Dummy variable equal to 1 if lead author is associated with a government-                SCI; author
LEAD AUTHOR      affiliated institution; 0 otherwise                                                      verification
NON-US           Dummy variable equal to 1 if lead author is associated with an institution               SCI; author
LEAD AUTHOR      located outside of the United States; 0 otherwise                                        verification
PRIVATE          Dummy variable equal to 1 if lead author is associated with a private                    SCI; author
LEAD AUTHOR      institution; 0 otherwise                                                                 verification
TOP UNIVERSITY   Dummy variable equal to 1 if lead author is associated with a university                 NSF; author
                 identified by NSF at one of Top 25 universities federally financed R&D                   verification
                 expenditures in the biological sciences



                                                                                                                39
                                    TABLE II
                          MEANS & STANDARD DEVIATIONS

                                                                STANDARD
       VARIABLE                      N            MEAN                                  MIN    MAX
                                                                DEVIATION

CITATION-YEAR CHARACTERISTICS
FORWARD CITATIONS      6475                           6.23             14.32              0     186
CUMULATIVE             6475                          79.28           1616.51              0    2333
CITATIONS
YEAR                   6475                       1989.79                7.21           1970   2001
AGE                    6475                         11.26                7.22              0     31

ARTICLE CHARACTERISTICS (N=289 total articles)
TOTAL CITATIONS          289            140.10                        238.94               0   2333
PUBLICATION YEAR         289          1979.42                           4.58            1970   1992
BRC ARTICLE              289               0.37                         0.48               0      1
             *
DEPOSIT YEAR             108          1983.63                           3.47            1981   1994
PRICE*                   108            233.12                         42.60             167    270
# PAGES                  287               7.09                         6.96               0     69
# AUTHORS                288               4.71                         4.24               0     57
BACKWARD CITATIONS       272              31.33                        29. 27              0    401
UNIVERSITY^              236               0.51                         0.50               0      1
GOVERNMENT^              236               0.18                         0.39               0      1
NON-US^                  216               0.29                         0.45               0      1
TOP UNIVERSITY^          236               0.19                         0.45               0      1

* DEPOSIT YEAR & PRICE are only meaningful for articles associated with BRC deposits.
^ Institutional affiliations are not available for some of the publications.




                                                                                                      40
                                   TABLE III
                         MEANS & STANDARD DEVIATIONS,
                              BY CONTROL GROUP
                                               Treatment
                                                                                   Control Articles
                                                Articles
                                                Articles
                                                                      Nearest Neighbor           Most-Related
                                             Associated with
                                                                          Control               Article Control*
                                             ATCC Deposits
#PAPERS                                          108                         108                         73
PAPER-YEARS                                     2418                        2415                       1642
                                                     11.13                     2.68                       4.25
FORWARD CITATIONS
                                                    (19.64)                   (6.91)                    (10.62)
                                                    250.50                    60.18                      97.37
CUMULATIVE CITATIONS
                                                   (331.00)                 (103.98)                   (146.64)
                                                   1979.40                  1979.40                    1979.48
PUBLICATION YEAR
                                                     (4.55)                   (4.55)                     (4.72)

* There are fewer Most-Related Control Articles than Treatment Articles, because the NIH algorithm is occasionally
  unable to identify a “most-related article” in the same year and journal as the Treatment Article.




                                                                                                                     41
                                                      TABLE IV
                                               BASELINE SPECIFICATIONS
                                         OLS                                   CONDITIONAL FIXED EFFECTS NEG BINOMIAL
                                       Dep Var =                                     [Incidence-Rate Ratios reported in brackets]
                                ln(FORWARD CITATIONS)*                         Non-exponentiated coefficients reported without brackets
                                                                               (Bootstrapped Standard Errors reported in parentheses)
                                                                                        Dep Var = FORWARD CITATIONS
                                  (4-1)                    (4-2)                   (4-3)                (4-4)                (4-5)
                            Base Model: BRC          Base Model, with          Baseline Count        (4-3) with       Core Article Fixed
                             Effect with Age         Article Family &              Model         Collection Effects      Effects Model
                                FEs only                 Year FEs
ARTICLE CHARACTERISTICS
BRC-ARTICLE                                                                          [2.079]
                                  0.465                    0.513                      0.732
                                 (0.143)                  (0.122)                    (0.174)
BRC-ARTICLE,                                                                         [1.408]              [1.407]                [1.612]
WINDOW PERIOD                     0.351                    0.355                      0.342                0.341                  0.477
                                 (0.122)                  (0.105)                    (0.157)              (0.161)                (0.147)
BRC-ARTICLE,                                                                         [1.913]              [1.934]                [2.350]
POST-DEPOSIT                      0.610                    0.574                      0.649                0.660                  0.854
                                 (0.161)                  (0.132)                    (0.190)              (0.177)                (0.144
HTB-ARTICLE                                                                                               [2.110]
                                                                                                           0.747
                                                                                                          (0.229)
TIB-ARTICLE                                                                                               [2.010]
                                                                                                           0.698
                                                                                                          (0.188)
GAZDAR-ARTICLE                                                                                            [2.658]
                                                                                                           0.978
                                                                                                           0.212
CONTROL VARIABLES
Parametric
Restrictions
                                                     F-stat         5.9*105
Article Family FEs = 0                                                             Included              Included
                                                     p-value         0.00
Article FEs = 0                                                                                                                 Included
                                                                               2                     2                     2
                            F-stat         16.84     F-stat         14.77     χ           1608.38   χ           1285.09   χ          1007.92
Age FEs = 0
                            p-value        0.00      p-value        0.00      p-value        0.00   p-value        0.00   p-value       0.00
               ^                                     F-stat          2.81     χ2           110.98   χ2           224.64   χ2          182.89
Year FEs = 0                                         p-value         0.00     p-value        0.00   p-value        0.00   p-value       0.00
Regression Statistics
R-squared                          0.26                    0.51
Log-likelihood                                                                     -13610.17             13607.11              -11795.38
# of Observations                     6475                   6475                       6371                 6371                   6298
* Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering by article group, are in parentheses.
^ Year FEs included for 1980-2001; 1970-1974 and 1975-1979 grouped.




                                                                                                                                      42
                                       TABLE V
                     ROBUSTNESS TO ALTERNATIVE CONTROL GROUPS
                                 AND SPECIFICATIONS

                                                  CONDITIONAL FIXED EFFECTS NEG BINOMIAL
                                                       [Incidence-Rate Ratios reported in brackets]
                                                  Non-exponentiated coefficients reported without brackets
                                                  (Bootstrapped Standard Errors reported in parentheses)
                                                           Dep Var = FORWARD CITATIONS
                                               (5-1)               (5-2)                   (5-3)                  (5-4)
                                        Core FE Model:       Only “Nearest           Only “Most-              Omitting
                                          Results by          Neighbor”             Related Article”        Window Period
                                          Collection           Controls                Controls              Observations

ARTICLE CHARACTERISTICS
BRC-ARTICLE,                                  [1.620]              [1.213]                [1.921]
WINDOW PERIOD                                  0.483                0.193                  0.653
                                              (0.150)              (0.128)                (0.220)
BRC-ARTICLE,                                                       [1.828]                [2.297]                [2.550]
POST-DEPOSIT                                                        0.603                  0.831                  0.936
                                                                   (0.138)                (0.228)                (0.143)
HTB-ARTICLE,                                  [2.825]
POST-DEPOSIT                                   1.039
                                              (0.181)
TIB-ARTICLE,                                  [2.285]
POST-DEPOSIT                                   0.826
                                              (0.196)
GAZDAR-ARTICLE,                               [1.553]
POST-DEPOSIT                                   0.440
                                              (0.196)

CONTROL VARIABLES
Parametric Restrictions

Article Family FEs = 0                                            Included                Included

Article FEs = 0                               Included                                                           Included
                                          2                   2                      2                       2
Age FEs = 0                              χ       1133.23     χ             718.57   χ              900.15   χ             665.92
    (#restrictions = 30)                 p-value    0.00     p-value         0.00   p-value          0.00   p-value         0.00
                 ^
Year FEs = 0                             F-stat   111.18     F-stat        107.72   F-stat         102.85   χ2            171.98
    (#restrictions = 23)                 p-value    0.00     p-value         0.00   p-value          0.00   p-value         0.00

Regression Statistics
Log-likelihood                            -11786.54               -9075.71               -8581.88            -10865.70

# of Observations                             6298                4656                    3984                   5997
^
    Year FEs included for 1980-2001; 1970-1974 and 1975-1979 grouped.




                                                                                                                               43
                                   TABLE VI
                       EXPLORING PERSISTENCE AND TIMING

                                    CONDITIONAL FIXED EFFECTS NEG BINOMIAL
                                            [Incidence-Rate Ratios reported in brackets]
                                      Non-exponentiated coefficients reported without brackets
                                      (Bootstrapped Standard Errors reported in parentheses)
                            Dep Var = FORWARD CITATIONS
                              (6-1)                   (6-2)
                     Including a BRC-article Including Pre- and Post-
                           Time Trend             Deposit Trend
ARTICLE CHARACTERISTICS
BRC-ARTICLE,                 [1.292]                 [1.633]
WINDOW PERIOD                 0.256                   0.490
                             (0.182)                 (0.205)
BRC-ARTICLE,                 [1.460]                 [1.649]
POST-DEPOSIT                  0.379                   0.500
                             (0.223)                 (0.288)
BRC-ARTICLE *                [1.045]
TIME TREND                    0.044
                             (0.013)
BRC-ARTICLE *                                        [1.060]
PRE-DEPOSIT TREND                                     0.058
                                                     (0.040)
BRC-ARTICLE *                                        [1.037]
POST-DEPOSIT TREND                                    0.036
                                                     (0.015)
CONTROL VARIABLES
Article FEs = 0
    (#restrictions = 287)
                                              Included                        Included
                                         2                               2
Age FEs = 0                             χ           647.34              χ           782.66
    (#restrictions = 30)                p-value       0.00              p-value       0.00
                 ^
Year FEs = 0                            χ2          345.39              χ2          137.89
    (#restrictions = 23)                p-value       0.00              p-value       0.00
Regression Statistics
Log-likelihood                           -11755.96                       -11764.01
P-value of Chi                                  0.00                           0.00
# of Observations                            6298                            6298
^
    Year FEs included for 1980-2001; 1970-1974 and 1975-1979 grouped.




                                                                                                 44
                          TABLE VII
        EXPLORING ACCESS COSTS & CERTIFICATION EFFECTS

                                                     CONDITIONAL FIXED EFFECTS NEG BINOMIAL
                                                      [Incidence-Rate Ratios reported in brackets]
                                                 Non-exponentiated coefficients reported without brackets
                                                 (Bootstrapped Standard Errors reported in parentheses)
                                                                Dep Var = FORWARD CITATIONS
                                                        (7-1)                (7-2)          (7-3)
 ARTICLE CHARACTERISTICS
 BRC-ARTICLE *                                         [1.402]                [1.429]                  [1.409]
 WINDOW PERIOD                                          0.338                  0.357                    0.343
                                                       (0.176)                (0.146)                  (0.172)
 BRC-ARTICLE *                                         [2.207]                [2.170]                  [2.136]
 POST-DEPOSIT                                           0.792                  0.775                    0.759
                                                       (0.180)                (0.158)                  (0.182)
 TIB-ARTICLE * POST-DEPOSIT                            [0.996]                                         [0.997]
 * PRICE˚                                              -0.0038                                         -0.0034
                                                       (0.0021)                                        (0.0019)
 HTB-ARTICLE * POST-DEPOSIT                            [0.992]                                         [0.993]
 * PRICE˚                                              -0.0083                                         -0.0073
                                                       (0.0041)                                        (0.0042)
 TIB-ARTICLE * POST-DEPOSIT                                                   [1.298]                  [1.177]
 * NON-US                                                                      0.261                    0.163
                                                                              (0.184)                  (0.219)
 HTB ARTICLE * POST-DEPOSIT                                                   [2.239]                  [1.828]
 * NON-US                                                                      0.806                    0.603
                                                                               0.131                   (0.162)
 CONTROL VARIABLES
 Article FEs                                           Included               Included                Included
 Age FEs = 0                                        χ2     916.10          χ2    1614.37           χ2    1365.70
  (#restrictions = 30)                              p-value 0.01           p-value 0.00            p-value 0.00
 Year FEs = 0^                                      χ2      60.43          χ2     137.48           χ2     148.96
  (#restrictions = 23)                              p-value 0.00           p-value 0.00            p-value 0.00
 Regression Statistics
 Observations                                           4690                   4690                    4690
 Log Likelihood                                        -9179.36               -9188.76                -9174.07
˚ Note: PRICE has been demeaned in the analysis at the level of the Special Collection, so that values of PRICE reflect
   variation from the average price of all materials in its collection.
^ Year FEs included for 1980-2001; 1970-1974 and 1975-1979 grouped.




                                                                                                                     45
                                       FIGURE I
                            NUMBER OF PUBLICATIONS BY YEAR

               60



               50



               40
Publications




               30



               20



               10



               0
                    1970   1972   1974   1976   1978   1980   1982   1984   1986   1989   1992
                                                       Year




                                                                                             46
                                 FIGURE II
                DISTRIBUTION OF ANNUAL FORWARD CITATIONS

            3,000



            2,500



            2,000
Frequency




            1,500



            1,000



             500



               0
                    0   6   12   18   24   30   36   42   48   54   61   67   74   80   89 108 130 158 173

                                                          Citations




                                                                                                             47
                                                              FIGURE III-1
                                                  AVERAGE ANNUAL CITATIONS BY AGE,
                                                      BRC VS. CONTROL ARTICLES
                                    25



                                    20
   Average Annual Citations




                                    15



                                    10



                                     5



                                     0
                                          0   1   2        3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10    11    12     13     14    15   16   17     18    19   20
                                                                                                               Age
                                                      Nearest Neighbor Control                         ATCC Publications                   Most-Related Article Control




                       FIGURE III-2
PERCENT DIFFERENCE IN ANNUAL AVERAGE CITATIONS BY AGE,
               BRC VS. CONTROL ARTICLES

                                    1200%
  Percent Difference in Citations




                                    1000%



                                    800%



                                    600%



                                    400%



                                    200%



                                         0%
                                              0   1    2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9    10    11     12    13     14   15   16   17     18    19   20
                                                                                                                   Age
                                                                       ATCC / Nearest Neighbor Control                        ATCC / Most-Related Article Control
                                                                                                                                                                                    48
                      FIGURE IV
PRE- AND POST-DEPOSIT EFFECTS ON FORWARD CITATIONS

350%



300%



250%



200%



150%



100%



 50%



  0%
        -9   -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   -1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17


-50%



-100%




                                                                                                                                  49
                APPENDIX TABLE I
     TYPES OF BIOLOGICAL RESOURCE CENTERS

     Center Type                   Examples
                                   • ATCC (USA)
   Public / Non-Profit                                                                              Tier 1
                                   • DSMZ (Germany)
   national collections
                                   • Japan Collection of Microorganisms (Japan)

                                   • Coriell Medical Research Institute (human genetic mutant
                                          cell lines)
   Public / Non-Profit             • National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (HIV
 specialized collections                  materials)
                                   • Ribosomal Database Project
                                   • Agricultural Research Service Culture Collection (NRRL)

                                   • Merck (antibiotics screening collection, clinical
    Private, industrial
                                           microbiology collection)                                 Tier 2
       collections
                                   • Institute for Fermentation Osaka (IFO)

                                   • Yale University (Escherichia coli Genetic Stock Center)
 Specialized University
                                   • Ohio State (Bacillus Genetic Stock Center)
      collections
                                   • Penn State (Fusarium Genetic Stock Center)

  Life Sciences Data               • Ribosomal Database Project (RDP)
Management Institutions            • Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR

Source: Adapted from OECD, 2001.




                                                                                               50
