                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ENDOGENOUS SKILL BIAS IN TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION:
                   CITY-LEVEL EVIDENCE FROM THE IT REVOLUTION

                                              Paul Beaudry
                                               Mark Doms
                                              Ethan Lewis

                                         Working Paper 12521
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12521


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2006




The authors would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, David Autor, Elizabeth Cascio, David Green, Larry Katz,
Thomas Lemieux, and seminar participants at UBC, LSE, UCL, the NBER Summer Institute, and the New
York Federal Reserve for very helpful discussions and to Meryl Motika for research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2006 by Paul Beaudry, Mark Doms and Ethan Lewis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Endogenous Skill Bias in Technology Adoption: City-Level Evidence from the IT Revolution
Paul Beaudry, Mark Doms and Ethan Lewis
NBER Working Paper No. 12521
September 2006
JEL No. E13, J31, O33

                                             ABSTRACT


This paper focuses on the bi-directional interaction between technology adoption and labor market
conditions. We examine cross-city differences in PC-adoption, relative wages, and changes in
relative wages over the period 1980-2000 to evaluate whether the patterns conform to the predictions
of a neoclassical model of endogenous technology adoption. Our approach melds the literature on
the effect of the relative supply of skilled labor on technology adoption to the often distinct literature
on how technological change influences the relative demand for skilled labor. Our results support
the idea that differences in technology use across cities and its effects on wages reflect an
equilibrium response to local factor supply conditions. The model and data suggest that cities
initially endowed with relatively abundant and cheap skilled labor adopted PCs more aggressively
than cities with relatively expensive skilled labor, causing returns to skill to increase most in cities
that adopted PCs most intensively. Our findings indicate that neo-classical models of endogenous
technology adoption can be very useful for understanding where technological change arises and how
it affects markets.

Paul Beaudry
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
Room 997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6T 1Z1
and NBER
paulbe@interchange.ubc.ca

Mark Doms
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street, Mail Stop 1130
San Francisco, CA 94105
mark.doms@sf.frb.org

Ethan G. Lewis
Economics Department
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
ethan.g.lewis@dartmouth.edu
1       Introduction

Research examining the relationships between technology and skilled labor usually takes one
of two forms. The first, addressed in a voluminous literature on skill-biased technological
change, examines to what extent relative demand for skilled labor may be influenced by
technology.1 The second examines to what extent technology adoption is affected by the
relative supply of skilled labor.2 More rarely are both forms approached simultaneously,
though the existence of such rich literatures in both areas argues that accurately identifying
either the effects of technology on the demand for skilled workers, or the effects of skill supply
on technology adoption, will be difficult.

In this paper we address this difficulty by first presenting a neoclassical model of endogenous
technological adoption – similar in spirit to some used in the economic history literature –
that has implications regarding the supply of skill, the returns to skill, technology adoption,
and changes in the return to skill. To test the predictions of the model, we use a dataset on
technology, skills, and returns to skill for a sample of 230 U.S. cities over the main period of
diffusion of the personal computer (PC), that is, from 1980 to 2000. In addition to having
appropriate skill and technology measures, identification requires the use of valid instruments
of skill across cities, and we use those developed in Doms and Lewis (2006). Indeed we find
that the predictions of the model closely align with the patterns observed in our cross-city
data.

The model examines how the supply of skilled labor affects the adoption of new technology,
and then how that adoption subsequently affects the demand for labor. The structure of the
model stems from the observation that firms often face many choices in the mix of techniques
used to produce a good, and the choice of techniques is influenced by the factor prices facing
the firm.3 As such, the model implies that new technologies are initially attractive only
for localities facing particular configurations of factor prices; it may be optimal for one
locality to adopt a new technology–if it has a comparative advantage in doing so–while in a
different locality it is optimal to maintain an old technology. In the case of the PC (a proxy
for information technology more generally), cities that have a relative abundance of skilled
labor (a factor complementary to PCs) tend to have low relative wages of skilled workers
    1
     For recent examples see Author, Levy, and Murnane (2003), Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2006).
    2
     For example, see Comin and Hobijn (2004) and Benhabib and Speigel (2005).
   3
     An attractive feature of the choice of technique model is that relatively few parameters allows for a very
rich set of substitution possibilities between inputs.



                                                      1
and therefore also adopt PCs more aggressively.4

The model predicts that as the price of the new technology declines over time, the conditions
for profitable adoptions increase, supporting a dynamic process with diffusion progressing
both on the intensive (within localities) and the extensive margin (across localities). Further,
the model predicts that those cities that adopt PCs most aggressively are the cities where
relative wages will rise the most. However, in the absence of externalities, the rise in relative
wages as a result of PC adoption will not be so great so as to create a positive association
between the supply of skill and the return to skill. Finally, the model predicts that real
wages of skilled workers will increase as technology is adopted whereas the wages of unskilled
workers will remain flat or even fall.

Consistent with the model, we find that it is in cities where high school educated workers
are more costly (and scare) relative to college educated workers that PCs were adopted
most intensely. It is also these cities that experience the greatest increase in the returns
to education. That is, it is cities that possess a more abundant supply of college educated
workers that adopted PCs most intensively and saw the returns to college increase fastest;
the downward slope across cities between the supply of skill and the return to skill that
existed from 1970 to 1990 dissipates by 2000. As the model suggests, the high PC adopting
cities are not observed to have higher returns to education in 2000 than their slower adopting
counterparts. Notice that this observation contrasts with common intuition regarding the
likely correlation between PC use and returns to education, but it is consistent with the
endogenous technology adoption framework.5

The economic history literature has employed models similar to ours. For example, Habakkuk
(1962) argues that land abundance in the United states affected relative factor prices and
thereby lead to different patterns of technological adoption compared to England. Another
example, Goldin and Sokoloff (1984), posit that factor prices differences in 1830 between
the northern and southern U.S. states (due to crop differences) help explain the differential
patterns of industrialization. Similarly to the model that we present and test, Goldin and
   4
      Our approach stands in contrast to many other models that rely on other mechanisms to explain patterns
of technology diffusion. Doms and Lewis (2006) examine a variety of factors related to technology diffusion
and find that the most important factor in understanding the large variance in PC use across cities is the
supply of human capital. The present paper extends Doms and Lewis (2006) by specifying and testing the
mechanism that drives these differences in PC adoption.
    5
      An important byproduct of our analysis is the observation that city-level wages do not behave as if
there where fully integrated into an national aggregate. Instead we find that city level wages are determined
locally in conjunction with PC use.



                                                     2
Sokoloff (1984) find that areas with relatively low payments to factors complementary to a
new technology are the areas that adopt the technology (industrialization in their case) was
adopted most aggressively. Further, like our model and results, payments to those factors
rise fastest in areas where technology was adopted most aggressively.6

This paper is also closely related to the recent literature on endogenous bias in technology
which emphasizes two avenues by which factor supplies can affect the bias of technological
change. First, market conditions may influence the direction of research and thereby favor
innovations that are biased towards or against a particular factor. This avenue reflects the
endogeneity of technology supply (see for example Acemoglu 1998, 2002). Alternatively,
market forces may affect decisions regarding which technologies to adopt. In contrast with
the innovation route, this second avenue reflects the potential endogeneity of the demand
for biased technologies (see for example Atkinson and Stiglitz (1969), Basu and Weil (1998),
Caselli (1999), Beaudry and Green (1998, 2003, and 2005), Caselli and Coleman (2006)).
Our exploration focuses on the relevance of this second channel.7

The remaining sections of the paper are structured as follows. In section 2, we present
a simple model of biased technology adoption and derive a set of implications regarding
local level interactions between returns to education, changes in returns to education, and
technology use. In our model, the labor market is viewed as a local market while the market
for technologies is a global market. Further, firms have a choice between a more and less
skilled biased technology where the skilled biased technology is PC-intensive. In Section 3
we discuss the data. In Section 4 we explore a set of empirical patterns predicted by the
theory. Section 5 examines and dispels several alternative explanations for our results. This
section also shows how our choice of technique model differs from other, more commonly
used models of production, and how those other models fail to capture all of the observed
phenomena that we document. Section 6 offers concluding comments.
   6
      Another example in this neoclassical literature is Manuelli and Seshadri (2004) that examine the diffusion
of the farm tractors across the US in the early 20th century. For an analysis of a more recent time period,
Beaudry and Green (2003) argues that differences in factor accumulation between the US and Germany may
have caused differences in technological choices and thereby differences in wages and employment patterns.
    7
      Although our paper focuses on the second channel, the first channel provides at least a partial explanation
as to why PCs may have been developed to be complements with skilled labor, where skilled labor has
increased in abundance.




                                                       3
2         A neoclassical model of technology adoption

Consider a environment where firms have access to a set of technologies to produce a final
good denoted by Yt . The production of Yt requires inputs Xt , where these inputs can
be organized in different ways to produce output, each of these alternative organizations
corresponding to a different technology. If we parameterize the different technologies by
θ ∈ Θ, then the production possibilities facing a firm can be represented by:

                                      F (Xt , θ),        θ ∈ Θt

where for each θ ∈ Θ, the production function is assumed to satisfy constant returns to scale
and concavity. In this case, a price taking firm will aim to maximize profits by solving the
following problem,
                                       max F (Xt , θt ) − wt Xt
                                       Xt ,θt

where wt is the vector of factor prices. In such an environment, it is straightforward to
extend the definition of a competitive equilibrium to include the choice of technologies, that
is, a competitive equilibrium can be defined as a set of prices, allocations and technology
choices, such that given prices, allocations and technology choices are optimal, and markets
clear.8

Let us now consider the situation with a set of distinct markets, indexed by i. Each of these
markets is assumed to have access to the same set of technologies, but differ in terms of the
supply of at least a subset of the factors X. The question we want to ask, is how do the
different markets react to a a change in the set of choices, that is, a change in Θt . Obviously,
the answer to this question depends on the nature of the change in Θ. In particular, given the
time period that interests us, we want to examine the effects of having Θ extend to include a
more skilled biased technology relative to the pre-existing choices. To this end, we will focus
on the case where initially there is only one dominant technology used across all markets.
This technology uses as inputs skilled labor S, unskilled labor U and traditional capital K.
The market for skilled and unskilled labor is assumed to be a local market, with exogenously
fixed local supplies. The market for K is assumed to be a common market, where firms
from all localities can rent the capital at the rate r k . Finally, for ease of presentation, the
pre-existing technology is assumed to have the following functional form:
    8
    Standard techniques can be used to prove the existence of a competitive equilibrium with technology
choices



                                                    4
                                                    α
       F T (K, S, U ) = K 1−α [aS σ + (1 − a)U σ ] σ ,       0 < α < 1,    1 < a < 1,   −∞ < σ < 1

In this environment, the initial returns to skill will differ across markets. In particular, the
ratio of the market specific skilled wage wiS to the unskilled wage wiU will be given by:


                                            wiS      aSiσ−1
                                                =
                                            wiU   (1 − a)Uiσ−1

where Si and Ui represent the quantities of skilled labor available market i.

Now suppose that at a point in time, say at t = 0, a new technology becomes available. This
technology has two characteristics that differentiate it from the traditional technology. First,
it uses a different form of capital, which we will denote as P C capital. This P C capital is
assumed to be available on a common market at rental rate r P C . Second, the new technology
is assumed to be skilled biased relative to the old technology in the sense that a common
factor prices, the new technology uses skilled labor more intensively (i.e., has a higher ratio
     S
of   U
       ).   These features are captured in the following functional form for the new technology:


                                                                      α
                     F N (P C, S, U ) = P C 1−α [bS σ + (1 − b)U σ ] σ ,      a<b<1

What is important to notice is that the new technology does not dominate the old technology
in the sense of producing more output at any input combinations. In effect, for given
rental rates of capital r K and rP C , the old technology is more productive than the new
technology when used with a small fraction of skilled workers, while the new technology
is more productive (higher output per worker) when used with a high fraction of skilled
workers. This property is depicted in Figure 1.




                                                         5
             Figure 1: Effects of Technological Choice

Y/S+U
   6                                                                                                                           NEW




                                                                                         s
                                                                                     ´
                                                                                     ´                                         OLD
                                                                                 ´
                                                                             ´
                                                                         ´
                                                                     ´
                                                                 ´
                                                             ´
                                                         ´
                                                     ´
                                                 ´
                                             ´
                                         ´
                                     s
                                     ´




                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                 S/S+U
   From Figure 1, it is easy to infer that localities with high ratios of skilled to unskilled
   workers will want to adopt the new technology, while those with low levels of skill may
   want to maintain the old technology. Actually, in such a situation, the adoption decision
   is characterized by three regions delimited by critical values of skill to unskilled ratios. In
   particular, it is easy to verify that there exist φL and φH (0 < φL < φH ) such that if a locality
                             Si                                                                              Si
   is characterized        Si +Ui
                                     < φL , then it maintains the old technology. If                       Si +Ui
                                                                                                                    > φH > φL , then
                                                                                                           L          Si
   the locality switches completely to the new technology. Finally if φ <                                           Si +Ui
                                                                                                                             < φH then
   both technologies co-exist in a competitive equilibrium, with the fraction of production done
                                                                                               Si
   using the new technology being an increasing function of                                  Si +Ui
                                                                                                    .9   Since P C capital is used
   intensively in the new technology, it follows that the quantity of PCs per worker used in a
   locality is a monotonically increasing function of the ratio of skilled to unskilled workers. 10
       9
           The values of φL and φH are defined by
                                 α 1−αα                1     1−σ     α     α                 1     1−σ
                            (     K
                                    )   a[a + (1 − a)( L )σ ] σ = ( P C ) 1−α b[b + (1 − b)( H )σ ] σ
                                r                     φ            r                        φ
   and
                         α 1−α
                             α                           1−σ     α     α                            1−σ
                    (      )   (1 − a)[a(φL )σ + (1 − a)] σ = ( P C ) 1−α (1 − b)[b(φH )σ + (1 − b)] σ
                        rK                                     r
     10
       We have chosen to present in the main text what we believe to be the simplest model that delivers the
   propositions which we investigate empirically. However, on some dimensions it is certainly too simplistic.
   For example, the particular formulation implies that adding more unskilled workers to a labor market while


                                                                                 6
This forms the basis of Proposition 1.


Proposition 1: After the arrival of a PC-based, skilled-biased technology, the ratio of PCs
per worker will be an increasing function of a locality’s ratio of skilled to unskilled workers.


Proposition 1 indicates that skill biased technologies are adopted most aggressively by lo-
calities in which skill is relatively abundant, and therefore the observable aspects of the
technology – such as here P C capital — are most prevalent in localities with more skill.
This implication is the focus of the Doms & Lewis (2006) paper. Here, we want to go further
and derive a set of additional implications in order to examine more closely the relevance of
a biased technology adoption model for understanding differences in outcomes across locali-
ties. To this end, we first extend slightly Proposition 1 and derive a corollary that captures
the incentive mechanism that lead to the different adoption decisions. Note that from an
individual firm’s perspective, the differential adoption decisions across localities must reflect
different incentives induced by factor prices. In effect, in localities with initially high ratios
of skilled to unskilled labor, the relative price of skilled labor is initially low (prior to the
availability of the new technology), favoring the adoption of a technology which uses skill
intensively. This implication is expressed in Corollary 1.


Corollary 1: The ratio of PCs per worker is an increasing function of a locality’s initial
ratio of skilled to unskilled wages.


Proposition 1 and Corollary 1 focus on the effects of local market condition on adoption
decisions. We now want to change perspective and examine instead how the arrival of the
new technology affects relative wages. In particular, we first want to emphasize how changes
                                                                                wiS
in the return to skill, as expressed by the change in the (log) ratio           wiU
                                                                                    ,   vary across localities
faced with similar new options. This is captured in Proposition 2 and Corollary 2.
keeping the number of skill workers constant would lead to a decrease in the number of PCs. This implication
is likely false as it results from the assumption that there is no possibility of using PCs in the traditional
technology. A slightly generalized formulation, which reverses this implication, is one where the traditional
technology use both structures and equipment. At t = 0, the PC becomes available. The PC can then
be used either as a substitute for equipment in the traditional technology, or it can be used in a new form
of organization which is both skill-biased and uses PC more intensely than the traditional technology (is
the sense that, as given factor prices, it uses a greater number of PC per worker). This later form of
work organization is what we envision as the new technology. It can be easily verified that this alternative
formulation is consistent which the all the propositions presented in the paper, but it does not imply that
the number of PCs used would decrease with an increase in unskilled labor.


                                                      7
Proposition 2: The arrival of the skilled biased technology causes the returns to skill to
increase most in localities where skill is abundant.


The content of Proposition 2 can be obtained by deriving the relationship between the
return to skill and the supply of skill before and after the arrival of the new technology, and
taking the difference between the two. This relationship is expressed analytically below and
graphically in Figure 2. As can be seen, for localities with very low initial supply of skilled
workers, relative wages don’t change since the new technology is not adopted. For localities,
                  Si
with φH <       Si +Ui
                       ,   they experience the largest increase in the returns to skill since they switch
entirely to the new technology which acts as an increase in the demand for skill. Finally, for
                                                         Si
localities in partial adoption region φL <             Si +Ui
                                                                  < φH , the increase in the returns to skill in
strictly increasing in the supply of skill since the endogenously induced demand for skill is
increasing with skill.



             wis                                                                            Si
         ∆ ln    =                                            0       if                          ≤ φL
             wiU                                                                         Si + U i
             ws                                 Si                                          Si
         ∆ ln Ui =                (1 − σ)[log      − log φL ]         if            φL <          ≤ φH
             wi                                 Ui                                       Si + U i
             ws                                                                                   Si
         ∆ ln Ui =               (1 − σ)[log φH − log φL ]            if                 φH <
             wi                                                                                Si + U i

Proposition 2 expresses how the arrival of the new technology induces a positive association
between the supply of skill and changes in returns to skills. However, the proposition by-
passes the channel through which this arises and, in this sense, it represents a reduced form
relationship. Corollary 2 addresses this issue by combining Propositions 1 and 2 to highlight
how it is the adoption of the PC-intensive technology that leads to increases in returns to
skill.

Corollary 2: Returns to skill increase most in localities which choose to use PCs most
intensively.


Any approach taken to evaluate Corollary 2 must acknowledge the endogeneity between
PCs and returns to skill. Corollary 2 implies that its is the adoption of PCs induced by
differences in initial supply of skill (or initial returns to skill) that causes increases in returns
to skill. Viewed in this light, Corollary 2 can be evaluated by employing an IV strategy where

                                                          8
        either initial (pre-PC-adoption) levels of skill or returns to skill are used as instruments for
        PC-adoption in a regression of changes in the returns to skill on PC-adoption.

             Figure 2: Effect of Initial Supply on Change in Relative Wage



    c
∆ wwH
        6




                                                                                                       ´
                                                                                                   ´
                                                                                               ´
                                                                                           ´
                                                                                       ´
                                                                                   ´
                                                                               ´
                                                                           ´
                                                                       ´
                                                                   ´
                                                               ´
                                                           ´
                                                       ´
                                                      ´
                                                  ´
                                              ´
                                          ´




                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                  S/U
        At first pass, Proposition 2 may possibly appear to contradict the law of supply and demand
        because it predicts an increase in return to skill where supply is most abundant. However,
        this is not the case since the model does not allow the level of the return to skill to be
        positively related to supply. In fact, as stated in Proposition 3, even after the introduction
        of the skill-biased technology, the returns to skill must remain a weakly decreasing function
        of the supply of skill. Note that it is possible for the arrival of the skill biased technology
        to cause the disappearance of a negative relation between return and supply if localities are
                                                                             Si
        concentrated in the technology-mixing zone (φL <                   Si +Ui
                                                                                       < φH ), since in this region there
        is factor price equalization. However, in the absence of any externalities in adoption, the
        model implies that the relationship between returns to skill and supply of skill cannot be
        positive even after the introduction of the skilled-biased technology.




                                                               9
Proposition 3: The arrival of the skill biased technology cannot induce a positive associa-
tion between the return to skill and the supply of skill.


The content of Propositions 2 and 3 can be easily inferred from Figure 1. Because the returns
to skill in this figure are captured by the slope of the production function, we can note that
the slope of the outer envelop is weakly decreasing in the fraction of skilled workers. This
is the content of Proposition 3. In contrast, if we consider the change in the return to skill
                                                                                    Si
induced by the new technology for an initial supply in the region (φL <           Si +Ui
                                                                                           < φH ), we see
that the increase in the slope is larger for initial higher levels of supply. The reason is that
the return to skill was initially more depressed in the higher supply localities and therefore
the new technology allows for greater induced demand for skill in such areas. The content
of Proposition 3 is depicted in Figure 3. In this figure we see that the availability of the new
technology alters the relationship between returns to skill and supply. However, the slope of
                                                                                  Si
the new relationship is nowhere positive. Note that in the region φL <          Si +Ui
                                                                                         < φH , the slope
of the relationship is zero. This arises since the technological choice allows the reallocation
of additional skill between the two technologies without affecting the returns. 11

Now that we have examined the effects of supply on both adoption and wage change, we can
therefore combine the two to obtain Corollary 3.

Corollary 3: The return to skill will not be larger in localities with more intensive use of
PCs.

Corollary 3 indicates that although PC adoption and increases in the returns to skill should
go hand-in-hand (as stated in Corollary 2), such positive co-movement cannot induce an
outcome where the returns to skill are higher in a locality with a higher PC-intensity. The
reason for this result comes directly from the fact that PC adoption is endogenous in the
framework. To be more precise, PCs are adopted more aggressively in one locality versus
another only because the cost of skill is lower. Therefore, PC capital cannot be more intensely
used in a locality with a higher cost of skill. By contrast, if the adoption and subsequent
use of PCs were viewed as an exogenous phenomena (as is the case in many papers), then
it would be natural to expect to find a positive association with PC use and returns to skill
(assuming that PCs are a skill-biased technology). Hence, this prediction nicely illustrates
how a model of endogenous technology adoption differs from more conventional models with
  11
    This mechanism is identical to that underlying factor price equalization zones in international trade
theory.


                                                   10
     exogenous technological change.12



            Figure 3: Effect of Supply on Relative Prices
wc
wH
     6


                               PP
                                    PP
                                     P                                                     POST
                                                                            XX
                                                                                 XXX
                               PP                                                   X
                                    PP
                                         PP
                                              PP
                                                   PP
                                                        PP
                                                             PP
                                                                  PP
                                                                       PP
                                                                            PP
                                                                                 PP
                                                                                      PP
                                                                                         PPPRE




                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                          S/L
     So far we have focused on the implications of the process of technology adoption on the
     returns to skill, but we have not examined implications for each component, that is, impli-
     cations for changes in the the wage of skilled workers and wages of unskilled workers taken
     individually. Proposition 4 addresses this point.


     Proposition 4: After the arrival of the skill biased technology, the wage paid to skilled
     workers should increase most in localities which adopt PCs most intensively, or alternatively
     in localities with either an initially low return to skill or a high supply of skill. Conversely,
     the wage paid to unskilled workers should decrease most in localities which adopt PCs most
       12
         The implication of endogenous adoption stated in the previous propositions and corollaries would be
     modified if the adoption process involved externalities. For example, suppose there existed a network type
     externality associated with the adoption of the new technology, that is, suppose that as more local production
     was done with the new technology, the productive performance of the new technology increased. In such
     a case, it would be possible to have returns to skill being positively correlated to PC-intensity. Also, the
     returns to skill could be, at least over a range, an increasing function of the supply of skill.


                                                          11
intensively, or alternatively in localities with either an initially low return to skill or a high
supply of skill.

Proposition 4 indicates that the model of endogenous technology adoption predicts opposite
responses for high skilled wages versus low skilled wages to local supply conditions. In
particular, as in the case of Proposition 2, Proposition 4 predicts positive relationships
between changes in wages for a skill group and its relative supply. The intuition is again
simple. If a locality has an abundance of skilled workers, then it should adopt the new
technology aggressively which induces an increased demand for skill and a substitution away
from less skilled workers. If instead the locality has mostly unskilled workers, then it does
not adopt the new technology intensely and hence such a locality should not experience
a strong reduction in the demand for less skilled workers. As discussed in Section 5, the
prediction that the adoption of PCs leads to a decrease in the wage of less skilled workers is
a feature that will help differentiate the current model from alternative explanations.

So far we have emphasized the role of differences in skill mix at the city level on technology
adoption and on the subsequent changes in wages. However, we have not offered any expla-
nation for the observed difference in skill mix across cities (which are stark and are shown in
the next section), we have simply noted that it predates the arrival of the PC and therefore
may plausibly be taken as exogenous to the process of PC adoption. One possible reason for
differences in skill mix across cities is the presence of amenities that act as luxury goods. As
discussed in Black, Kolesnikova and Taylor (2004), such amenities can help explain differ-
ences in skill mix, differences in returns to skill and differences in housing prices across cities.
In fact, the data patterns presented in this section can be shown to be consistent with an
environment where (1) skilled workers are mobile across cities and land prices adjust to make
such individuals indifferent between locations (as discussed in Black, Kolesnikova and Taylor
(2004)), and (2) cities gained the option of adopting a PC and skill-intensive technology over
the period 1980-2000.13 However, for simplicity we have not pursued this avenue here.
  13
    Another possible reason for differences in skill levels across cities are differences in industry composition.
However, as shown in Doms and Lewis (2006), industry composition accounts for very little of the cross-
sectional variation in skill levels.




                                                       12
3      Data

Section 2 highlighted several implications of viewing technological adoption as driven by
principles of comparative advantage. Our goal now is to examine whether city-level outcomes
observed over the 1980-2000 period exhibit the patterns implied by such a model. We choose
to focus on this period for several reasons. First, this is a period often referred to as one
of technological revolution due to astounding technical progress and diffusion of information
technology. Hence it is a perfect candidate period to see whether our neoclassical model
of technological adoption is relevant. Second, it is a period in which returns to education
have increased substantially, for which skill-biased technological change is a primary suspect.
Therefore, it is particularly relevant to examine whether this period is best characterized as
reflecting the effects of exogenous technological change (in line with much of the literature
which treats the extent and bias of technological change as an exogenous driving force) or
whether instead it reflects a process of endogenous choice of production techniques.14

The city-level data we use can roughly be divided into two categories; technology and demo-
graphic. The technology data is derived from establishment-level information on technology
use and is described in more detail in Doms and Lewis (2006). About 160,000 establishment-
level observations per year are used to compute the PC intensity (PCs per employee) of each
city in our sample (230 cities).15 Our PC intensity measure is an industry-adjusted measure;
in computing the PC intensity, we control for the 3-digit SIC industry interacted with 8
establishment size classes, for a total of over 1,800 interactions.16

We focus on PCs instead of other IT technologies for several reasons. First and foremost,
businesses spent about 90 percent more money on PCs during the 1990s than on other types
  14
     Note that it could be possible that the extent of bias of technical change is endogenous at the national
level, but not at the city level since markets across cities are well integrated. In such a case, our approach
of focusing on city level outcomes would not identify elements of endogenous technological change. In other
words, our empirical work evaluates the joint hypothesis that technological adoption is a phenomena that
reacts to market conditions and that the labor markets in cities across the US are not perfectly integrated.
  15
     To increase the precision of our city-level measures, the 1990 PC intensity measure uses data from
1990 and 1992 and the 2000 PC intensity measure relies on 2000 and 2002 data. Doms and Lewis (2006)
define “city” primarily as consolidated metropolitan statistical areas (CMSAs). The logic was to derive city
definitions that corresponded to the idea of a local labor markets. In some cases, CMSAs were modified to
more closely capture the concept of a labor market. Our results throughout the paper are insensitive to how
we define labor markets in especially large, contiguous areas, such as in and around New York City.
  16
     The SIC-size interaction allows for the possibility that, for instance, large banks perform different oper-
ations than small banks. As described in Doms and Lewis (2006), our city-level measures of PC intensity
are strongly correlated with other measures that control for 4-digit SIC and for measures that also control
for the firm to which an establishment belongs.



                                                      13
of computers. Also, spending on PCs is likely correlated with other information technology
spending, such as spending on software, computer networking equipment, printers, et cetera.
Finally, we were able to obtain consistent measures of PCs over this period.17

Figure 4 shows a scatter plot of the city-level PC measures for 1990 and 2000 (the 1990 results
are shown along the horizontal axis and the 2000 results are shown on the vertical axis). The
axes in figure 4 are scaled to the San Francisco Bay Area, the city that consistently ranked
very highly in nearly all measures of technology that we have examined. For instance, in
1990, the mean establishment in San Francisco had .12 more PCs per employee than the
mean establishment in Scranton, PA (the city that frequently ranked among the lowest of
our sample of cities) after controlling for industry and size differences across the two cities.
In 2000, the difference in PC intensity between the Bay Area and Scranton increased to .16.
One item to note about figure 4 is that the differences in PC intensity are persistent over
time: for example, the correlation in PC intensity between 1990 and 2002 is 0.57. 18

Most of the city-demographic information we use comes from the decennial censuses, specifi-
cally the public-use micro-data files for 1970, 1980, 1990, or 2000. The thrust of our analysis
is to examine how the technology measures discussed above correspond to relative supplies
of skilled labor and to relative wages. Our measure of skilled labor is defined as workers
who have a least a four year college degree plus one-half of those with at least some college
education. Measures similar to this one are often used in research examining the impact of
skill-biased technological change, such as Katz and Murphy(1992), Autor et al.(2003), and
Card and DiNardo(2002).19

The measure of skill varies greatly across cities, but the ranking of cities according to skill
remains nearly constant over time. Figure 5 shows a scatter plot of the log of skilled to
unskilled workers for 1980 and 2000. As with the PC intensity data, there is great persistence
in the skill mix over time as the skill mix in 1980 explains over 85 percent of the variance
in 2000, although the mean skill share increases sharply. Doms and Lewis (2006) finds that
one reason why the skill mix for a city changes by more or less than average is immigration.
  17
     Other measures of information technology were examined in Doms and Lewis (2006), including more
refined measures of PC. The results in Doms and Lewis (2006) were very robust to choice of technology
measure. However, our wage measures do not account for occupational differences, one of the areas we plan
to pursue in future research.
  18
     The PC debuted in 1981. To obtain a measure of information technology before the introduction of the
PC, Doms and Lewis (2006) used data on IT sales by city between 1978 and 1980. The correlation between
these IT sales data and PC intensity in 1990 was close to 0.
  19
     Further, our sample of workers includes employed 16-65 year-olds with at least one year of potential
work experience and not living in group quarters.


                                                   14
Cities such as Fresno, Stockton, and El Paso received relatively large numbers of unskilled
immigrants over the past several decades, resulting in lower than average skill appreciation.

Our measure of relative wages is computed using the wages of people who report exactly a
high-school degree or GED and people with exactly a four years of post high school education.
We adjusted wages for each group by controlling for a fourth-degree polynomial in potential
work experience, a female dummy, an immigrant dummy, and a dummy for people born after
1950. Although the results presented in subsequent tables use these adjusted relative wages,
the results are robust to using non-adjusted wages as well.

We also construct several city-level measures that we label as city controls. These measures
include the log of the size of the labor force and percent of the workforce in a city are African
American, female, Hispanic, and U.S. citizens. Additionally, we construct 9 industry controls
which reflect the employment distribution across major industry groups within each city.

In the empirical work that follows, it is necessary for us to use instruments that are correlated
with the human capital in a city but not correlated with any of the unobserved determinants
of technology adoption. Instruments used in Doms and Lewis (2006) relied on the historical
density of colleges in an area. There are three reasons why the presence of colleges in an area
may increase the general skill level of that area. The first is that the presence of colleges
in an area reduces the cost of obtaining higher education for an area’s residents. Second,
college graduates may more likely settle in areas where they went to school as a result of low
search costs. Finally, areas that have an abundance of colleges may also have amenities that
college graduates place relatively high values on.20 One instrument we use, following Moretti
(2004), is a dummy for whether or not the metropolitan area has a land-grant college. Land-
grant colleges came into existence after Congress in 1862 passed the Morrill Act, which gave
states land to fund the creation of university-level agricultural schools. Doms and Lewis
(2006) shows that areas with land-grant colleges tend to have a significantly higher college-
educated share. In addition to the information on land-grant colleges, we also use lagged
information on local college density generally. There has been a dramatic growth in two-
year colleges since World War II (documented in Kane and Rouse, 1999) which may have
raised educational attainment in areas which received new schools. To capture the effect
non-land-grant may have on the local college share, we construct additional instruments
  20
    As a result, human capital theory predicts otherwise similar individuals will have higher college at-
tainment (Card, 1999). At an individual level, for example, several studies have showed that the distance
a person lives from a college when they are growing up predicts their college attainment (e.g. Kane and
Rouse, 1995; Card, 1995).


                                                   15
using information on enrollment at two- and four-year colleges in 1971 in each metropolitan
area.21



4         Empirical results

Our presentation of empirical results closely follows the order of the Propositions and Corol-
laries presented in Section 2. We begin by examining the determinants of technology adoption
as measured by diffusion of PCs (Proposition 1). The first results echo those presented in
Doms and Lewis (2006). We then go further by examining whether returns to skill in 1980,
at the beginning of the diffusion process for PCs, are negatively associated with the intensity
of PC use in 2000 (Corollary 1). We next turn to examining implications of the model for
changes in the returns to skill, as measured by the ratio of college wages to high school
wages. In particular, we explore whether the data exhibits a positive co-movement between
PC-adoption and changes in the returns to skill as implied by Corollary 2, but do not reveal
a positive association between the level of returns to skill and PC use as implied by Corollary
3. We also report the reduced form implications of the model regarding the changes in the
returns to skill and the supply of skill (Proposition 2), in addition to examining changes in
the relationship between the level of return and the supply of skill (Proposition 3). Finally,
we examine the relationship between PC-adoption and changes in the wages paid to high
school workers and college workers separately (Proposition 4).


4.1       PC adoption and local market conditions

To begin and to illustrate the strength of the relationship between PC adoption and skills,
Figure 6 shows a scatter plot of PC intensity against the log ratio of skilled versus unskilled
labor for 2000. To examine the relationship between these variables more rigorously, Table 1
reports a series of regression results. The first column of Table 1 reports the results obtained
by regressing our city-level measure of PCs-per-worker on the log ratio of college to high
school equivalent workers. As can be seen from the table, cities with a high fraction of
college educated workers in 2000 also had adopted PCs more intensively by the year 2000.
  21
    Doms and Lewis (2006) also examine instruments based on immigration patterns for the change in college
share. Doms and Lewis (2006) find very similar results in PC adoption equations between the college-based
instruments for the level of human capital and the immigrant-based instruments for the change in human
capital.



                                                   16
The data in Figure 6 demonstrate that the relationship is not driven by outliers. Since cities
that use information technology more intensively may attract higher educated workers, this
observation does not imply that the local supply of college educated workers caused a greater
adoption of PCs. In order to address the possibility of reverse causation, Column 4 reports
an estimate obtained by instrumental variables, where the instruments, which are described
more fully in the previous section, correspond to measures of local college accessibility and
attendance as of 1971, which is well before the availably of PCs.22 The IV estimate is almost
identical to the OLS estimate, suggesting that the endogeneity of worker migration cross
cities to take advantage of more IT intensive cities may not be very strong.

Columns 2,3,5 and 6 follow up on this conjecture by breaking down the local skill measure
into its level in 1980 (just before the introduction of the IBM PC) and its change between
1980 and 2000. The only difference between columns 2 and 3, and between columns 5 and 6,
is the addition of a set of city level controls.23 The estimates in columns 2 and 3 are obtained
by OLS, while those in column 5 and 6 are obtained by IV. The results reported in Column 5
and 6 are based on the same 1971 variables to instrument both the the level and the change
in skill supply. Note that if the supply of skills is exogenous to the process of technology
adoption, then the coefficients on both the 1980 level of skill and the change in skill between
1980 and 2000 should have the same size coefficient, and this is what is observed in all but
one case.24 Furthermore, the estimates obtained by OLS and IV are very similar adding
support to the notion that it is the local supply of skill that favored differential adoption
patterns across US cities and not the reverse.25 While there are many models or mechanisms
of technological change that could potentially explain the observations presented in Table 1,
our goal now is to examine whether the mechanism outlined in the theory section is relevant
by examining implications for wages.

The estimates presented in Table 1 indicate that cities with a more educated labor force
as of 1980 adopted PCs more aggressively between 1980 and 2000. The neoclassical model
presented in Section 2 suggests that such an outcome arises due to the price incentive by
firms in cities with initially expensive low skilled workers (relative to high skilled workers)
to adopt skill-biased technologies.26 In Table 2 we examine whether the data support such a
  22
     The first stage had an r 2 of .32.
  23
     The city level controls correspond the size of the labor force, unemployment rate, the fraction of popu-
lation which is female, percent African-American, and U.S. citizens.
  24
     We tested the equality of these coefficients, and the p-values are reported on the last row of the table.
  25
     Recall that the measure of city-level PC-use we use controls for a cities industrial composition.
  26
     A clear negative trend between relative wages and the supply of skilled labor for 1970, 1980 and 1990 is


                                                     17
mechanism by regressing PC intensity in 2000 on the relative cost of skilled versus unskilled
labor in 1980. As can be seen in Column 1, cities with low relative cost of skills in 1980 are
observed to be using PCs more intensively as of 2000. In the second column, we add the
change in the ratio of college and high-school educated workers, and in column 3 we also
control for share of employment at the industry level (in two digit industries). In the fourth
column, we instrument the change in the ratio of college to high school educated workers,
again using 1971 college attainment and access variables as instruments. In all cases, we
find that the return to skill as of 1980 has a significant negative effect on subsequent PC-
adoption. We also find that after controlling for initial returns to skill, an increase in the
college population favors more PC-adoption. Once again we find only minor differences
between treating changes in the college population as exogenous to the adoption process as
compared with estimating by IV, further suggesting that the endogeneity of skill supply to
PC-adoption process is likely minor.


4.2      Returns to skill and PC adoption

We now turn to the relationship between the adoption of PCs and changes in the returns
to skill. Recall that our model implies a positive association between these two endogenous
variables. In Table 3 we report results obtained by regressing the change in the return to
skill over the period 1980-2000 on the extent of PC-adoption in 2000. In the first 3 columns
we estimate the relationship by OLS, which likely provides a downward biased estimate due
to the endogeneity of PC-use. In particular, given our theoretical framework, we expect
that unobserved variables which lead to higher returns to skill would result in lower PC
adoption. As can be seen, our OLS results find a positive, but weak and insignificant
relationship between these two variables. In columns 4 to 6, we report IV estimates where
we instrument the PC-adoption variable by the 1980 ratio of college educated workers to
high school educated workers. As shown in Table 1, the first stage of this regression works
well. The IV results indicate a strong positive association between PC-adoption and changes
in returns to skill, even after including city and industry controls. We also estimated (but
did not report here) the relationship using as an instrument the 1980 value of the returns
to skill (as suggested by Table 2). In this case, we also found a very significant and robust
positive relationship between changes in returns to skill and PC-adoption. The estimates
shown by the scatter-plots in figures 8a-8c.




                                               18
are bigger than the ones reported in Columns 4-6, but are less precise.27

In addition to predicting that localities that adopt PCs intensively should witness greater
increases in returns to skill, the model also predicts that the adoption process should not lead
to a situation where returns to skill are higher in cities that adopted PCs most intensively. To
examine this implication of the model, Table 4 reports estimates of the relationship between
returns to skill in 2000 and the use of PCs in 2000. The first 3 columns report results based
on estimating the relationship by OLS, and in the last three columns the relationship is
estimated by IV, where the ratio of college to high school equivalent workers in 1980 is the
instrument. In none of these cases do we observe a positive relationship between PC-use
and returns to skill; in some cases we actually find a significant negative relationship. Taken
together, the results in Tables 3 and 4 provide considerable support for the view that PC-
adoption and changes in returns to skill should be viewed as jointly determined, and that
the process appears to conform to the neoclassical principles outlined in Section 2.


4.3      Reduced form relationship between returns and skill supply

Tables 3 and 4 report results associated with examining the implications of the model as
stated in Corollaries 2 and 4. For completeness, it is also of interest to directly examine
the reduced form relationship emphasized by Proposition 2 and 3. To this end, we begin
by showing a plot, Figure 7a, of the changes in the returns to skill and the initial supply of
skill. As can be seen, there is a clear positive relationship with a regression slope coefficient
of .07 and standard error of .01. Figures 7b and 7c decompose the changes by decade and
show that the change in relative wages between 1980 and 1990 had no significant relationship
vis-a-vis skill share, whereas the change in 1990-2000 had the most pronounced relationship
with skill share.28 This suggests that PC adoption may have been a much more important
force in explaining changes in wage differentials movements in the 1990s then during the
introductory phase of the 1980. Turning to a fuller set of regressions, the first three columns
of Table 5 report the results of regressing change in the returns to skill over the period 1980
to 2000 on the 1980 ratio of college to high school educated workers and the change in skill
  27
      As a robustness check, we ran the regressions in Table 3 separately for the change in relative wages of
men only and women only. The results for each group were similar to those reported in Table 3 although
the results for women were, on average, a bit stronger than those for men.
   28
      As we have mentioned previously, the PC was introduced in 1981, and hence we frequently begin our
analyses with data in 1980. However, it was not until the 1990s that information technology became a
significant share of the capital stock and a significant contributor to GDP growth.



                                                     19
supply over the period 1980-2000.

In order to better interpret the coefficients on the initial supply of skill and the coefficient
on the change in the supply of skill, it is helpful to recall that the theory implies that the
arrival of a skilled biased technology will cause a flattening of the relationship between the
returns to skill and the local supply of skill (as depicted in Figure 3). If we approximate this
prediction by a change in the linear relationship between return and relative supply, then we
can see that theory predicts the change in the returns to skill to be positively related to the
initial level of skill and negatively related to the change in skill. In order to see this more
clearly, let us express the initial relationship between return and supply by:

                                         S
                                        wi,0           Si,0
                                         U
                                             = α1 + α2
                                        wi,0           Ui,0

and denote the relationship after the arrival of the technological option by:

                                         S
                                        wi,1           Si,1
                                         U
                                             = β1 + β2
                                        wi,1           Ui,1

where α2 < β2 ≤ 0.

Then the change in the returns to skill is then given by


                             wiS                           Si,0        Si
                         ∆    U
                                 = (β1 − α1 ) + (β2 − α2 )      + β2 ∆
                             wi                            Ui,0        Ui

with β2 − α2 > 0 and β2 ≤ 0. In words, the coefficient on the initial supply should capture
the change in the slope of the relationship between return and relative supply of skill–which
the theory predicts in positive – and the coefficient on the change in supply should capture
the final slope– which according to the theory could be either negative or zero in the absence
of externalities.

Interestingly, the results in Columns 1-3 of Table 5 indicate a positive relationship between
the change in returns and the initial supply of skill, while simultaneously observing a negative
or zero relationship between the change in returns and the supply of skill. In fact, the latter
relationship is sufficiently weak to suggest it may be a zero relationship. The last three
columns examine the effect of replacing the initial skill ratio with the initial value of the


                                                20
returns to skill, as also suggested by Proposition 2. Here we see, consistent with the theory,
that returns to skills increased most in cities where the returns were initially low.

The results presented in Table 5 were aimed at evaluating the implications of Proposition
2. The goal of Figure 8 and Table 6 is to examine more directly the local flattening of
the relationship between returns to skill and supply of skill implied by the theory. To this
end, Figure 8 plots the relative wages and the supply of skill for 1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000
and Table 5 reports the associated regression estimates. From the figures and the table
we can see that the slope of the relationship between returns to skill and the supply of
skill is significantly negative in 1970, 1980 and 1990.29 By contrast, in 2000 the returns
to skill/supply of skill relationship essentially evaporates at the local level. This finding is
consistent with Proposition 3 if cities are finding it optimal to simultaneously use both old
and new technologies. Note that these observation are also consistent with those presented
in Table 5, which can be viewed as providing first difference estimates of both the slope in
2000 (through the coefficient on the change in supply of skill) and the change in the slope
between 1980 and 2000.30


4.4      Changes in wages and PC adoption

In order to complete our exploration of the implications derived in Section 2, namely Propo-
sition 4, Table 7 displays results of changes in college and high school real wages separately.
In this table we see that the growth in wages of high school educated workers (in columns
1,3 and 5) was negatively associated with the extent of PC adoption within cities, and this
pattern is observed whether the relationship is estimated by OLS or by IV using the city
level market conditions in 1980 as instruments for PC adoption. Note that this result is not
implied by the previous results since high school educated workers could have made wage
gains in cities that adopted PCs aggressively while allowing college educated workers to do
even better. However, this is not what is observed. Instead, consistent with the theory, we
  29
     Because of data issues, we could only focus only on 140 of our 230 sample of our cities for 1970.
  30
     An alternative explanation for such convergence is that the supplies of skills converges across cities.
However, there was actually only minimal convergence in the fraction of college equivalent workers across
cities over this period, with the variance of the fraction college equivalents per city being almost the same
in 2000 as in 1980. This contrasts with Glaser (2005) which reports a divergence in the concentration of
college educated over this period. His result relies on looking precisely at the fraction of workers with 4
years of college or more. If instead we look at the fraction of college equivalents, where workers with post
secondary education are allocated equally between high skill and low skill, then there is no indication of
either convergence or divergence. Finally, if we look at the log of the ratio of college equivalents to high
school equivalents, there is evidence of convergence but the coefficient is nowhere near -1.


                                                     21
see that high school educated workers were negatively affected by the adoption of PC in an
absolute sense, not just a relative sense.

For college educated workers, the OLS results do not uncover much of a relationship between
their wage change and the adoption of PCs. However, since both variables are endogenous,
the coefficient can be expected to be biased. Accordingly, we also report results where
we instrument the extent of PC-adoption by the ratio of college and high school educated
workers in 1980 and the return to college in 1980 (using only one of these instruments gives
similar, but slightly less precise, estimates). The IV results indicate that college educated
workers had faster wage gains in cities that adopted PCs most intensely, nearly to the same
extent that high school workers lost.31



5       Alternative explanations

The evidence presented in Tables 1 to 8 provide considerable support for the model of endoge-
nous technology adoption we presented in Section 2. However, such evidence does not imply
that this model is correct since the data may be consistent with alternative interpretations.
In this section we compare the properties of our model to several alternative technology
specifications used in the literature. We then examine two non-technological explanations
for our results; increased labor mobility and increased trade.


5.1       A comparison to other technology specifications

We ask whether the observed patterns can be easy explained by alternatives suggested by
the literature. One class of explanations we want to examine focuses upon the effects of a fall
in the price of equipment – such as PCs – within a stable production function framework.
To be more precise, let us continue to consider an environment with four factors of produc-
tion: traditional capital (K), PC/equipment (P C), skilled labor (S)and unskilled labor (U ).
However, instead of considering two production functions, let us postulate a unique produc-
tion function denoted by f (Kt , P Ct , St , Ut ), with wages for skilled and unskilled labor given
by the marginal products. The issue we want to address is whether the cross-city patterns
  31
    The result for college wages is robust to a wide variety of specifications, especially for specifications that
examine the changes in wages in the 1990s. The results for high school wages are somewhat less robust, but,
the high school wage results always imply a zero to negative relationship with PC adoption, a result in stark
contrast to that for college wages.


                                                       22
we have documented can be explained within this alternative framework as the result of a
common fall in the price of PC/equipment. If we impose no restrictions on the function f (·),
the answer to this question is a trivial yes since the stable production needs to be chosen
as the outer envelop of our two production function setup.32 Hence, to make this question
relevant, we need to ask whether the observed patterns could be explained by commonly
used parameterizations for such a function. To this end, we will focus on three nested CES
specifications.

The first parametrization we consider, denoted by f I , is in the spirit of the work by Katz
and Murphy (1992). In this case, the two types of capital form a sub-aggregate and the two
types of labor form a sub-aggregate. The function f I (·) can then be represented by


                                                                       α              1−α
                         f I (Kt , P Ct , St , Ut ) = [Ktσ + P Ctσ ] σ [Stγ + Utγ ]    γ




In the second case (F II ), motivated by the capital skill-complementarity hypothesis, we allow
P C capital to be a complement to skilled labor. This case is represented by the following
production function


                                                                   γ            1−α
                  f II (Kt , P Ct , St , Ut ) = Ktα [[Stσ + P Ctσ ] σ + Utγ ]    γ          σ<0

The third possibility is motivated by Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) which emphasizes
the substitution between PCs and unskilled workers. In this case, the production function
takes the form


                                                                                  1−α
                      f III (Kt , P Ct , St , Ut ) = Ktα [[Ut + P C]γ + Stγ ]      γ




Given that we want to consider the situation where firms at the city level can rent both types
of capital on a common market, it is useful to define a reduced form production function
f˜i , i = I, II, III, which represents the production possibility set at the city level, as follows
  32
    Given that there is a fundamental observational equivalence between a choice of technique framework
and a stable production function framework, one may ask what is the advantage of the choice of technique
framework. One answer is that the endogenous choice of technique framework leads one to consider param-
eterizations of the aggregate production function which otherwise would appear bizarre, un-intuitive and
would therefore likely be overlooked. By contrast, when such parameterizations are presented through the
lens of the endogenous technological adoption framework, they become intuitive and credible contenders as
explanations to observations.


                                                      23
                f˜i (rtK , rtP C , St , 1 − St ) = max f i (Kt , P Ct , St , 1 − St ) − rtK Kt − rtP C
                                                Kt ,P Ct


                                     i
and let us denote by the function P˜C (rtK , rtP C , St , 1 − St ) , the optimal choice of P C equip-
ment per worker for a city with a fraction St of skilled workers and a fraction 1 − St of
unskilled workers. In order to be consistent with the observations presented in Tables 1-7,
                             i                                                         i
the functions f˜i (·) and P˜C (·) need to satisfy at least three properties. First, P˜C (·) should
be such that the number of PCs per worker increases with the fraction of the work force that
is skilled. This requirement is necessary in order to be consistent with with the observations
of Table 1. The next two requirements are that, following a decrease in the rental price of
P Cs, rP C , the change in the wage of skilled workers should be greatest in cities where the
           S
ratio of   U
               is high, and the change in the wage of less skilled workers should be negatively
related to the skill ratio. These conditions guarantee consistency with the results of Table
7 and therefore consistency with Tables 3 and 5. These two last conditions can be seen
as restrictions on the cross-derivative of the functions f˜i (·). In particular, to satisfy these
conditions it is necessary that (1) the second derivative of wage of skilled workers (where the
wage of skilled workers can be denoted f˜i ()) with respect to the rental cost of computers and
                                                    3
to quantity of skilled workers be negative, and (2) the second derivative of wage of unskilled
workers (where the wage of unskilled workers can be denoted f˜i ()) with respect to the rental
                                                                                    4
cost of computers and to quantity of skilled workers be positive. These two conditions are
expressed below.


                                         ∂ 2 f˜3i (rtK , rtP C , St , 1 − St )
                                                                               <0
                                                       ∂rP C ∂S


                                         ∂ 2 f˜4i (rtK , rtP C , St , 1 − St )
                                                                               >0
                                                       ∂rP C ∂S
                                                 i
For all three parameterizations, the function P˜C (rtK , rtP C , St , 1−St ) will generally exhibit the
property that the number of P Cs per worker is increasing in the fraction of skilled workers.
Hence, the results of Table 1 would be consistent with either of these models in addition to our
choice of technique model. However, it can be verified that none of these parameterizations
can simultaneously satisfy all three conditions. For case I, the accumulation of P C capital
has a similar effect on the wages of both skilled and unskilled workers. In case II, when P C
                                                                                             ∂ 2 f˜4i (rtK ,rtP C ,St ,Ut )
capital increases with the ratio of skilled to unskilled, then the condition                           ∂r P C ∂S
                                                                                                                              >0

                                                           24
will not be satisfied due to the fact that increases in P C capital leads to an increase in the
wage of less skilled workers. In case III, the change in relative wages due to a change in the
cost of PC is independent of of local factor supplies (as in case I), and accordingly can not
satisfy the conditions. Hence, these standard parametrizations of the aggregate production
function are not sufficiently flexible to offer an explanation of our set of observations, which
are easily explained with an endogenous technology model.


5.2      Labor mobility and trade

We now briefly examine the possibility that our cross-cities observations could be primarily
driven by some non-technological forces as opposed to the technological forces emphasized
by the model. In particular, we want to ask whether the observed patterns could be easily
explained by either an increase in labor mobility across cities or by increased goods market
integration (freer inter-city trade).

Let us start with labor mobility. One reason why there are less systematic differences in
returns to skill across cities in 2000 than in 1980 could be that labor mobility across cities
has increased; for instance, highly skilled individuals may have moved between cities where
skill is abundant to where it was relatively scarce. There are two problems associated with
this conjecture as an explanation to the observed patterns. First, it does not appear that
labor flows were in a direction that would favor convergence. For example, the correlation
between the change in college equivalent share by city over the period 1980-2000 with the
initial level of the college equivalent share in 1980 (or the return to skill in 1980) is very close
to zero.33 This is not surprising given that figure 5 showed very strong persistence in the
skill levels across cities from 1980 to 2000. Furthermore, if labor mobility were the dominant
force favoring a convergence in returns to skill across cities over this period – as opposed
to different speeds of technology adoption – we would not expect to observe the patterns
presented in Table 5. Recall that Table 5 showed that changes in the college-high school
wage differentials over 1980-2000 were positively and significantly related to the fraction of
college workers in 1980 and only weakly related to the change in the education composition
of the city.

A second mechanism that could remove systematic differences in returns to skill across cities
  33
     Barry and Glaeser (2005) actually suggest that flows favored divergence. The difference with the result
reported here is they did not include any of the workers with post-secondary education in their measure of
skilled workers, while our college equivalent share measure includes a fraction of post-secondary workers.


                                                    25
is increased trade between cities. If the cost of trading between cities diminished significantly
over the period, this should favor a reallocation of industries to take advantage of differences
in skill supply across cities, thereby leading to factor price equalization. Taking this argument
to the next logical step then, it should also be the case that the local industry mix will become
more sensitive to the local factor endowments mix, as localities adapt industry mix to their
comparative advantage. We evaluate that possibility with the following statistic:


                                  X CEj · µ Nj,c ¶    µ ¶¸
                                                       Nj
                                         ∆         −∆
                                  j
                                    Nj      Nj         N

         CEj
where    Nj
               is the college equivalent share for industry j in 2000 and the term in brackets is
equal to the change in employment share in industry j and city c compared to industry j
in the nation as a whole between 1980 and 2000. This statistic tells us how much changes
in industry mix in c are expected to increase college share in c. If geographic integration
is occurring, then this statistic will be high for cities with a high college share, as college-
intensive industries disproportionately relocate to them, and low for cities with a low college
share.

In order to evaluate the extent to which this is the case, Figure 9 plots this statistic against
1980 college equivalent share (normalized to zero for the average city, i.e. the “excess”
college share). Note that this statistic is generally quite small - changes in industry mix
have virtually no differential impact on changes in college share in most cities - and there is
no sign that this relates positively to college share. For instance, one of the least educated
cities in our sample, Scranton, PA, has one of the larger increases in college-intensive industry
shares between 1980 and 2000. More generally, the coefficient from the regression line can be
interpreted as the proportion of differences in college share absorbed by changes in industry
mix: it is -.01 with a standard error of 0.01.34 Thus, at the level of industry detail available in
the censuses, there is no evidence that cities are “integrating” over time.35 This is consistent
with Lewis (2003) and Card and Lewis (2006) who find, using a similar approach, that
industry mix accounts for little of the skill mix differences across cities.

Another difficulty with the increased inter-city trade explanation is that, controlling for
  34
    The regression used the same weights used in the regression presented in tables 1-7.
  35
    Industry mix is measured at the level of detail available in the 1980 PUMS, which is roughly equivalent
to the 3-digit SIC. We used the same mapping of Lewis (2003) to match the industry codes in the 1980 and
2000 Censuses.



                                                    26
industry structure, there should be no systematic differences in PC-use across cities: cities
with more educated workers should have more skill and PC intensive industries but should
not use PCs more intensively within an industry. However, as documented in Table 1 and
illustrated in Figure 6, there is a strong positive link between PC use within industries and
the local supply of skill.



6     Conclusion

In this paper we began by highlighting the implications of a simple neoclassical model of
endogenous technology adoption. This model generates a number of predictions that we
test using a dataset on technology, skills, and wages for a set of 230 cities during the IT
revolution. We found the predictions of the model to conform well with the patterns found
in the data.

One important aspect of the model and the empirical results is that they tie together two
rather disparate strands of the literature. One strand has focused on how technological
change affects the demand for skilled labor while the other has examined how the supply of
skilled labor affects technological adoption. At the heart of the model is a choice facing firms
on which production technique to employ. In our model, we choose a parsimonious approach
and focus on just two choices. However, having these two choices produces a rich set of
implications (richer than can be generated from more standard nested CES specifications).
Our results are in many ways similar to those in the economic history literature, notably
Goldin and Sokoloff (1984). We find that cities that enjoyed relative abundance of skilled
labor in 1980 were those cities that adopted PCs (a skill-biased technology) most aggressively.
Further, cities that adopted PCs the most aggressively were also cities that witnessed the
largest increase in relative wages. In fact, the downward sloping relationship between relative
wages and the supply of skilled labor that existed in 1970, 1980, and 1990 had lessened
considerably by 2000. The increase in relative wages in response to PC adoption appears
to be driven by gains in wages of high-skilled workers and declines of wages of low-skilled
workers.




                                              27
References

Acemoglu, Daron (1998), “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Tech-
nical Change and Wage Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1998, vol
113, 1055-1089.

Acemoglu, Daron (2002), “Directed Technical Change”, Review of Economic Studies, volume
69. pp. 781-810.

Altonji, Joseph and David Card (1991), “Effects of Immigration on Labor-Market Outcomes
of Less-Skilled Natives,” in John Abowd and Richard Freeman, eds., Immigration, Trade,
and Labor p. 201-234.

Atkinson, Anthony B. and Joseph E.Stiglitz (1969), “A New View of Technological Change,”
Economic Journal, September, 79(3), pp.573-78.

Autor, David, Lawrence F. Katz and Melissa S. Kearney (2006), ”The Polarization of the
U.S. Labor Market,” mimeo.

Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane (2003), “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118
(4): November 2003, p. 1279-1334.

Basu, Susanto and David Weil (1998), “Appropriate Technology and Growth,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, November, 113(4), pp. 1025-54.

Beaudry, Paul and David Green (1998), “What is Driving US and Canadian Wages: Exoge-
nous Technical Change or Endogenous Choice of Technique?” (December), NBER working
paper 6853.

Beaudry, Paul and David Green (2003), “The Changing Structure of Wages in the US and
Germany: What explains the differences?” American Economic Review, June , pp 573-603.

Beaudry, Paul and David Green (2005), “Changes in U.S. Wages, 1976ndash2000: Ongoing
Skill Bias or Major Technological Change?” Journal of Labor Economics, vol 23 , pp. 609-
648.

Benhabib, Jess and Mark Spiegel (2005), ”Human Capital and Technology Diffusion,” forth-
coming, Handbook of Economic Growth, Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., North-
Holland, Amsterdam.

                                          28
Black, Dan, N. Kolesnikova and L. Taylor (2004), “Understanding the Returns to Education
when Wages and Prices Vary by Location,” working paper.

Card, David (1995), “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the
Return to Schooling,” in Louis N. Chiristofides, E. Kenneth Grant , and Robert Swidinsky,
Eds., Aspects of Labour Market Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, p. 201-222.

Card, David (1999), “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” Handbook of Labor
Economics. Volume 3A, 1999, p 1801-1863. Amsterdam, New York and Oxford: Elsevier
Science, North-Holland.

Card, David and John E. DiNardo (2002), “Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising
Wage Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles,” Journal of Labor Economics, 20 (4): October
2002, pp. 733-83.

Card, David and Ethan Lewis (2005), “The Diffusion of Mexican Immigrants During the
1990s: Explanations and Impacts,” NBER Working Paper no. 11552, August 2005.

Caselli, Francesco (1999), “Technological Revolutions,” American Economic Review, 89:1,
pp. 78-102.

Caselli, Francesco and W. John Coleman (2006), “The World Technology Frontier,” Ameri-
can Economic Review, forthcoming.

Comin, Diego and Bart Hobijn (2004), “Cross-Country Technology Adoption: Making the
Theories Face the Facts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2004, 51, 39-83.

Doms, Mark and Ethan Lewis (2006), “The Diffusion of Personal Computers Across the
U.S., 1990-2002,” Working Paper Series 2006-18, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Gerschenkron, A. (1962), Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective, Cambridge,
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Glaeser, Edward (2005), “Urban Colossus: Why is New York America’s Largest City?,”
Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper 2073.

Goldin, Claudia and Kenneth Sokoloff (1984), “The Relative Productivity Hypothesis of
Industrialization: The American Case, 1820 to 1850,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99
(August): 461- 488.

                                             29
Habakkuk, H. J. American and British Technology in the Nineteenth Century. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1962.

Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia Elena Rouse (1995), “Labor Market Returns to Two- and
Four-Year College,” American Economic Review 85(3): June 1985, p. 600-614.

Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia Elena Rouse (1999), “The Community College: Educating
Students at the Margin Between College and Work,” Journal of Economic Perspectives
13(1): Winder 1999, p. 63-84.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 1992, p 291-303.

Krueger, Alan (1993), “How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from
Microdata 1984-1989,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(1): 1993, p. 33-60.

Lewis, Ethan (2003),“Local, Open Economies Within the US: How Do Industries Respond to
Immigration?” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper no. 04-01, December
2003.

Lewis, Ethan (2005), “Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique,” Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper, May 2005.

Manuelli, Rodolfo and Ananth Seshadri (2004), “Frictionless Technology Diffusion: The Case
of Tractors,” working paper.

Moretti, Enrico (2004), “Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence From
Longitudinal and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data,” Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2): July-
August 2004, p. 175-212.

Nervis, Allan (1962). The State Universities and Democracy. Urbana, IL: University of
Illinois Press, 1962.

Welch, Finis (2000), “Growth in Women’s Relative Wages and in Inequality Among Men:
One Phenomenon or Two?,” Papers and Proceedings of the American Economic Association,
pp. 444-449.




                                            30
Table 1: PC Adoption and Education

                                OLS         OLS            OLS     IV          IV         IV
              ¡C ¢                1          2              3       4           5          6
                H 2000
                                0.101        -              -     0.102         -          -
                                ( 0.009)                          ( 0.017)
              ¡C ¢
                H 80
                                   -       0.100       0.084         -       0.097      0.094
                                           ( 0.009)    ( 0.012)              ( 0.017)   ( 0.022)
                  ¡C ¢
              ∆    H
                                   -       0.117       0.088         -       0.174      0.134
                                           ( 0.022)    ( 0.029)              ( 0.050)   ( 0.089)


              City Controls        -          -            yes       -          -         yes

              R2                 0.34       0.34           0.58
              p-value              -        0.65           0.02      -        2.38       0.32

The dependant variable is the number of PCs per worker at the city level corrected for industry
                             C
composition. The variable H     corresponds to the log of the ratio of college equivalent workers to
high school equivalent workers. The instruments used are measures of local college availability
and attendance patterns as of 1971. The reported p-value is associated to the test of equality of
                ¡C ¢          ¡C ¢
coefficients on H    80
                        and ∆ H    , where the latter is the change over the period 1980-2000. The
city level controls correspond the the log of the labor force, the unemployment rate, the fraction of
city population which is female, African-American, and U.S. citizens. The regressions were run on
230 observations and weighted by the square root of the size of the labor force.




                                                      31
Table 2: PC Adoption and Initial Returns to Skill

                                                       OLS            OLS      OLS          IV
                                ³        ´              1              2        3            4
                                    wC
                                    wH
                                                      -0.231      -0.250      -0.195      -0.201
                                         80
                                                      ( 0.054)     (0.057)    ( 0.059)    ( 0.092)
                                    ¡C ¢
                                ∆    H
                                                             -     0.028      0.053       0.066
                                                                  ( 0.028)    ( 0.032)    ( 0.138)
                                City Controls           yes           yes       yes         yes

                                Ind. Shares                  -         -        yes         yes

                                R2                      0.36          0.37     0.45

The dependant variable is ³the number
                                 ´        of PCs per worker at the city level corrected for industry
                              wC
composition. The variable wH          corresponds to the relative wage of college to high-school work-
                                   80
ers. The instruments used are measures of local college availability and attendance patterns as
                          ¡C ¢
of 1971. The variable ∆ H       corresponds to the 1980-2000 change in the skill level of the city’s
workforce. The city level controls correspond the the log of the labor force, the unemployment rate,
the fraction of city population which is female, African-American, and U.S. citizens. The industry
controls include the share of the workforce in 12 major industry groups. The regressions were run
on 230 observations and weighted by the square root of the size of the labor force.




Table 3: Changes in Returns and PC Adoption

                                             OLS      OLS          OLS          IV          IV          IV
             ¡PC ¢                             1        2            3           4           5           6
                 L       2000
                                             0.107    0.042        0.049       1.073       1.158       0.896
                                         ( 0.074 )   ( 0.077 )    ( 0.076 )   ( 0.259 )   ( 0.391 )   ( 0.293 )
                 ¡C ¢
             ∆       H
                                               -         -        -0.061          -            -      -0.081
                                                                  ( 0.035 )                           ( 0.045)


             City Controls                    yes      yes            yes       yes          yes        yes

             Ind. Shares                       -       yes            yes         -          yes        yes

             R2                              0.26     0.35            0.36        -            -          -

The dependent variable is the change in the log ratio of college to high school wages, where wages
are adjusted for experience and gender. The instrument used for PCs is the ratio of college to high
school equivalent workers in 1980. See the notes in Table 1 and Table 2 about sample size, controls,
and weighting.


                                                                 32
Table 4: Returns to Education and PCs in 2000

                                      OLS          OLS         OLS            IV          IV           IV
                 ¡PC ¢                  1            2           3             4           5            6
                      L    2000
                                     -0.184       -0.234      -0.099        -0.526      -1.467       -3.398
                                     ( 0.076)     ( 0.078)     ( 0.079)     ( 0.217)    ( 0.357)     ( 3.433)
                 ¡C ¢
                  H 2000
                                          -             -     -0.118           -           -         0.229
                                                                  (0.024)      -                     ( 0.367)
                 City Controls         yes          yes            yes       yes         yes           yes

                 Ind. Shares              -         yes            yes         -         yes           yes

                 R2                   0.39         0.46           0.52         -           -            -

The dependant variable is the log ratio of college to high-school wages, where the wages are adjusted
to control for experience and gender. The PC-measure controls for industry composition. See the
notes in Table 1 and Table 2 about sample size, controls, and weighting.




Table 5: Changes in Relative Wages and Skill: Reduced Form Relationships

             ¡C ¢                    1             2             3              4              5            6
              H 1980
                                   0.054         0.063         0.086            -              -            -
                                  ( 0.011 )     ( 0.014 )     ( 0.022 )
                 ¡C ¢
             ∆    H
                                  -0.083        -0.040         0.001        -0.079       -0.047         0.013
                                  ( 0.027 )     ( 0.034 )     ( 0.037 )     ( 0.027 )    ( 0.029 )     ( 0.032 )
             ³        ´
                 wC
                 wH
                                      -             -               -       -0.320       -0.442        -0.474
                          1980
                                                                            ( 0.062 )   ( 0.057 )      ( 0.059 )


             City Controls            -           yes             yes              -       yes           yes

             Ind. Shares              -             -             yes              -           -         yes

             R2                    0.16          0.35             0.41       0.17         0.44           0.51

The dependent variable is the change in log ratio of college to high school wages, where wages
are adjusted for experience and gender. See the notes in Table 1 and Table 2 about sample size,
controls, and weighting.




                                                             33
Table 6: Relative Wages and Supply of Skills (all OLS)

             ¡C ¢                1(2000)          2(1990)           3(1980)         4(2000)       5(1990)      6(1980)
              H 2000
                                  -0.001             -                 -             -0.028          -            -
                                 ( 0.014 )                                          ( 0.015 )
             ¡C ¢
              H 1990
                                     -             -0.055               -               -         -0.055           -
                                                  ( 0.012 )                                       ( 0.014 )
             ¡C ¢
              H 1980
                                     -                -             -0.066              -             -        -0.106
                                                                    ( 0.011 )                                  ( 0.012 )


             C. Cont.                -                -                 -             yes           yes           yes

             R2                   0.00              0.08              0.13           0.38          0.31          0.38

The dependent variable is log ratio of college to high school wages, where wages are adjusted for
                                       C
experience and gender. The variable H    corresponds to the log of the ratio of college equivalent
workers to high school equivalent workers. See the notes in Table 1 and Table 2 about sample size,
controls, and weighting.




Table 7: Changes in Wages and PCs: College and High School Educated Workers

                                            1                2                 3          4           5           6
                                           HS              Coll               HS         Coll        HS         Coll
             ¡PC ¢                        OLS              OLS                IV         IV          IV          IV
                  L       2000
                                         -0.117           -0.010            -0.607      0.652      -0.470       .465
                                         ( 0.080 )        ( 0.094 )      ( 0.222 )      (0.266)    (0.192)     (0.228)
                  ¡C ¢
             ∆        H
                                              -                -                -            -      0.043      -0.055
                                                                                                   ( 0.035 )   ( 0.052 )
             City Controls                   yes              yes            yes            yes      yes         yes

             R2                              0.52          0.48                 -            -         -           -

The dependant variable is either the percentage increase in the wage of high school educated workers
or the percentage increase in the wage of college educated workers. For the columns indicated by
IV, the variable PLC is instrumented by the ratio of college to high school educated workers in 1980
and the return to college in 1980. See the notes in Table 1 and Table 2 about sample size, controls,
and weighting.




                                                                      34
              Figure 4: PCs per Employee by City in 1990 and 2000:
                   Difference from the San Francisco Bay Area
                             (after controlling for industry and establishment size)
       .05
                                                                      Minneapolis Madison
                                                                               Boston
         0                                             Omaha
                                                                                    San Francisco Bay
                                                                                  Denver               Area
                                                                                                      Seattle
                                    Appleton, WI Lincoln    Des       Kansas
                                                                 Moines        City AtlantaHouston
                                         Davenport                             ChicagoDallas Cedar Rapids, IA
                                                                           NYC
                                                             Charlotte Detroit              Portland
                                                       Philadelphia                       Austin     DC
       -.05                             Springfield,Reno
                                                     MOMemphis
                                                                                 Los Angeles
2002




                                                                   Greensboro
                                    Springfield, MA                                  Honolulu
                            Tallahasee       Little Rock
                                                         Hickory, NC
        -.1                                         Chattanooga                            Lexington, KY
                                                            El Paso

                                           Utica,Stockton,
                                                  NY       CA
       -.15                                                                                       Fresno, CA
                                     Scranton, PA

                                                                          PC intensity 2002=0+.84*PC intensity 1990
        -.2
          -.15                                       -.1                                   -.05                                        0
                                                                          1990
              PC intensity computed from establishement-level regressions that control for 3-digit SIC industry interacted with 8
              employment-size categories. The size of the markers in the figure are proportional to the square root of employment in
              the city. This same measure is used as weights in the regression. All data are from Harte-Hanks.




                                                                     35
                          Figure 5: Log of College to High School Equivalents
                                            2000 and 1980
                                                                         San Francisco BayMadison
                                                                                            Area
                                                                                   DC       Tallahasee
                                                                        Boston Seattle
                                                                                  Lincoln
                                                                   Minneapolis Austin
                                                                                    Denver
                   0                                                    NYC
                                                                          Honolulu
                                                               Chicago
                                                                Atlanta
                                                      Des  Moines        Portland
                                                     Kansas
                                             CedarPhiladelphia
                                                    Rapids,
                                                       Omaha  City
                                                              IA    Dallas
  ln(C/H) 2000




                                                        Detroit
                                                 Springfield,
                                                  Lexington,MA  KY Angeles
                                      Charlotte Little Rock Los    Houston
                                           Memphis
                              Appleton,  WI
                                   Greensboro
                                      Davenport           Reno
                                                           Fresno, CA
                 -.5         ChattanoogaUtica,
                              Springfield, MO  NY
                                              El Paso
                                                 Stockton, CA
                 Scranton, PA


Hickory, NC

                 -1                                                                            ln(C/H)2000=0.56+.89*ln(C/H)1980


                              -1.5                                   -1                                    -.5                                       0
                                                                          ln(C/H) 1980
                      The size of the markers in the figure are proportional to the square root of employment in the city. This same
                      measure is used as weights in the regression. College equivalents is defined as those with a college degree or more plus 1/2
                      of those with some college. All data come from the PUMS




                                                                              36
PC intensity (difference from SF Bay Area)                          Figure 6: PC Intensity and Skills in 2000
                                             .1



                                                                                                                                      Madison
                                                                                                                     Minneapolis
                                              0                                                                              Boston Bay Area
                                                                                                                      San Francisco
                                                                                                          Rapids, IAAtlanta
                                                                                                     Houston
                                                                                                  Cedar                     Seattle
                                                                                                         Kansas
                                                                                                           Des   City
                                                                                                               Moines
                                                                                                             Omaha        Denver
                                                                                                                             Lincoln
                                                                                       Appleton, WI
                                                                                         Davenport              Portland
                                                                                                            Detroit
                                                                                                              Dallas
                                                                                                                   Chicago
                                                                                                        Philadelphia     NYC
                                                                                                   Charlotte                        DC
                                                                              Springfield, MO Reno
                                                                                              Memphis                       Austin
                                                                                       GreensboroLos Angeles
                                                                                                  Little Rock
                                                                                                Springfield, MA Honolulu Tallahasee
                                             -.1       Hickory, NC                                      Lexington, KY
                                                                             Chattanooga
                                                                                   El Paso
                                                                                   Utica, NY
                                                                          Stockton,Fresno,
                                                                                    CA     CA
                                                                        Scranton, PA


                                             -.2                                                                     PC intensity 2002=-.03+.09*ln(C/H)2000

                                                           -1                                     -.5                                     0                            .5
                                                                                                             ln(C/H)
                                                   PC intensity computed from establishement-level regressions that control for 3-digit SIC industry interacted with
                                                   8 employment-size categories. C/H is the ratio of college equivalent workers to high school equivalent workers.
                                                   The size of the markers in the figure are proportional to the square root of employment in the city. This same
                                                    measure is used as weights in the regression.




                                                                                                            37
                                           Figure 7a: Initial Skill and Changes in the Relative Wages, 1980-2000
                                     .4
Change in Relative Wages 1980-2000




                                     .3
                                                                                                             San Francisco Bay Area
                                                                                                     Fresno, CA
                                     .2                                                                          Tucson
                                                                                          El Paso       LosHouston
                                                                                                             Angeles
                                                                                                        Chicago Honolulu
                                                                                                    Detroit Dallas
                                                                                                                Portland
                                                                                                                     Seattle
                                                                                        Memphis
                                                                                             St.  Louis  Atlanta
                                                                                                  Colorado
                                                                                            Little Rock      Springs
                                                                                                                NYC      DC
                                     .1                                                                        Boston Denver
                                                                                             PhiladelphiaMinneapolis
                                                          Scranton, PA
                                                                                  Charlotte
                                                                                 Las Vegas
                                                                                Greensboro                                              Madison
                                                   Hickory, NC
                                                                         Appleton, WI
                                      0


                                                                                                             Change in Return to Skill=.19+.07*ln(C/H)
                                     -.1
                                           -2                            -1.5                          -1                                 -.5                            0
                                                                                                 ln(C/H), 1980
                                           C/H is the ratio of college equivalent workers to high school equivalent workers. The size of the markers in the figure are
                                           proportional to the square root of employment in the city. This same measure is used as weights in the regression.



                                                                                                    38
                                           Figure 7b: Initial Skill and Changes in the Relative Wages, 1990-2000
                                     .2
Change in Relative Wages 1990-2000



                                                                                                                                San Francisco Bay Area
                                                                                           Fresno, CA
                                     .1                                                             Los Angeles          Boston
                                                                                                         Houston     NYC
                                                                                                                Atlanta
                                                                                                                 Dallas
                                                                                                              Chicago          DC
                                                                                                         DetroitMinneapolis
                                                                                                                          Seattle
                                                                                                Philadelphia Honolulu
                                                                                         Charlotte St. Louis
                                                                                              Little Rock
                                                                   Scranton, PA            Memphis               Portland
                                                                                                           Colorado         Denver
                                                                                                                       Springs   Madison
                                      0                                                El Paso
                                                                                  Greensboro
                                                                                Las Vegas
                                                                             Appleton, WI                         Tucson



                                     -.1                Hickory, NC




                                                                                                                 Change in Return to Skill=.07+.08*ln(C/H)
                                     -.2
                                        -1.5                                    -1                           -.5                                            0
                                                                                                 ln(C/H), 1990
                                           C/H is the ratio of college equivalent workers to high school equivalent workers. The size of the markers in the figure are
                                           proportional to the square root of employment in the city. This same measure is used as weights in the regression.




                                                                                                     39
                                           Figure 7c: Initial Skill and Changes in the Relative Wages, 1980-1990
                                     .3
Change in Relative Wages 1980-1990



                                                                                                                             Tucson
                                     .2                                                El Paso


                 Hickory, NC                                                                                         Portland
                                                                                  Memphis
                                                                                                     ColoradoHouston
                                                                                                                SpringsHonolulu
                                     .1                                                                 Fresno, CA San Francisco Bay Area
                                                                                            Little  DetroitChicago
                                                                                                   Rock      LosDallas
                                                                                                                 Angeles SeattleDenver
                                                                                             St. Louis
                                            Scranton, PA
                                                                         Las Vegas
                                                                       Greensboro             PhiladelphiaAtlanta
                                                                                                              Minneapolis                DC         Madison
                                                                 Appleton, WI
                                                                         Charlotte                                NYC
                                                                                                                         Boston
                                      0



                                                                                                                   Change in Return to Skill=.08-.01*ln(C/H)
                                     -.1
                                                          -1.5                                       -1                                           -.5
                                                                                                 ln(C/H), 1980
                                           C/H is the ratio of college equivalent workers to high school equivalent workers. The size of the markers in the figure are
                                           proportional to the square root of employment in the city. This same measure is used as weights in the regression.




                                                                                                     40
                                    Figure 8a: Relative Wages and Skill Mix in 1970
                      .7


                      .6
                                                                Greensboro
                                                               Charlotte
Relative wages 1970




                                                                                    Little Rock DC
                      .5                                                  Philadelphia         Houston
                                                                           Memphis            Dallas
                                           Scranton, PA                                    NYC
                                                                 Appleton, WI
                                                                            St. Louis Atlanta
                                                                                         Boston
                                                                                              Minneapolis Denver
                                                                                                 Los Angeles
                      .4                                                             Chicago
                                                                                           El Paso
                                            Hickory, NC                                                           Madison
                                                                          LasDetroit
                                                                              Vegas                  Seattle
                                                                                                      San Francisco Bay Area
                                                                                                   Tucson
                      .3
                                                                                                          Portland
                                                                                                            Honolulu

                      .2                                                                               Fresno, CA



                      .1                                                                     Relative Wages 1970=.28 -.09*ln(C/H)

                                                     -2                             -1.5                                -1                           -.5
                                                                                 ln(C/H) 1970
                           C/H is the ratio of college equivalent workers to high school equivalent workers. The size of the markers in the figure
                           are proportional to the square root of employment in the city. This same measure is used as weights in the regression.




                                                                                      41
                                    Figure 8b: Relative Wages and Skill Mix in 1980
                      .6


                      .5
Relative wages 1980




                                                                      Charlotte
                                                                     Greensboro
                                                                            El Paso      Dallas
                                                                                         Houston
                      .4       Hickory, NC                                           Atlanta
                                                                 Memphis
                                                                          Philadelphia   LosNYC
                                                                                             Angeles DC
                                                                       Little Rock Fresno, CABoston
                                          Scranton, PA Appleton, WI
                                                                              Detroit Colorado Springs
                                                             Las Vegas St. Louis
                                                                                           Minneapolis Denver
                      .3                                                            Chicago
                                                                                                        San Francisco Bay Area
                                                                                               Portland
                                                                                                     Seattle
                                                                                                                Madison
                                                                                                Tucson
                                                                                                Honolulu
                      .2


                      .1                                                                    Relative Wages 1980=.27 -.06*ln(C/H)

                                              -1.5                                    -1                                          -.5
                                                                                 ln(C/H) 1980
                           C/H is the ratio of college equivalent workers to high school equivalent workers. The size of the markers in the figure
                           are proportional to the square root of employment in the city. This same measure is used as weights in the regression.




                                                                                      42
                                    Figure 8c: Relative Wages and Skill Mix in 1990
                      .7

                                                                            El Paso
                      .6
                                             Hickory, NC
Relative wages 1990




                                                                         Memphis Houston   Dallas
                      .5
                                                                   Greensboro     Los       Tucson Springs
                                                                        Charlotte
                                                                          Fresno,  CAAngeles
                                                                            Little Rock   Colorado
                                                                                          Atlanta
                                                      Scranton, PA                  Detroit
                                                                               Philadelphia
                                                                                   St. Louis NYC DC
                                                                                            Portland Denver
                      .4                                       Appleton, WI
                                                                 Las Vegas               ChicagoSan    Francisco Bay Area
                                                                                                  Boston
                                                                                            Minneapolis
                                                                                                   Seattle
                                                                                          Honolulu
                      .3                                                                                 Madison



                      .2
                                                                                             Relative Wages 1990=.38 -.07*ln(C/H)
                      .1
                        -1.5                              -1                          -.5                                 0                          .5
                                                                                 ln(C/H) 1990
                           C/H is the ratio of college equivalent workers to high school equivalent workers. The size of the markers in the figure
                           are proportional to the square root of employment in the city. This same measure is used as weights in the regression.




                                                                                     43
                                    Figure 8d: Relative Wages and Skill Mix in 2000
                      .7


                      .6                                                 El Paso
                                                                                              Houston
Relative wages 2000




                                                                         Fresno, CA                 Dallas
                                                                                         Los Angeles
                                                                                                           San Francisco Bay Area
                                                                                                        Atlanta
                      .5                                                          Memphis
                                                                                      Charlotte              NYC
                                                                                               Detroit
                                                                                     Little Rock                        DC
                                                                            Greensboro     Philadelphia
                                                                                                 Colorado
                                                                                             St. Louis     Springs
                                                                                                       Chicago
                                                                                                   Tucson        Boston
                                       Hickory, NC Scranton, PA
                      .4                                                                                    Portland Denver
                                                                                                                 Minneapolis
                                                                                                                       Seattle
                                                                Las Vegas                                         Honolulu
                                                                        Appleton, WI

                      .3                                                                                                                   Madison



                      .2                                                              Relative Wages 2000=.45 -.01*ln(C/H)
                                           -1                                      -.5                                        0
                                                                                 ln(C/H) 2000
                           C/H is the ratio of college equivalent workers to high school equivalent workers. The size of the markers in the figure
                           are proportional to the square root of employment in the city. This same measure is used as weights in the regression.




                                                                                       44
                                               Figure 9. College Share and Changes in Industry Mix
                                        .04
 Impact of Industry Mix Changes, 1980-2000,

                                                                                   Ind Mix Changes = 0.00 - 0.01*Excess Share, 1980

                                                                       Charlotte
                                .02




                                                                    Greensboro
               on College Share




                                                    Hickory, NC
                                                       Scranton, PA            Philadelphia
                                                                                          Atlanta
                                                                                    Colorado    San
                                                                                              Dallas
                                                                                                  NYC
                                                                                              SpringsFrancisco
                                                                                                Boston  Seattle Bay Area
                                                                                         Chicago
                                                                                             Houston
                                                                Appleton, WI Little Rock
                                                                            El Paso
                       0




                                                                                                   Honolulu
                                                                               St. Louis Minneapolis
                                                                          Memphis                           Denver
                                                                                                  Portland DC
                                                                                     Detroit                     Madison
                                                                                      Fresno, CA
                                                                                          Los Angeles
                                                                      Las Vegas                    Tucson
-.04       -.02




                                              -.2                     -.1                0                          .1                    .2
                                                                             Excess College Share, 1980
Excess college share is the college equivalent share in the city minus the college equivalent share in all cities. College equivalent share is the share
of workers with a college degree plus 1/2 of those with some college education but no degree. The y-axis shows the impact of industry mix changes
on college share; how this was calculated is described in the text. All calculations come from PUMS for 1980 and 2000.




                                                                                           45
